Question: What is case 2008 CLC 332 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 332 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K) on 2007-12-14. The case involved MUHAMMAD MUKHTAR KHAN AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS MUHAMMAD SADIQ AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR RIGHT OF PRIOR PURCHASE ACT 1993 (B.K.)..R - SS. 6, 14, 20 AND 20-A. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.AND MUHAMMAD YOUNIS TAHIR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 332?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 332, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR RIGHT OF PRIOR PURCHASE ACT 1993 (B.K.)..R - SS. 6, 14, 20 AND 20-A. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K) and decided on 2007-12-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 332?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 332 were: SARDAR NOOR AKBAR KHAN FOR APPELLANTS. SARDAR ABDUL KHALIQ FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.AND MUHAMMAD YOUNIS TAHIR.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 332?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 332 were: MUHAMMAD MUKHTAR KHAN AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS MUHAMMAD SADIQ AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 332.
Answer: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.- Through this appeal the judgment and decree passed by learned District Judge Bagh dated 31-8-2004 is under challenge. The relevant facts necessary for decision of this appeal are that Muhammad Sadiq, respondent herein, brought a suit for possession on the basis of preemption against Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and others, appellants herein, in the Court of Sub Judge Bagh on 12-6-1997. The learned Judge after due process of law disallowed the suit, consequently, an appeal was taken to the learned District Judge who, through the judgment and decree impugned before this Court, reversed the findings of the Trial Court and decreed the suit of pre-emptor, hence this appeal. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Vendée Muhammad Mansha Khan was on equal footing with pre-emptor whereas the other two vendees Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and Muhammad Akram Khan by name had improved their status through the sale-deed, dated 24-6-1997 executed in their favor. Therefore, the preemption suit was rightly disallowed by the learned Trial Judge, which needed no interference by the first Appellate Court. According to the learned counsel, the first appellate Court fell in error while allowing the preemption suit because neither "Rule of Sinker" was attracted in this case nor the amendment in section 20-A of Prior Purchase Act could be made effective retrospectively. The learned counsel, in alternative argued that even if the amendment in section 20 of Prior Purchase Act had retrospective effect on pending cases wherein the status had been improved prior to this amendment, the suit to the extent of Muhammad Mansha Khan Vendée was liable to be disallowed, as in the estimation of the learned counsel the doctrine of Sinker was not applicable. While controverting the arguments on the side of appellants it was argued by the learned counsel representing the respondent that the amendment in section 20 of Prior Purchase Act and Rule of Sinker both applied to the case in hand, therefore, the learned District Judge while allowing the preemption suit acted in accordance with law and his findings deserve no interference by this Court. The learned counsel during his arguments relied upon the law like 2003 CLC 1073 and PLD 1971 Lahore 171 and contended that the Vendée Muhammad Mansha Khan by joining other two strangers for the purpose of preemption with him could not access claim of pre-emptor even in respect of his own share of purchase. He during his arguments also relied upon the case titled “Baqa Muhammad Khan v. Kh. Zafar Iqbal’ decided on 26-7-2007 by the division bench of this Court and submitted that in view of the judgment of this Court the amendment in section 20 applied to the case as in which the status has been improved during pendency of preemption suit. According to the learned counsel, the other two vendees except Muhammad Mansha Khan improved their status during pendency of preemption suit and this transfer was made in their favor by Muhammad Mansha Khan, therefore, in view of doctrine of Sinker and applicability of amendment in section 20, the preemption suit has rightly been decreed in favor of respondents. Before deciding the controversy we would like to have brief survey of the case law cited at Bar. In Muhammad Hussain’s case 2003 CLC 1073 it was held that the defendants/vendees having joint strangers with them, they were hit by principle of sinker and could not claim any competitive right of preemption as against plaintiff especially when defendants could not prove that the sale was divisible. Similarly, in Mst. Fateh Bibi’s case PLD 1971 LAH. 171 it has been held that if the purchaser having equal right of preemption associate with himself in the purchase the person with rights inferior to those of the pre-emptor he is not entitled to resist the claim of such pre-emptor even in respect of his own share of the purchase. The purchaser in such a case would be deemed to have sunk down to the level of his associate and therefore, would not be entitled to resist preemption even qua his own share. In Baqa Muhammad Khan’s case the division bench of this Court has observed as under:- In view of above stated position we are of the considered view that neither section 56 of the interim Constitution Act, 1974 nor Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, is attracted in the present case. The legislature has enacted this provision to protect the right of pre-emptor which is a statutory right and the Courts are duty bound to give full effect to the wisdom of the legislature especially to choose, laws which have been enacted for carrying out supremacy of Sharia. We are of the view that even vested right can be taken away by amending the law, retrospectively. A reference can be made to PLD 1978 SC (AJ&K) 42. It may be observed that appellant herein cannot claim even any vested right in view of clauses “c” and “e”’ of the General Clauses Act because no right was conferred on him by any statute, or he has acquired the same before promulgation of the ORDINANCE XXI of 1998. Section 20-A was firstly added through Ordinance XXI of 1998 on July 15, 1998. The plaintiff obtained decree on 18-4-2001, therefore, Section 20-A was already in the field when the defendant/Vendée improved his status. Only those rights of Vendée could be protected which have become his property in shape of decree or otherwise before promulgation of Ordinance XXI of 1998".  It is clear from the record that Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and Muhammad Akram Khan purchased a piece of land from Muhammad Mansha Khan appellant during pendency of preemption suit just to become co-sharer in the property wherein respondent Muhammad Sadiq and Muhammad Mansha Khan appellant were sharer at the time of sale deed; but Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and Muhammad Akram Khan were not so. Meaning by this that they were strangers, for the purpose of preemption they improved their status during pendency of preemption suit, therefore, in view of the judgment of this Court in case titled “Baqa Muhammad Khan v. Kh. Zafar Iqbal’ decided on 26-7-2007 they are hit by the amendment in section 20 of Prior Purchase Act, thus, this attempt of transfer in their favor could not help them for the purpose of preemption. They are on the same level with the pre-emptor at the time of sale deed and no more. Coming to the doctrine of sinker it may be observed that Muhammad Mansha Khan appellant is found to have associated Muhammad Akram Khan and Muhammad Mukhtar Khan being strangers for the purpose of preemption twice. Once at the time of sale deed and for the second time when he transferred a piece of land in their favor during pendency of suit, thus, he is found to have joined deliberately the other strangers with him; therefore, he is deemed to have sunk down to the level of his associate and could not be entitled to resist preemption even qua his own share. We respectfully subscribe to the case law cited at bar with respect to doctrine of sinker. The result therefore, is that finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs. Respondent Muhammad Sadiq is allowed to deposit the decretal amount in the trial Court within two months’ time from the date of this order. The office is directed to transmit immediately the file of the Trial Court along with, the copy of this order. The learned Trial Court after receiving this order shall issue notice to the appellants/preceptors for depositing the decretal amount within time fixed by this Court, failing which the suit shall be dismissed. H.B.T./22/H.C.(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 332?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 332 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.- Through this appeal the judgment and decree passed by learned District Judge Bagh dated 31-8-2004 is under challenge. The relevant facts necessary for decision of this appeal are that Muhammad Sadiq, respondent herein, brought a suit for possession on the basis of preemption against Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and others, appellants herein, in the Court of Sub Judge Bagh on 12-6-1997. The learned Judge after due process of law disallowed the suit, consequently, an appeal was taken to the learned District Judge who, through the judgment and decree impugned before this Court, reversed the findings of the Trial Court and decreed the suit of pre-emptor, hence this appeal. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Vendée Muhammad Mansha Khan was on equal footing with pre-emptor whereas the other two vendees Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and Muhammad Akram Khan by name had improved their status through the sale-deed, dated 24-6-1997 executed in their favor. Therefore, the preemption suit was rightly disallowed by the learned Trial Judge, which needed no interference by the first Appellate Court. According to the learned counsel, the first appellate Court fell in error while allowing the preemption suit because neither "Rule of Sinker" was attracted in this case nor the amendment in section 20-A of Prior Purchase Act could be made effective retrospectively. The learned counsel, in alternative argued that even if the amendment in section 20 of Prior Purchase Act had retrospective effect on pending cases wherein the status had been improved prior to this amendment, the suit to the extent of Muhammad Mansha Khan Vendée was liable to be disallowed, as in the estimation of the learned counsel the doctrine of Sinker was not applicable. While controverting the arguments on the side of appellants it was argued by the learned counsel representing the respondent that the amendment in section 20 of Prior Purchase Act and Rule of Sinker both applied to the case in hand, therefore, the learned District Judge while allowing the preemption suit acted in accordance with law and his findings deserve no interference by this Court. The learned counsel during his arguments relied upon the law like 2003 CLC 1073 and PLD 1971 Lahore 171 and contended that the Vendée Muhammad Mansha Khan by joining other two strangers for the purpose of preemption with him could not access claim of pre-emptor even in respect of his own share of purchase. He during his arguments also relied upon the case titled “Baqa Muhammad Khan v. Kh. Zafar Iqbal’ decided on 26-7-2007 by the division bench of this Court and submitted that in view of the judgment of this Court the amendment in section 20 applied to the case as in which the status has been improved during pendency of preemption suit. According to the learned counsel, the other two vendees except Muhammad Mansha Khan improved their status during pendency of preemption suit and this transfer was made in their favor by Muhammad Mansha Khan, therefore, in view of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 332?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 332 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): as in which the status has been improved during pendency of preemption suit. According to the learned counsel, the other two vendees except Muhammad Mansha Khan improved their status during pendency of preemption suit and this transfer was made in their favor by Muhammad Mansha Khan, therefore, in view of doctrine of Sinker and applicability of amendment in section 20, the preemption suit has rightly been decreed in favor of respondents. Before deciding the controversy we would like to have brief survey of the case law cited at Bar. In Muhammad Hussain’s case 2003 CLC 1073 it was held that the defendants/vendees having joint strangers with them, they were hit by principle of sinker and could not claim any competitive right of preemption as against plaintiff especially when defendants could not prove that the sale was divisible. Similarly, in Mst. Fateh Bibi’s case PLD 1971 LAH. 171 it has been held that if the purchaser having equal right of preemption associate with himself in the purchase the person with rights inferior to those of the pre-emptor he is not entitled to resist the claim of such pre-emptor even in respect of his own share of the purchase. The purchaser in such a case would be deemed to have sunk down to the level of his associate and therefore, would not be entitled to resist preemption even qua his own share. In Baqa Muhammad Khan’s case the division bench of this Court has observed as under:- In view of above stated position we are of the considered view that neither section 56 of the interim Constitution Act, 1974 nor Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, is attracted in the present case. The legislature has enacted this provision to protect the right of pre-emptor which is a statutory right and the Courts are duty bound to give full effect to the wisdom of the legislature especially to choose, laws which have been enacted for carrying out supremacy of Sharia. We are of the view that even vested right can be taken away by amending the law, retrospectively. A reference can be made to PLD 1978 SC (AJ&K) 42. It may be observed that appellant herein cannot claim even any vested right in view of clauses “c” and “e”’ of the General Clauses Act because no right was conferred on him by any statute, or he has acquired the same before promulgation of the ORDINANCE XXI of 1998. Section 20-A was firstly added through Ordinance XXI of 1998 on July 15, 1998. The plaintiff obtained decree on 18-4-2001, therefore, Section 20-A was already in the field when the defendant/Vendée improved his status. Only those rights of Vendée could be protected which have become his property in shape of decree or otherwise before promulgation of Ordinance XXI of 1998". It is clear from the record that Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and Muhammad Akram Khan purchased a piece of land from Muhammad Mansha Khan appellant during pendency of preemption suit just to become co-sharer in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 332?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 332 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): become his property in shape of decree or otherwise before promulgation of Ordinance XXI of 1998". It is clear from the record that Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and Muhammad Akram Khan purchased a piece of land from Muhammad Mansha Khan appellant during pendency of preemption suit just to become co-sharer in the property wherein respondent Muhammad Sadiq and Muhammad Mansha Khan appellant were sharer at the time of sale deed; but Muhammad Mukhtar Khan and Muhammad Akram Khan were not so. Meaning by this that they were strangers, for the purpose of preemption they improved their status during pendency of preemption suit, therefore, in view of the judgment of this Court in case titled “Baqa Muhammad Khan v. Kh. Zafar Iqbal’ decided on 26-7-2007 they are hit by the amendment in section 20 of Prior Purchase Act, thus, this attempt of transfer in their favor could not help them for the purpose of preemption. They are on the same level with the pre-emptor at the time of sale deed and no more. Coming to the doctrine of sinker it may be observed that Muhammad Mansha Khan appellant is found to have associated Muhammad Akram Khan and Muhammad Mukhtar Khan being strangers for the purpose of preemption twice. Once at the time of sale deed and for the second time when he transferred a piece of land in their favor during pendency of suit, thus, he is found to have joined deliberately the other strangers with him; therefore, he is deemed to have sunk down to the level of his associate and could not be entitled to resist preemption even qua his own share. We respectfully subscribe to the case law cited at bar with respect to doctrine of sinker. The result therefore, is that finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs. Respondent Muhammad Sadiq is allowed to deposit the decretal amount in the trial Court within two months’ time from the date of this order. The office is directed to transmit immediately the file of the Trial Court along with, the copy of this order. The learned Trial Court after receiving this order shall issue notice to the appellants/preceptors for depositing the decretal amount within time fixed by this Court, failing which the suit shall be dismissed. H.B.T./22/H.C.(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 2008 CLC 412 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 412 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K on 2008-01-18. The case involved ZULQARNAIN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAJ&K MUZAFFARABAD AND 73 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 14 SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF, LIMITATION ACT, 1908 - S. 14 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43-A LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 14. The case was heard by RAFIULLAH SULTANI AND MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 412, the court applied the following statutes: LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 14 SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF, LIMITATION ACT, 1908 - S. 14 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43-A LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 14. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K and decided on 2008-01-18.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 412 were: HAJI MUHAMMAD AFZAL FOR PETITIONERS. CH. MUHAMMAD TAJ FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: RAFIULLAH SULTANI AND MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 412 were: ZULQARNAIN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAJ&K MUZAFFARABAD AND 73 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 412.
Answer: . JUDGMENT MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR, J.- The above captioned revision petition is filed under section 43(A) of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee. Property) Act, 1957 against the judgments of learned Custodian dated 9-5-2000 and 18-10-2001 passed in its appellate and review jurisdiction. ] 2. Along with the revision petition, a separate application under t section 14 of the Limitation Act for exclusion of time spent in the High Court and Supreme Court was moved by the petitioners herein. V H 3. Brief facts of the case are that land measuring 64 Canals comprising Survey Nos.201, 325, 360, 373, 165, 349, 371, 407, 372 and 54 situated in Village Nagpur, Thesis Chamber, District Mirror (now Thesis Barnsley District Chamber) was allotted in the name of Abdul Aziz son of Shalwar (deceased), the husband of petitioner No.4 and father of others petitioners. The respondents herein filed different suits on 1-4- 1980 before the Deputy Custodian, Chamber for redemption of land in dispute. The petitioners defendants resisted the suits by filing their written statement. After trial of the suits, the Deputy Custodian decreed all the suits side judgment, dated 30-10-1991. An appeal, was preferred by the petitioners before the Custodian. The *r learned Custodian upheld. The judgment recorded by the Deputy Custodian vide its judgment dated 9-5-2000. Feeling aggrieved from the above-mentioned judgment, the present petitioners filed a review petition before the Custodian. The learned Custodian dismissed the same vide his judgment dated 18-11-2001. The petitioners challenged the said order. through a writ petition on 26-4-2002 and the same. was dismissed vide order dated 25- 10-2000 by this Court in view of decision of the apex Court rendered in Appeal No.54 of 2004. The other petition titled 1. ‘ Muhammad Real and others v. Pervier Mehdi and others: was contested by the petitioners and. pro forma respondents, which was r ultimately disallowed on the ground that an alternate* efficacious remedy was available to the. petitioners in the shape of section 43-A of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. Beng dissatisfied with the above-mentioned judgment of the High Court, the petitioners filed an appeal before the apex Court. The Honorable Supreme Court dismissed ® the appeal vide its judgment dated 6-5-2005. This judgment was also assailed in a review petition, but the apex Court dismissed the same in line on 25-11-2005. - 4, After completion of first round of litigation, the petitioners herein filed a* revision under section 43-A of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 before this Court. Both the learned counsel for the parties are in agreement that the application under section 14 of Limitation Act may be taken first. In view of the agreement of the learned Advocates, arguments have been heard on this application. 5. Heidi Muhammad Axial, the learned counsel representing the petitioners vehemently argued that the petitioners invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of High Court bona-fide and prosecuted that same in a good faith. The petitioners are, therefore, entitled to seek the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act. The learned counsel further contended that the period spent in the aforesaid cause may kindly be condoned and the revision petition under section 43-A may also be treated to have been filed within limitation. The learned counsel maintained that the petitioners fulfilled the required conditions for exclusion of the time spent in a wrong forum as is visualized by section }4 of Limitation Act. The learned counsel further maintained that the case of the petitioner is also covered’ by section 5 of Limitation Act, because no. limitation runs against a void order. According to the learned counsel, the exclusion of full period in the instant case is requirement of the justice. 6. Ch. Muhammad TAJ, the learned counsel for the respondents controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for. petitioners. The learned counsel argued that no sufficient cause has been N shown by the petitioners. The learned counsel contended that the w petitioner call in question the validity of judgment of learned Custodian in a writ petition before this Court, but subsequently, this wrt was dismissed on the request of petitioners. The learned counsel maintained that in Writ Petition No.2'9 of 2002, the High Court given a direction, that the petitioners may seek the remedy by invoking the revisional jurisdiction under section 43-A of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel maintained that in the presence of clear-cut direction, the petitioners did not avail the proper remedy, but with the connivance of pro forma respondents filed an appeal before the Apex. Court. The learned counsel also submitted that after the dismissal of appeal and thereafter review petition, the petitioners were not legally entitled to file the instant revision petition. According to the learned counsel, the petitioners do not deserve any leniency due to their own conduct. The learned counsel further argued that section 14 of Limitation Act does not apply in the case in hand. This section TS confined to only suits, not to appeals or revisions. The learned counsel placed reliance on a case titled Mascot Ahmed and others v. United Bank Limited and others 1992 SCR 98 and Abdul Gianni v. Ghulam Salwar -PLD 1997(?) SC 102. The learned counsel for respondents further controverted that the revision petition was filed beyond the period of Imitation and is hopelessly time-barred. Therefore, he prayed that by rejecting the application under section 14 the revision petition may also be dismissed. 17. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record made available with care and also perused the case- m law cited at bar. It is settled principle of law, that the benefit of section 14 would be available to a party who has diligently and with good faith prosecuted his case in a wrong forum. In other words, the benefit of section 14 can only be extended, if the'following conditions are fulfilled:- “(a) That the plaintiffs been prosecuting another civil proceedings against the defendant; ’ _ (b) that he has been prosecuting it with due diligence; (c) that this proceeding is founded upon the same cause of action; (d) that it is prosecuted in good faith; and that, it does not bear fruit because that Court is unable to entertain it due to the defect of jurisdiction or other, cause of alike nature. (f) that both the proceedings are in a Court." 1 8. In the. Present case, the circumstances are altogether different. Admittedly the order of learned Custodian was challenged in a writ petition before this Court. The writ petition was dismissed by this Court vide order, dated 25-10-2005 on the request of the petitioners, in the light of decision of apex Court Ina Civil Appeal No.54 of 2004 decided on 6-5-2005. After dismissal of writ petition, the petitioners harm filed a revision petition before this Court on 22- 2-2006. Whereas revision petition under section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act can be filed within three months of such declaration given by the Custodian. 9. It would be useful to reproduce section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 as under:- ' "43-A. Revision by High Court.- If in any case in which a Custodian has, on or after the first day of January, 1953, declared any evacuee or any EVACUEE property to be a nonevacuee or, as the case may be, non-evacuee property, the Central Government or the Government of West Pakistan considers it necessary so to do, it may, notwithstanding anything in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force send, within STX months of the commencement of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee property) (Amendment) Act, 1958, or within three months of such declaration, whichever be later, the record of the case to the High Court for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or proprietary of the order passed by the Custodian, and the High Court may pass such order in the case as it may deem fit”. Careful perusal of the provision shows that when the custodian declared any evacuee property to be non-evacuee then only remedy is available to a party to file a revision petition before this Court within » prescribed limit, but needful was not done by the petitioners. It is to be noted that no plausible explanation has been shown I'm the revision petition as well as in the application under section 14 of Limitation Act, that why the petitioners have filed the instant revision petition at such a belated stage. No reasonable grounds have been given by the petitioner for exclusion of time in the application. Especially when this Court has observed its judgment, dated 22-1-2004 that in a case in which the Custodian has declared any property to be non-evacuee, the remedy in shape of revision under section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act was available to the petitioners, it was essential for the petitioners to file revision petition before this Court under the relevant provision of law immediately but needful was not done by them. 10. We agree with the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that section 14 of Limitation Act deals with the time spent in suits not in appeals in wrong forum. 11. On the. Proposition in hand, the Apex Court has already observed in Mascot Ahmed's case 1992 SCR 98, as under:- "We may however observe that this section has nothing to do with appeals and its application is confined to suits. In this provision of law TT is laid down that in computing the period of m limitation prescribed for a suit, the time spent by the plaintiff in prosecuting, with due diligence, another civil proceeding shall be excluded." 12. In Abdul Gianni's case reported as PLD 1997 SC 102, the Supreme Court of Pakistan has held that:-- "prosecuted in good faith" therefore, in order to make out sufficient cause under section 5 an appellant must prove that he had acted in good faith in presenting his appeal in the wrong f Court. Good faith has been defined in clause (7) of section 2 of - the Limitation Act as: “good faith’, nothing shall be deemed to be done in good faith which is not done with due care and attention:" y k 13. From the perusal of the record and after consider mg the case-law, referred to hereinabove, we are of the view that in the N circumstances of the case, benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act M cannot be extended to the petitioners. The principle of coral- non-judicial is not applicable in the petitioner’s case. Same proposition has already been resolved by the apex Court in a Civil Appeal No.54 of 2004 decided on 6-5-2005. The apex Court has observed at page 14 of the "# judgment as under:---. "The myth of coral-non-judice is not acceptable in the case MN hand because Custodian had the power to make any declaration under section 22, whether declaration is with authority or, without authority in view of section 3-A does not make the order crampon- juice."’ 11 11f£*, * 14. As the next contention of the learned Advocate that petitioner's case is covered by section 5 is also devoid of any force, because.’ period of limitation for film the revision petition is provided by the special law and section 5 of the Limitation Act is not made applicable to the proceedings before the Custodian. This view finds support from a judgment, reported as PLD 1970Xah. 6.'j’T* krJ1i15. Even otherwise, no sufficient cause or reasons have been shown by the petitioners in their revision petition or in the application under section 14 of Limitation Act. 16. A contemplate perusal of the record shows that a gross negligence was committed by the petitioners themselves, by not availing proper remedy within reasonable time. It is not a.case of,good faith rather is of gross negligence. - 4–1*7 The- upshot of the above discussion is that finding no force in any application, it is hereby, rejected, consequently, the revision petition TS declared time-barred and is hereby dismissed. Vs?

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): . JUDGMENT MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR, J.- The above captioned revision petition is filed under section 43(A) of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee. Property) Act, 1957 against the judgments of learned Custodian dated 9-5-2000 and 18-10-2001 passed in its appellate and review jurisdiction. ] 2. Along with the revision petition, a separate application under t section 14 of the Limitation Act for exclusion of time spent in the High Court and Supreme Court was moved by the petitioners herein. V H 3. Brief facts of the case are that land measuring 64 Canals comprising Survey Nos.201, 325, 360, 373, 165, 349, 371, 407, 372 and 54 situated in Village Nagpur, Thesis Chamber, District Mirror (now Thesis Barnsley District Chamber) was allotted in the name of Abdul Aziz son of Shalwar (deceased), the husband of petitioner No.4 and father of others petitioners. The respondents herein filed different suits on 1-4- 1980 before the Deputy Custodian, Chamber for redemption of land in dispute. The petitioners defendants resisted the suits by filing their written statement. After trial of the suits, the Deputy Custodian decreed all the suits side judgment, dated 30-10-1991. An appeal, was preferred by the petitioners before the Custodian. The *r learned Custodian upheld. The judgment recorded by the Deputy Custodian vide its judgment dated 9-5-2000. Feeling aggrieved from the above-mentioned judgment, the present petitioners filed a review petition before the Custodian. The learned Custodian dismissed the same vide his judgment dated 18-11-2001. The petitioners challenged the said order. through a writ petition on 26-4-2002 and the same. was dismissed vide order dated 25- 10-2000 by this Court in view of decision of the apex Court rendered in Appeal No.54 of 2004. The other petition titled 1. ‘ Muhammad Real and others v. Pervier Mehdi and others: was contested by the petitioners and. pro forma respondents, which was r ultimately disallowed on the ground that an alternate* efficacious remedy was available to the. petitioners in the shape of section 43-A of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. Beng dissatisfied with the above-mentioned judgment of the High Court, the petitioners filed an appeal before the apex Court. The Honorable Supreme Court dismissed ® the appeal vide its judgment dated 6-5-2005. This judgment was also assailed in a review petition, but the apex Court dismissed the same in line on 25-11-2005. - 4, After completion of first round of litigation, the petitioners herein filed a* revision under section 43-A of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 before this Court. Both the learned counsel for the parties are in agreement that the application under section 14 of Limitation Act may be taken first. In view of the agreement of the learned Advocates, arguments have been heard on this application. 5. Heidi Muhammad Axial, the learned counsel representing the petitioners vehemently argued that the petitioners invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of High Court bona-fide and prosecuted that same in a good faith. The petitioners are, therefore, entitled to seek the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): on this application. 5. Heidi Muhammad Axial, the learned counsel representing the petitioners vehemently argued that the petitioners invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of High Court bona-fide and prosecuted that same in a good faith. The petitioners are, therefore, entitled to seek the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act. The learned counsel further contended that the period spent in the aforesaid cause may kindly be condoned and the revision petition under section 43-A may also be treated to have been filed within limitation. The learned counsel maintained that the petitioners fulfilled the required conditions for exclusion of the time spent in a wrong forum as is visualized by section }4 of Limitation Act. The learned counsel further maintained that the case of the petitioner is also covered’ by section 5 of Limitation Act, because no. limitation runs against a void order. According to the learned counsel, the exclusion of full period in the instant case is requirement of the justice. 6. Ch. Muhammad TAJ, the learned counsel for the respondents controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for. petitioners. The learned counsel argued that no sufficient cause has been N shown by the petitioners. The learned counsel contended that the w petitioner call in question the validity of judgment of learned Custodian in a writ petition before this Court, but subsequently, this wrt was dismissed on the request of petitioners. The learned counsel maintained that in Writ Petition No.2'9 of 2002, the High Court given a direction, that the petitioners may seek the remedy by invoking the revisional jurisdiction under section 43-A of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel maintained that in the presence of clear-cut direction, the petitioners did not avail the proper remedy, but with the connivance of pro forma respondents filed an appeal before the Apex. Court. The learned counsel also submitted that after the dismissal of appeal and thereafter review petition, the petitioners were not legally entitled to file the instant revision petition. According to the learned counsel, the petitioners do not deserve any leniency due to their own conduct. The learned counsel further argued that section 14 of Limitation Act does not apply in the case in hand. This section TS confined to only suits, not to appeals or revisions. The learned counsel placed reliance on a case titled Mascot Ahmed and others v. United Bank Limited and others 1992 SCR 98 and Abdul Gianni v. Ghulam Salwar -PLD 1997(?) SC 102. The learned counsel for respondents further controverted that the revision petition was filed beyond the period of Imitation and is hopelessly time-barred. Therefore, he prayed that by rejecting the application under section 14 the revision petition may also be dismissed. 17. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record made available with care and also perused the case- m law cited at bar. It is settled principle of law, that the benefit of section 14 would be available to a party who has

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): dismissed. 17. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record made available with care and also perused the case- m law cited at bar. It is settled principle of law, that the benefit of section 14 would be available to a party who has diligently and with good faith prosecuted his case in a wrong forum. In other words, the benefit of section 14 can only be extended, if the'following conditions are fulfilled:- “(a) That the plaintiffs been prosecuting another civil proceedings against the defendant; ’ _ (b) that he has been prosecuting it with due diligence; (c) that this proceeding is founded upon the same cause of action; (d) that it is prosecuted in good faith; and that, it does not bear fruit because that Court is unable to entertain it due to the defect of jurisdiction or other, cause of alike nature. (f) that both the proceedings are in a Court." 1 8. In the. Present case, the circumstances are altogether different. Admittedly the order of learned Custodian was challenged in a writ petition before this Court. The writ petition was dismissed by this Court vide order, dated 25-10-2005 on the request of the petitioners, in the light of decision of apex Court Ina Civil Appeal No.54 of 2004 decided on 6-5-2005. After dismissal of writ petition, the petitioners harm filed a revision petition before this Court on 22- 2-2006. Whereas revision petition under section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act can be filed within three months of such declaration given by the Custodian. 9. It would be useful to reproduce section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 as under:- ' "43-A. Revision by High Court.- If in any case in which a Custodian has, on or after the first day of January, 1953, declared any evacuee or any EVACUEE property to be a nonevacuee or, as the case may be, non-evacuee property, the Central Government or the Government of West Pakistan considers it necessary so to do, it may, notwithstanding anything in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force send, within STX months of the commencement of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee property) (Amendment) Act, 1958, or within three months of such declaration, whichever be later, the record of the case to the High Court for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or proprietary of the order passed by the Custodian, and the High Court may pass such order in the case as it may deem fit”. Careful perusal of the provision shows that when the custodian declared any evacuee property to be non-evacuee then only remedy is available to a party to file a revision petition before this Court within » prescribed limit, but needful was not done by the petitioners. It is to be noted that no plausible explanation has been shown I'm the revision petition as well as in the application under section 14

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): is available to a party to file a revision petition before this Court within » prescribed limit, but needful was not done by the petitioners. It is to be noted that no plausible explanation has been shown I'm the revision petition as well as in the application under section 14 of Limitation Act, that why the petitioners have filed the instant revision petition at such a belated stage. No reasonable grounds have been given by the petitioner for exclusion of time in the application. Especially when this Court has observed its judgment, dated 22-1-2004 that in a case in which the Custodian has declared any property to be non-evacuee, the remedy in shape of revision under section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act was available to the petitioners, it was essential for the petitioners to file revision petition before this Court under the relevant provision of law immediately but needful was not done by them. 10. We agree with the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that section 14 of Limitation Act deals with the time spent in suits not in appeals in wrong forum. 11. On the. Proposition in hand, the Apex Court has already observed in Mascot Ahmed's case 1992 SCR 98, as under:- "We may however observe that this section has nothing to do with appeals and its application is confined to suits. In this provision of law TT is laid down that in computing the period of m limitation prescribed for a suit, the time spent by the plaintiff in prosecuting, with due diligence, another civil proceeding shall be excluded." 12. In Abdul Gianni's case reported as PLD 1997 SC 102, the Supreme Court of Pakistan has held that:-- "prosecuted in good faith" therefore, in order to make out sufficient cause under section 5 an appellant must prove that he had acted in good faith in presenting his appeal in the wrong f Court. Good faith has been defined in clause (7) of section 2 of - the Limitation Act as: “good faith’, nothing shall be deemed to be done in good faith which is not done with due care and attention:" y k 13. From the perusal of the record and after consider mg the case-law, referred to hereinabove, we are of the view that in the N circumstances of the case, benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act M cannot be extended to the petitioners. The principle of coral- non-judicial is not applicable in the petitioner’s case. Same proposition has already been resolved by the apex Court in a Civil Appeal No.54 of 2004 decided on 6-5-2005. The apex Court has observed at page 14 of the "# judgment as under:---. "The myth of coral-non-judice is not acceptable in the case MN hand because Custodian had the power to make any declaration under section 22, whether declaration is with authority or, without authority in view of section 3-A does not make the order crampon- juice."’ 11 11f£*, *

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): judgment as under:---. "The myth of coral-non-judice is not acceptable in the case MN hand because Custodian had the power to make any declaration under section 22, whether declaration is with authority or, without authority in view of section 3-A does not make the order crampon- juice."’ 11 11f£*, * 14. As the next contention of the learned Advocate that petitioner's case is covered by section 5 is also devoid of any force, because.’ period of limitation for film the revision petition is provided by the special law and section 5 of the Limitation Act is not made applicable to the proceedings before the Custodian. This view finds support from a judgment, reported as PLD 1970Xah. 6.'j’T* krJ1i15. Even otherwise, no sufficient cause or reasons have been shown by the petitioners in their revision petition or in the application under section 14 of Limitation Act. 16. A contemplate perusal of the record shows that a gross negligence was committed by the petitioners themselves, by not availing proper remedy within reasonable time. It is not a.case of,good faith rather is of gross negligence. - 4–1*7 The- upshot of the above discussion is that finding no force in any application, it is hereby, rejected, consequently, the revision petition TS declared time-barred and is hereby dismissed. Vs?

Question: What is case 2004 YLR 2260 about?
Answer: Case 2004 YLR 2260 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2004-05-19. The case involved MUHAMMAD YAQOOB AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AJ&K THROUGH CHIEF SECRETARY AND 16 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN REHABILITATION) ACT (XLLL OF 1956) - 1951, R. 10(2) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 YLR 2260?
Answer: In case 2004 YLR 2260, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN REHABILITATION) ACT (XLLL OF 1956) - 1951, R. 10(2) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2004-05-19.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 YLR 2260?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 YLR 2260 were: CH. SHARIF TARIQ FOR PETITIONERS. RAJA MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 YLR 2260?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 YLR 2260 were: MUHAMMAD YAQOOB AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AJ&K THROUGH CHIEF SECRETARY AND 16 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 YLR 2260.
Answer: LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y This Constitutional petition arises out of the following facts: 2. Initially Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner, Mirror allotted the disputed piece of land in the name of petitioners as refugees. This allotment was challenged by the private respondents before Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner who after hearing the parties cancelled the allotment in favor of petitioners and remanded the case to A.R.C. for determination of the entitlement of respective parties and while doing so he formulated certain points upon which an inquiry was required. The petitioners herein feel mg aggrieved by the order of D.R.C. filed an appeal before Rehabilitation Commissioner, Mirror who upheld the order of D.R.C. by dismissing the appeal. The petitioners challenged the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner before learned Custodian who disallowed the revision petition on the ground of incompetency under law. Hence this writ petition. 3. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record made available to this Court. This writ petition is able to be dismissed on the following grounds: - (1) The order through which the case has been remanded is not a final order and the petitioners have alternate remedy to redress their grievance before relevant Rehabilitation Authority to whom the case has been remanded. In case they fail to get favorable decision they have right of appeal before higher for a on rehabilitation side. Under section 44 of Interim Constitution Act, 1974, the jurisdiction of this Court can only be invoked where no alternate remedy is available to an aggrieved party. (2) Under section 12 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 as adapted in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, the Government may buy order notified in the official Gazette, specify the cases or class of cases in respect of A which a revision petition may be made and unless such order is published no revision petition against the order of any Rehabilitation Commissioner or Rehabilitation Board shall lie before Custodian Evacuee Property. The Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir through its Order No.484 of 1959, dated 21-9- 1959, by exercising powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 12 of Rehabilitation Act, 1956 has specified the cases or class of cases subject to revision by the Custodian. The cases specified through the aforesaid order are as follows:~ (a) An order of allotment or cancellation of allotment of immovable property passed by Rehabilitation Board; (b) An order of allotment, confirmed ton of allotment on appeal or revision or cancellation of allotment passed by a Rehabilitation Commissioner pertain to immovable property of all kinds, whether urban or rural or pertaining to industrial or business concerns: This WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Government order specifying cases or class of cases when seen in view of subsection (1) of section 12 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, suggests saying that the order of two Rehabilitation Authorities namely Rehabilitation Commissioner and Rehabilitation Board are subject to revision by the Custodian. No order passed by any other Rehabilitation Authority Is subject to revision by the Custodian. Here in this case a revision petition was brought before learned Custodian against an order of Rehabilitation Commissioner through which remand order and cancellation of allotment by D.R.C. was upheld on appeal. Therefore, the order challenged before learned Custodian was neither an allotment order made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner not it was confirmation of allotment on appeal or revision before Rehabilitation Commissioner, nor it was cancellation of allotment by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. Thus, the learned Custodian while dismissing the revision petition by the petitioners acted perfectly in accordance with law. 3. The order of Rehabilitation Commissioner challenged before learned Custodian through a revision petition was passed on 25-6- 2002, and it was challenged before the learned Custodian on 5-8-2002. This order was announced in presence of the learned counsel for the parties. Under rule 10(2) of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Rules, 1951 as applicable in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, the limitation provided for an application for revision against the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner is 15 days from the date of the order sought to be revised. The revision petition before learned Custodian therefore, was hopelessly time-barred. 4. The result is that for the reasons stated above, I find no force in this writ petition which stands dismissed. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 2260?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 2260 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-05-19): LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y This Constitutional petition arises out of the following facts: 2. Initially Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner, Mirror allotted the disputed piece of land in the name of petitioners as refugees. This allotment was challenged by the private respondents before Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner who after hearing the parties cancelled the allotment in favor of petitioners and remanded the case to A.R.C. for determination of the entitlement of respective parties and while doing so he formulated certain points upon which an inquiry was required. The petitioners herein feel mg aggrieved by the order of D.R.C. filed an appeal before Rehabilitation Commissioner, Mirror who upheld the order of D.R.C. by dismissing the appeal. The petitioners challenged the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner before learned Custodian who disallowed the revision petition on the ground of incompetency under law. Hence this writ petition. 3. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record made available to this Court. This writ petition is able to be dismissed on the following grounds: - (1) The order through which the case has been remanded is not a final order and the petitioners have alternate remedy to redress their grievance before relevant Rehabilitation Authority to whom the case has been remanded. In case they fail to get favorable decision they have right of appeal before higher for a on rehabilitation side. Under section 44 of Interim Constitution Act, 1974, the jurisdiction of this Court can only be invoked where no alternate remedy is available to an aggrieved party. (2) Under section 12 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 as adapted in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, the Government may buy order notified in the official Gazette, specify the cases or class of cases in respect of A which a revision petition may be made and unless such order is published no revision petition against the order of any Rehabilitation Commissioner or Rehabilitation Board shall lie before Custodian Evacuee Property. The Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir through its Order No.484 of 1959, dated 21-9- 1959, by exercising powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 12 of Rehabilitation Act, 1956 has specified the cases or class of cases subject to revision by the Custodian. The cases specified through the aforesaid order are as follows:~ (a) An order of allotment or cancellation of allotment of immovable property passed by Rehabilitation Board; (b) An order of allotment, confirmed ton of allotment on appeal or revision or cancellation of allotment passed by a Rehabilitation Commissioner pertain to immovable property of all kinds, whether urban or rural or pertaining to industrial or business concerns: This WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Government order specifying cases or class of cases when seen in view of subsection (1) of section 12 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, suggests saying that the order of two Rehabilitation Authorities namely Rehabilitation Commissioner and Rehabilitation Board are subject to revision by the Custodian. No order passed by any other Rehabilitation Authority Is subject to revision by the Custodian. Here in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 2260?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 2260 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-05-19): subsection (1) of section 12 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, suggests saying that the order of two Rehabilitation Authorities namely Rehabilitation Commissioner and Rehabilitation Board are subject to revision by the Custodian. No order passed by any other Rehabilitation Authority Is subject to revision by the Custodian. Here in this case a revision petition was brought before learned Custodian against an order of Rehabilitation Commissioner through which remand order and cancellation of allotment by D.R.C. was upheld on appeal. Therefore, the order challenged before learned Custodian was neither an allotment order made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner not it was confirmation of allotment on appeal or revision before Rehabilitation Commissioner, nor it was cancellation of allotment by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. Thus, the learned Custodian while dismissing the revision petition by the petitioners acted perfectly in accordance with law. 3. The order of Rehabilitation Commissioner challenged before learned Custodian through a revision petition was passed on 25-6- 2002, and it was challenged before the learned Custodian on 5-8-2002. This order was announced in presence of the learned counsel for the parties. Under rule 10(2) of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Rules, 1951 as applicable in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, the limitation provided for an application for revision against the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner is 15 days from the date of the order sought to be revised. The revision petition before learned Custodian therefore, was hopelessly time-barred. 4. The result is that for the reasons stated above, I find no force in this writ petition which stands dismissed. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2004 MLD 960 about?
Answer: Case 2004 MLD 960 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2002-12-12. The case involved MUHAMMAD ASLAM AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE PROPERTY AND DISPLACED PERSONS LAW (REPEAL) ACT (XIV OF 1975) - SS.2 AND AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.42(12). The case was heard by CHAUDHARY MUHAMMAD TAJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 MLD 960?
Answer: In case 2004 MLD 960, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE PROPERTY AND DISPLACED PERSONS LAW (REPEAL) ACT (XIV OF 1975) - SS.2 AND AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.42(12). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2002-12-12.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 MLD 960?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 MLD 960 were: RAJA MUHAMMAD HANIF KHAN, ADVOCATE FOR PETITIONERS. KH. MUHAMMAD NASIM, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENTS NOS.2 AND 3.. The judges presiding were: CHAUDHARY MUHAMMAD TAJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 MLD 960?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 MLD 960 were: MUHAMMAD ASLAM AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 MLD 960.
Answer: This petition for leave to appeal has been filed to challenge the order passed by the High Court on 8-10-2002, whereby the writ petition filed by the petitioners was dismissed. 2. The facts giving rise to the present petition for leave to appeal are that the land measuring 39 Canals 13 Marla's, situate in village Sail, Thesis Sense, was allotted in petitioners name, vide order of allotment dated 29-6-1986. The proprietary rights were also granted in favor of the petitioners. The aforesaid proprietary rights were later on set aside by the Custodian on the ground that the land stood allotted in the name of Muhammad Ibrahim on 5-8-1971. Thereafter the proprietary rights were also granted in favor of the respondent. The petitioner submitted a review petition before the Custodian which was dismissed. The aforesaid order of allotment, the order of granting proprietary rights and the order passed by the Custodian were challenged before the High Court through a writ petition which was dismissed. Hence, this petition for leave to appeal. 3. Raja Muhammad Han if Khan, the learned counsel for the petitioners, maintained that the allotment was illegally made in the name of the respondents which was in excess of the scale prescribed for it. It was also argued by him that the respondents were not entitled to the allotment as they did not constitute the head of their families therefore, the allotment in their names was illegal. It was further argued that in the previous round of litigation the petitioners were not aware of the full facts as such could not place on record. 4. Km. Muhammad Na sim, the learned counsel for respondents Nos.2 and 3, while controverting the arguments addressed on behalf of the petitioners, argued that the petitioners had not Focus stand to agitate the matter through writ petition. The learned counsel contended that actual facts are that the land in dispute was earlier allotted in favor of non-petitioners in the year 1971. The petitioners herein challenged the aforesaid allotment on the ground that the land was non-evacuee. The aforesaid cause was dismissed. The petitioners however, maneuvered to get the allotment of disputed land in their favor without its cancellation from the name of non-petitioners. The non-petitioners moved before the Custodian for the cancellation of illegal allotment in favor of the petitioners which was accepted, and the allotment was cancelled. The petitioners filed a writ petition before the High Court which. was also dismissed and a further appeal before the Supreme Court also met the same fate. Subsequently, the petitioners started the third round of litigation by challenging the allotment existing>in the name of non-petitioners before the Custodian through a review petition which was dismissed. A writ petition challenging the aforesaid order was also dismissed. The order is challenged through this petition for leave to appeal. It was forcefully argued that the petitioners have no case on merits, and they are dragging the non-petitioners. ty 5. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the record. It is not denied by the learned counsel for the petitioners that in the earlier round of litigation the petitioners were unsuccessful before the Custodian while challenging the allotment and also failed to succeed before the High Court and finally before the Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir. The order passed by the Supreme Court attained finality, therefore, the petitioners could not re-agitate the matter through another review petition before the Custodian as such the petition for leave to appeal is found to have no substance in TT particularly in the circumstances when in previous two rounds of litigation they remained unsuccessful. It may also be mentioned that the respondents were allotted land in the year 1971. They were also conferred the proprietary rights. No illegality is found in the order of allotment existing in the name of respondents. Therefore, the petition for leave to appeal has been found to have no. substance in it and is dismissed. »> I N I As the petition for leave to appeal has been dismissed, therefore, the application for grant of stay order also stands dismissed., Petition dismissed. “WPaklcgaldatabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 960?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 960 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2002-12-12): This petition for leave to appeal has been filed to challenge the order passed by the High Court on 8-10-2002, whereby the writ petition filed by the petitioners was dismissed. 2. The facts giving rise to the present petition for leave to appeal are that the land measuring 39 Canals 13 Marla's, situate in village Sail, Thesis Sense, was allotted in petitioners name, vide order of allotment dated 29-6-1986. The proprietary rights were also granted in favor of the petitioners. The aforesaid proprietary rights were later on set aside by the Custodian on the ground that the land stood allotted in the name of Muhammad Ibrahim on 5-8-1971. Thereafter the proprietary rights were also granted in favor of the respondent. The petitioner submitted a review petition before the Custodian which was dismissed. The aforesaid order of allotment, the order of granting proprietary rights and the order passed by the Custodian were challenged before the High Court through a writ petition which was dismissed. Hence, this petition for leave to appeal. 3. Raja Muhammad Han if Khan, the learned counsel for the petitioners, maintained that the allotment was illegally made in the name of the respondents which was in excess of the scale prescribed for it. It was also argued by him that the respondents were not entitled to the allotment as they did not constitute the head of their families therefore, the allotment in their names was illegal. It was further argued that in the previous round of litigation the petitioners were not aware of the full facts as such could not place on record. 4. Km. Muhammad Na sim, the learned counsel for respondents Nos.2 and 3, while controverting the arguments addressed on behalf of the petitioners, argued that the petitioners had not Focus stand to agitate the matter through writ petition. The learned counsel contended that actual facts are that the land in dispute was earlier allotted in favor of non-petitioners in the year 1971. The petitioners herein challenged the aforesaid allotment on the ground that the land was non-evacuee. The aforesaid cause was dismissed. The petitioners however, maneuvered to get the allotment of disputed land in their favor without its cancellation from the name of non-petitioners. The non-petitioners moved before the Custodian for the cancellation of illegal allotment in favor of the petitioners which was accepted, and the allotment was cancelled. The petitioners filed a writ petition before the High Court which. was also dismissed and a further appeal before the Supreme Court also met the same fate. Subsequently, the petitioners started the third round of litigation by challenging the allotment existing>in the name of non-petitioners before the Custodian through a review petition which was dismissed. A writ petition challenging the aforesaid order was also dismissed. The order is challenged through this petition for leave to appeal. It was forcefully argued that the petitioners have no case on merits, and they are dragging the non-petitioners. ty 5. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 960?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 960 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2002-12-12): writ petition challenging the aforesaid order was also dismissed. The order is challenged through this petition for leave to appeal. It was forcefully argued that the petitioners have no case on merits, and they are dragging the non-petitioners. ty 5. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the record. It is not denied by the learned counsel for the petitioners that in the earlier round of litigation the petitioners were unsuccessful before the Custodian while challenging the allotment and also failed to succeed before the High Court and finally before the Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir. The order passed by the Supreme Court attained finality, therefore, the petitioners could not re-agitate the matter through another review petition before the Custodian as such the petition for leave to appeal is found to have no substance in TT particularly in the circumstances when in previous two rounds of litigation they remained unsuccessful. It may also be mentioned that the respondents were allotted land in the year 1971. They were also conferred the proprietary rights. No illegality is found in the order of allotment existing in the name of respondents. Therefore, the petition for leave to appeal has been found to have no. substance in it and is dismissed. »> I N I As the petition for leave to appeal has been dismissed, therefore, the application for grant of stay order also stands dismissed., Petition dismissed. “WPaklcgaldatabase.com

Question: What is case 2004 MLD 1624 about?
Answer: Case 2004 MLD 1624 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2004-04-24. The case involved MUHAMMAD HUSSAINAND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS TiWMUHAMMAD ASGHAR AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.XL, R.I SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S.9. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 MLD 1624?
Answer: In case 2004 MLD 1624, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.XL, R.I SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S.9. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2004-04-24.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 MLD 1624?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 MLD 1624 were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD ANWAR KHAN FOR PETITIONERS. ".414 'SARDAR ABDUL QAYYUM KHAN FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 MLD 1624?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 MLD 1624 were: MUHAMMAD HUSSAINAND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS TiWMUHAMMAD ASGHAR AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 MLD 1624.
Answer: - IJ / Through this revision the order of Civil Judge Hejira dated 14-11 -2003 is under challenge. * 2. The relevant facts necessary for resolution of controversy d between the parties are that Muhammad Affair and others (respondents herein) brought a suit for perpetual injunction in the Court of Civil Judge Hejira against Muhammad Hussain and others (petitioners herein) regarding Survey No.258 measuring 14 Canals, Marla's and Survey No.259.measuring 3 Canals, 3 Marla's situated in village Dear Thesis r j} Hejira. Along with the suit and application for maintenance of status quo was also moved before the trial Court. The learned trial Judge issued order of status quo subject to objections by the other party however, during pendency of this application, another application for violation of J order of status quo was moved before the trial Court. The learned trial 1 Court summoned petitioners Muhammad Hussain and others after enter taming the application for violation of order of status quo. They appeared in the Court, on 24-11-2003 and requested adjournment for filing their objections to this application. However, the trial Court directed Assistant Collector (Tonsilar) one of the defendants to apport receiver of the suit-land at the verbal request of the learned counsel for the plaintiffs/respondents. Hence this revision r petition. RT 3. In order to resolve this controversy, it is felt expedient to have a brief background of the dispute. Initially two suits one by Muhammad Affair and others by Muhammad Hussain and others for adverse possession and suit for possession pertaining to a Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals, 3 Marla's were brought before Civil Judge Haywire on 1-8- 1994 and 15-8-1994 respectively. The suits were consolidated and after due process of law both the suits were decided through a consolidated judgment. The suit for adverse possession was disallowed whereas the cross-suit for possession was decreed in favor of Muhammad Hussain and others. Muhammad Affair and others went in appeal before District Judge with no success. A second appeal before High Court also failed and the judgment and decree of the High Court attained finality as it was not challenged before the apex Court. h 4. The petitioners Muhammad Hussain and others applied for execution of the decree in their favor on 19-8-2002. The executing f Court (Civil Judge Haywire) issued warrant for execution of the decree on 29-9-2002 and the same was implemented by the Revenue authorities with a report to the executing Court on 25-10-2003. The executing Court on 25-10-2003 in presence of learned counsel for the parties after recording statements of the decree-holders and examination of the report showing execution of decree consigned the execution application to record as in the option of learned Civil Judge (executing Court) the decree was satisfied. 5. Muhammad Affair and others have brought present suit for perpetual injunction regarding Survey No,259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's by joining another Survey No.258 measuring 14 Canals and 14 Marla's asking to restrain Muhammad Hussain and others from implementation of decree already passed in their favor. They also obtained an order of status quo. Meanwhile, the decree in favor of the petitioners stood satisfied as the trial Judge in the capacity of executed Court consigned the execution application to record on 25-10-2003. The respondents Affair and others moved and application for violation of order of status quo to which the objections were yet to come by the opposite party when the learned trial Judge on 24-11-2003 directed Tonsilar concerned to remove the* petitioners (decree-holders) from possession of the Survey No.259 by apporting a receiver. Thus, the trial Judge (as a executing Court) at one hand got the decree executed through his order and at the other hand directed to remove the decree-holders (petitioners) from the possession over Survey No.259. 6. The learned counsel for the petitioners assailed the impugned order for it was not passed in accordance with law. According to him, the respondents through their present suit have attempted to frustrate the decree of the trial Court upheld by the High Court and the learned trial Judge has also aided them by recording the impugned order. 7. While, controverting the arguments by the. petitioners counsel, it was argued that the impugned order was passed under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. and it could be done even so moth. The execution carder. was not implemented, and the possession was still with the respondents therefore, the impugned order as recorded in the right direction in view of immediate apprehension of breach of peace, the learned counsel f w maintained. The learned counsel further argued that the modified order was not open to revision as the same was appealable order, However, « assuming that it was revisable, the revision was competent before District Judge, under amended law. It was also the case of learned counsel that the petitioners were awarded a decree for joint possession which was subject to partition as such Has possession was not' possible. ' I 8. After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, the record made available to this Court has been examined with care and caution. It * is an admitted, fact that the petitioners brought a suit for possession regarding Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's against the respondents, and they succeeded to secure a decree for possession. It. is also admitted that the cross-suit for adverse possession by the respondents was disallowed. The respondent Muhammad Affair and for others were found strangers in Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's therefore, a decree for possession was granted in favor of petitioners. The petitioners are real brothers and Survey No.259 is the ownership and none-else. The record also shows that the decree for possession regarding Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's has been satisfied. Though the learned trial Court during previous round k of litigation concluded suit for possession with a decree for joint possession nevertheless the fact remains that Muhammad Affair and others (respondents) were neither co-sharer in the said survey number nor they claimed to do so. They are'found as illegal occupants of Survey No.259 therefore, the word “Joint possession” used in the operative part of the judgment of the trial Court in the IST round of litigation or in the degree-sheet upheld by’ the Appellate Courts appears to be result of some inadvertence or clerical mistake. It was a decree for specific possession and executing Court rightly ordered to hand over the possession (Has) to the decree-holders (petitioners). As the order for specific possession in view of decree was implemented in accordance with law therefore, the execution application was consigned to record in presence of the learned counsel for the respective parties. This Court Plus'l1, by exercising inherent powers rectifies the error in the decree by declaring it as decree for specific possession and not for joint possession in order to remove ambiguity. The respondents are found to have engaged the petitioners in a second round of litigation cleverly by join mg another survey number so as to frustrate the decree in the favor of the petitioners. The controversy regarding Survey No.259 has already been resolved in favor of the petitioners therefore, the respondents are surely with dirty hands. 9, Now let us examine the legal aspect of the impugned order. The learned counsel for the respondents while defending it resorted to Order XL, rule of C.P.C. This order is found to have been passed while dealing with an application for violation of an order of status quo. The learned trial Judge unfortunately allowed to prevail the argument of learned counsel for the respondent about immediate apprehension of breach of peace. It appears that learned Judge was entertaining’ a request under section 145, Cr.P.C. in the capacity of a Magistrate. While dealing with an application for violation of order of status quo any appropriate order could be passed after having objection by the other side. The impugned order by no stretch of imagination can be accepted as an order under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. It is a patent illegality therefore, it can be rectified in revisional jurisdiction. 10. After close examination of Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. and the case-law on the subject of appointment of receiver under the said provision of law, it appears that the object and purpose of 'the appointment of a receiver is preservation of the subject-matter of litigation pending adjudication of the nights of the parties thereto. This provision of law is to safeguard the merest of all parties as well as property which is the subject-matter of litigation. A plaintiff is under legal obligation to make out a prima facie case so as to persuade the Court to reach such conclusion. One who seeks appointment of receiver is required to satisfy the Court that the protection and preservation of subject-matter because of expected waste or peril to such property, right and merest of the plaintiff therein is necessary. A person who is found to be in possession of a property in his own night and title should not be lightly dispossessed unless some peculiar circumstances or instance of waste and damage to property is shown. The appointment of receiver by dispossessing a party is a very harsh action which should not be resorted to lightly unless a strong case of damage or waste to the property is made out. The receiver is a representative of the Court and not of either party to the litigation. The appointment of receiver is always made to protect the property for equal benefit of those who' are interested in its distribution and to keep the property with the control of the Court. This power available to a Court is exercised only when the petitioner establishes a special equity in his favor but where the title of party in possession is established then certainly the petitioner for appointment of receiver cannot ask for such appointment. The appointment of receiver is made in exceptional cases and in the circumstance where the interest of the party seeking appointment of a receiver is exposed to manifest peril. The party seeking such appointment therefore, has to show emergency or danger or loss to the property demanding immediate action. The element of danger is an important consideration and the Court cannot act on possible danger only. The possession of a person bona-fide in occupation of the subject-matter should not be disturbed unless there is an allegation of waste, mismanagement of the property or apprehension of irreparable loss and injury. This power is sparingly used by the Court and, if the interest of any plaintiff can be protected by another means, the Court should abstain its hands to apport a receiver under the aforesaid provision of law. Where a plaintiff failed to establish specific instances ’of alleged waste, mismanagement and misappropriation, the Court should refuse to apport receiver under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. Reference may be hard to (1992 CLC 2460, PLD 1977 Karachi 280, PLD 1980 Karachi 1093, 1994 CLC 247 and 1993 CLC 605). v 11’. There is yet another aspect of the case that the learned trial Judge did not apport receiver himself but directed the Tonsilar to appoint receiver of the property which is quite illegal. While apporting a receiver under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. the trial Court is under legal obligation to apport a receiver himself by conferring upon him all such powers as to bringing and defending suits and for the realization, management, protection, preservation and improvement of the property along with collection of rents and profit thereof or any other powers as the Court thinks fit. Here in this case, all these legal requirements were violated therefore, the impugned order is not sustainable on this ground too. 'h 12. Here in this case, the petitioners were declared as full owners of. Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals, 3 Marla's whereas the respondents were found stranger in the said survey number. They were declared illegal occupants over the suit-land. The petitioners were rightly put into possession, and they had every right to protect the same. The fresh suit to the extent of Survey No.259 is a clear example to frustrate the decree about the said survey number upheld by the High Court. The impugned order is also an act to facilitate the frustration of the decree or writ of the Court. The impugned order therefore, is set aside. The suit by the plaintiff- respondents to the extent of Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's is hit by mischief of res judicata which is also disallowed under the revisional powers of this Court. The plaintiffs-respondents shall bear the costs of the present HOR FE! 44tabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1624?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1624 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-04-24): - IJ / Through this revision the order of Civil Judge Hejira dated 14-11 -2003 is under challenge. * 2. The relevant facts necessary for resolution of controversy d between the parties are that Muhammad Affair and others (respondents herein) brought a suit for perpetual injunction in the Court of Civil Judge Hejira against Muhammad Hussain and others (petitioners herein) regarding Survey No.258 measuring 14 Canals, Marla's and Survey No.259.measuring 3 Canals, 3 Marla's situated in village Dear Thesis r j} Hejira. Along with the suit and application for maintenance of status quo was also moved before the trial Court. The learned trial Judge issued order of status quo subject to objections by the other party however, during pendency of this application, another application for violation of J order of status quo was moved before the trial Court. The learned trial 1 Court summoned petitioners Muhammad Hussain and others after enter taming the application for violation of order of status quo. They appeared in the Court, on 24-11-2003 and requested adjournment for filing their objections to this application. However, the trial Court directed Assistant Collector (Tonsilar) one of the defendants to apport receiver of the suit-land at the verbal request of the learned counsel for the plaintiffs/respondents. Hence this revision r petition. RT 3. In order to resolve this controversy, it is felt expedient to have a brief background of the dispute. Initially two suits one by Muhammad Affair and others by Muhammad Hussain and others for adverse possession and suit for possession pertaining to a Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals, 3 Marla's were brought before Civil Judge Haywire on 1-8- 1994 and 15-8-1994 respectively. The suits were consolidated and after due process of law both the suits were decided through a consolidated judgment. The suit for adverse possession was disallowed whereas the cross-suit for possession was decreed in favor of Muhammad Hussain and others. Muhammad Affair and others went in appeal before District Judge with no success. A second appeal before High Court also failed and the judgment and decree of the High Court attained finality as it was not challenged before the apex Court. h 4. The petitioners Muhammad Hussain and others applied for execution of the decree in their favor on 19-8-2002. The executing f Court (Civil Judge Haywire) issued warrant for execution of the decree on 29-9-2002 and the same was implemented by the Revenue authorities with a report to the executing Court on 25-10-2003. The executing Court on 25-10-2003 in presence of learned counsel for the parties after recording statements of the decree-holders and examination of the report showing execution of decree consigned the execution application to record as in the option of learned Civil Judge (executing Court) the decree was satisfied. 5. Muhammad Affair and others have brought present suit for perpetual injunction regarding Survey No,259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's by joining another Survey No.258 measuring 14 Canals and 14 Marla's asking to restrain Muhammad Hussain and others from implementation of decree

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1624?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1624 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-04-24): Judge (executing Court) the decree was satisfied. 5. Muhammad Affair and others have brought present suit for perpetual injunction regarding Survey No,259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's by joining another Survey No.258 measuring 14 Canals and 14 Marla's asking to restrain Muhammad Hussain and others from implementation of decree already passed in their favor. They also obtained an order of status quo. Meanwhile, the decree in favor of the petitioners stood satisfied as the trial Judge in the capacity of executed Court consigned the execution application to record on 25-10-2003. The respondents Affair and others moved and application for violation of order of status quo to which the objections were yet to come by the opposite party when the learned trial Judge on 24-11-2003 directed Tonsilar concerned to remove the* petitioners (decree-holders) from possession of the Survey No.259 by apporting a receiver. Thus, the trial Judge (as a executing Court) at one hand got the decree executed through his order and at the other hand directed to remove the decree-holders (petitioners) from the possession over Survey No.259. 6. The learned counsel for the petitioners assailed the impugned order for it was not passed in accordance with law. According to him, the respondents through their present suit have attempted to frustrate the decree of the trial Court upheld by the High Court and the learned trial Judge has also aided them by recording the impugned order. 7. While, controverting the arguments by the. petitioners counsel, it was argued that the impugned order was passed under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. and it could be done even so moth. The execution carder. was not implemented, and the possession was still with the respondents therefore, the impugned order as recorded in the right direction in view of immediate apprehension of breach of peace, the learned counsel f w maintained. The learned counsel further argued that the modified order was not open to revision as the same was appealable order, However, « assuming that it was revisable, the revision was competent before District Judge, under amended law. It was also the case of learned counsel that the petitioners were awarded a decree for joint possession which was subject to partition as such Has possession was not' possible. ' I 8. After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, the record made available to this Court has been examined with care and caution. It * is an admitted, fact that the petitioners brought a suit for possession regarding Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's against the respondents, and they succeeded to secure a decree for possession. It. is also admitted that the cross-suit for adverse possession by the respondents was disallowed. The respondent Muhammad Affair and for others were found strangers in Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's therefore, a decree for possession was granted in favor of petitioners. The petitioners are real brothers and Survey No.259 is the ownership and none-else. The record also shows that the decree for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1624?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1624 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-04-24): respondent Muhammad Affair and for others were found strangers in Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's therefore, a decree for possession was granted in favor of petitioners. The petitioners are real brothers and Survey No.259 is the ownership and none-else. The record also shows that the decree for possession regarding Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's has been satisfied. Though the learned trial Court during previous round k of litigation concluded suit for possession with a decree for joint possession nevertheless the fact remains that Muhammad Affair and others (respondents) were neither co-sharer in the said survey number nor they claimed to do so. They are'found as illegal occupants of Survey No.259 therefore, the word “Joint possession” used in the operative part of the judgment of the trial Court in the IST round of litigation or in the degree-sheet upheld by’ the Appellate Courts appears to be result of some inadvertence or clerical mistake. It was a decree for specific possession and executing Court rightly ordered to hand over the possession (Has) to the decree-holders (petitioners). As the order for specific possession in view of decree was implemented in accordance with law therefore, the execution application was consigned to record in presence of the learned counsel for the respective parties. This Court Plus'l1, by exercising inherent powers rectifies the error in the decree by declaring it as decree for specific possession and not for joint possession in order to remove ambiguity. The respondents are found to have engaged the petitioners in a second round of litigation cleverly by join mg another survey number so as to frustrate the decree in the favor of the petitioners. The controversy regarding Survey No.259 has already been resolved in favor of the petitioners therefore, the respondents are surely with dirty hands. 9, Now let us examine the legal aspect of the impugned order. The learned counsel for the respondents while defending it resorted to Order XL, rule of C.P.C. This order is found to have been passed while dealing with an application for violation of an order of status quo. The learned trial Judge unfortunately allowed to prevail the argument of learned counsel for the respondent about immediate apprehension of breach of peace. It appears that learned Judge was entertaining’ a request under section 145, Cr.P.C. in the capacity of a Magistrate. While dealing with an application for violation of order of status quo any appropriate order could be passed after having objection by the other side. The impugned order by no stretch of imagination can be accepted as an order under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. It is a patent illegality therefore, it can be rectified in revisional jurisdiction. 10. After close examination of Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. and the case-law on the subject of appointment of receiver under the said provision of law, it appears that the object and purpose of 'the appointment of a receiver is preservation of the subject-matter of litigation pending adjudication of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1624?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1624 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-04-24): 10. After close examination of Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. and the case-law on the subject of appointment of receiver under the said provision of law, it appears that the object and purpose of 'the appointment of a receiver is preservation of the subject-matter of litigation pending adjudication of the nights of the parties thereto. This provision of law is to safeguard the merest of all parties as well as property which is the subject-matter of litigation. A plaintiff is under legal obligation to make out a prima facie case so as to persuade the Court to reach such conclusion. One who seeks appointment of receiver is required to satisfy the Court that the protection and preservation of subject-matter because of expected waste or peril to such property, right and merest of the plaintiff therein is necessary. A person who is found to be in possession of a property in his own night and title should not be lightly dispossessed unless some peculiar circumstances or instance of waste and damage to property is shown. The appointment of receiver by dispossessing a party is a very harsh action which should not be resorted to lightly unless a strong case of damage or waste to the property is made out. The receiver is a representative of the Court and not of either party to the litigation. The appointment of receiver is always made to protect the property for equal benefit of those who' are interested in its distribution and to keep the property with the control of the Court. This power available to a Court is exercised only when the petitioner establishes a special equity in his favor but where the title of party in possession is established then certainly the petitioner for appointment of receiver cannot ask for such appointment. The appointment of receiver is made in exceptional cases and in the circumstance where the interest of the party seeking appointment of a receiver is exposed to manifest peril. The party seeking such appointment therefore, has to show emergency or danger or loss to the property demanding immediate action. The element of danger is an important consideration and the Court cannot act on possible danger only. The possession of a person bona-fide in occupation of the subject-matter should not be disturbed unless there is an allegation of waste, mismanagement of the property or apprehension of irreparable loss and injury. This power is sparingly used by the Court and, if the interest of any plaintiff can be protected by another means, the Court should abstain its hands to apport a receiver under the aforesaid provision of law. Where a plaintiff failed to establish specific instances ’of alleged waste, mismanagement and misappropriation, the Court should refuse to apport receiver under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. Reference may be hard to (1992 CLC 2460, PLD 1977 Karachi 280, PLD 1980 Karachi 1093, 1994 CLC 247 and 1993 CLC 605). v 11’. There is yet another aspect of the case that the learned trial Judge

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1624?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1624 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-04-24): Court should refuse to apport receiver under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. Reference may be hard to (1992 CLC 2460, PLD 1977 Karachi 280, PLD 1980 Karachi 1093, 1994 CLC 247 and 1993 CLC 605). v 11’. There is yet another aspect of the case that the learned trial Judge did not apport receiver himself but directed the Tonsilar to appoint receiver of the property which is quite illegal. While apporting a receiver under Order XL, rule 1, C.P.C. the trial Court is under legal obligation to apport a receiver himself by conferring upon him all such powers as to bringing and defending suits and for the realization, management, protection, preservation and improvement of the property along with collection of rents and profit thereof or any other powers as the Court thinks fit. Here in this case, all these legal requirements were violated therefore, the impugned order is not sustainable on this ground too. 'h 12. Here in this case, the petitioners were declared as full owners of. Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals, 3 Marla's whereas the respondents were found stranger in the said survey number. They were declared illegal occupants over the suit-land. The petitioners were rightly put into possession, and they had every right to protect the same. The fresh suit to the extent of Survey No.259 is a clear example to frustrate the decree about the said survey number upheld by the High Court. The impugned order is also an act to facilitate the frustration of the decree or writ of the Court. The impugned order therefore, is set aside. The suit by the plaintiff- respondents to the extent of Survey No.259 measuring 3 Canals and 3 Marla's is hit by mischief of res judicata which is also disallowed under the revisional powers of this Court. The plaintiffs-respondents shall bear the costs of the present HOR FE! 44tabase.com

Question: What is case 2004 MLD 1170 about?
Answer: Case 2004 MLD 1170 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2004-04-12. The case involved MUNIQIPAL COMMITTEE, GUJRAT THROUGHADMINISTRATOR (PETITIONER) VERSUS I |}* |DEPUTYADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY, GUJRAT AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS.. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.21 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.V, R.19 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 ORDER NATURAL JUSTICE, PRINCIPLES OF QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) - ARTICLE https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2004/MLD/html_txt/MLD_2004_1170.html 1/6 28/10/2025, 00:10 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2004/MLD/html_txt/MLD_2004_1170.htm| 129(E) GENERAL CLAUSES ACT (X OF 1897) - 8.27 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.V, R.10-A DECREE. The case was heard by CH. LJAZAHMADS.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 MLD 1170?
Answer: In case 2004 MLD 1170, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.21 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.V, R.19 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 ORDER NATURAL JUSTICE, PRINCIPLES OF QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) - ARTICLE https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2004/MLD/html_txt/MLD_2004_1170.html 1/6 28/10/2025, 00:10 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2004/MLD/html_txt/MLD_2004_1170.htm| 129(E) GENERAL CLAUSES ACT (X OF 1897) - 8.27 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.V, R.10-A DECREE. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2004-04-12.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 MLD 1170?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 MLD 1170 were: ZABI ULLAH NAGRA ON BEHALF OF RAM ZAN CHAUDHRY FOR PETITIONER. ITCH. MUNIR AHMAD FOR RESPONDENTS NOS.LAND 2.MUHAMMAD HANIF KHATANA, ADDITIONAL ADVOCATE-GENERAL FOR RESPONDENTS NOS.3 AND 4.. The judges presiding were: CH. LJAZAHMADS.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 MLD 1170?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 MLD 1170 were: MUNIQIPAL COMMITTEE, GUJRAT THROUGHADMINISTRATOR (PETITIONER) VERSUS I |}* |DEPUTYADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY, GUJRAT AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS.. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 MLD 1170.
Answer: T r The brief facts out of which the present writ petition arises are that the petitioner challenged the virus of the order of respondent No.2 dated 3-3-1999 through this Constitutional petition. 2. Learned counsel of the petitioner submits that the petitioner was never served and the ex parte decision in the circumstances is not justified. He further submits that it is mentioned in the order dated 3-3-1999 that service of respondent No.| petitioner was effected through post which does not mean that notice was received to the petitioner. He further submits that the Chairman has decided the case as quasi-judicial Tribunal and procedure. Prescribed under Order 5, C.P.C. for effecting service of summons and enforcing attendance’ of the parties is applicable but the impugned order was passed by the Chairman without adopting the method prescribed under Order 5, C.P.C. therefore, impugned order is hit by the principle of natural justice. He further submits that impugned order is without lawful authority as the same is passed in violation of the mandatory provisions of law. He further submits that nobody has entered appearance before the Chairman, therefore, impugned order passed by the respondent/ Chairman is arbitrary and passed in haste ignoring the provisions of law. The property in question was transferred in favor of the petitioner during. the year 1988. The Administrator Evacuee Trust Property did not challenge the same before any higher forum. He further submits that presumption of truth is attached to the entries, in the Revenue Record by efflux of time, which has attained finality. The land m question has been exchanged in so many hands and at present it has become a well-developed area having modern facilities and displacement at such a belated stage, without notice, is not only harsh but unjust and unfair. 3. Learned counsel of the respondents submits that Constitutional pet'in is not main tamable, as the petitioner has filed revision petition before the Federal Government, which has been subsequently withdrawn as is evident from para. of the contents of the writ petition. He further submits that respondent has passed the order after completing all w. the legal formalities and the service of the petitioner was effected as is evident from Annexures R-2 and R-3 attached with the written statement field by the respondents. He further submits that the Chairman passed the impugned order after application of mind with reasons; therefore, Constitutional petition is liable to be dismissed. 4. I have given my anxious consideration to the contentions of the learned counsel of the parties and perused the record. 5. It is admitted fact that respondent No.2 has decided the controversy between the parties, as a quasi-judicial Tribunal under the provisions of law, Order 5, C.P.C. is applicable. It is better and appropriate to reproduce the operative portions of the Annexures R-2 and R-3 and section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 to resolve the controversy between the parties: - WIA -c/1/'J Received Notice No.3122 29-9- 1998 for 20-10-1998 "Section 21. Power of Chairman etc. as Civil Court.-The Federal Government or any person authorized by it, the Chairman and every officer appointed under this Act shall, for the purposes of making any inquiry or harem any appeal or revision under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:--. - ’ ft (a) summoning and enforcing the. attendance of any person and examine him on oath; ' 3 ( (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; (c) requisitioning any public record from any Court or office; it (d) issuing commissions for the examination of.witnesses;. 1" (e) apporting guardians or next friends of persons who are Moors or of unsound mind; a (f) adding legal representatives of deceased applicants or claimants, as parties;. - (g) restoration of cases dismissed for default;. (h) substituting the names of the rightful claimants; J (1) consolidation of cases; ox any other matter which this Act. II a be prescribed by rules made under m (2) The Chairman and every officer appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be a Court for the purposes of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), N and any. proceeding before the Chairman or any such officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of. 1860) and for the purposes of sections 196, 199. and 200, thereof" F in P Mere reading of aforesaid section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 clearly reveals that Order 5 of « J' C.P.C. is applicable qua. the proceedings initiated before respondent No.2;, It is no doubt that’ Annexure R/2 reveals that notice was received by the petitioner on 29-9-1998 for 20-10-1998. The report of the Process Server was not on oath as required under the law, therefore, the service of the petitioner-defendant was not in accordance with the mandatory provisions of. law. In arriving to.this. conclusion, I am fortified by the following judgments: Syed Mazda’ Shah's case (1990 MLD 1070); Muhammad Ibrahim's case (1994 CLC 1994); Major TAJ-ud-Din's case (1989 CLC. 2183); Heidi Kara mat Hussain's case (1986 CLC 6) and Sushi Tamil-ud-Dmin's case (PLD 1970 Dacca 483). It is pertinent to mention here that case was not decided by respondent No.2 on 20-10- 1998. Mere reading of Annexure-R/3 clearly reveals that it does not contain any sentence that petitioner-defendant has received the notice, which is not in consonance in terms of Order 5-, C.P.C. and the law 1airt down by this'Court in Allah Banish's case (1990 MLD 230). The relevant observation is as follows:. "The Process Server has nowhere stated in his report that copy of the summons was delivered to the defendant". RW for And ex parte order was set aside by this Court in Allah Bath's case supra. Merely on this ground which is applicable in this case in all force. It appears that respondent No.2 without application of dependent mind has decided the case against the petitioner ex parte, which is not in consonance with the mandatory provisions of Order 5, C.P.C. read with section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, therefore, ex parte order" is not in accordance with-the law laid down by the Superior Courts. In arriving to this conclusion, I am fortified by the law laid down by this Court in Main Shabbir Ahmad's case (1991 CLC 1830). It is settled principle of law that it is duty of the Court/authority to observe the process prescribed in Order 5, C.P.C. where the Process Server is not examined in terms of Order 5, Rule 19, C.P.C. The summons is w. neither witnessed by any party/from locality nor an affidavit given, this is not valid service as the law laid down by Court in From Khan v. Muhammad Shriek. (1994 CLC 1465). It is settled principle of law that an ex parte decree, in spite of service of notice cannot be passed unless service effected through summons as the law laid down by this Court n Abdullah Gill v. MST. Eleven >(PLD 1980 LAH. 668). It is also settled principle of law that where service of summons is denied, and Process Server has nowhere stated in his report that copy of the summons is delivered to the defendants, presumption would be that defendant is not properly served. In arriving to this conclusion, I am fortified by the law laid down is Syed Mazda Ah Shah v. Shah Muhammad (1990 MLD 230). Service by post generally would be that summons has duly been served on the addressee by registered post in view of Article 129(e) QAnon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 read with section 27 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 but this presumption is rebutted able as the law laid down mm the following judgments:-- w Peshawar Khan v. Mrs. NACMA Mastaba (1986 CLC 1735); There Muhammad v. Akhtar Hussain (1983 CLC 302); L.C. De Souza, Cawnpore, In re Civil Miscellaneous Case No.714 of 1931 (AIR 1932 Allahabad 374); Emirate Bank International v. Dost Muhammad Cotton Mills (1993 MLD 54); Muhammad Sulaiman Malik and another v. Royal Trust Corporation of Canada and others.1979 CLC 48) and MST. Axial Begum v. Y.M.C.A. through General Secretory (PLD 1979 SC 18). As mentioned above, in the present case, service of the petitioner-defendant is not effected in terms of Order 5 of C.P.C. read with section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, therefore, impugned order is not valid as the law laid down by the Superior Courts in the following judgments:-- University of Dacca v. Fakir Ahmad (PLD 1965 SC 90) and Pakistan Chrome Mines v. The Inquiry Officer (1983 SCMR 1208).' It is settled principle of law that principle of natural justice must be read in each and every Statute unless and until it is prohibited by the wording of the statute itself as per law laid down by the Honorable Supreme Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Fatal.-Ur-Rehman (PLD 1964 SC 410). In view of what has been discussed above, the impugned order is set aside, and the Constitutional petition is accepted. It is settled principle of law that when the basic order is without lawful authority then superstructure shall fall on the ground automatically as the law laid down in Crescent Sugar Mills and Distillery Ltd. Faisalabad v. Central Board of w. Revenue, Islamabad and 2 others (PLD 1982 LAH. 1), and Yousafzai v. Muhammad Islam Via and 2 others (PLD 1958 SC 104), therefore, notification dated 3-6-1999 is also set aside. Since the basic order is set aside on technical post, therefore, parties are directed to appear before respondent No.2 on 6-5-2004.who is directed to decide the case afresh as expeditiously as possible. In case the parties fail to appear before respondent No.2 on the said date. Then respondent No.2 is well within his right to proceed in accordance with law. M.H./M-258/L Case remanded

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1170?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1170 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-04-12): T r The brief facts out of which the present writ petition arises are that the petitioner challenged the virus of the order of respondent No.2 dated 3-3-1999 through this Constitutional petition. 2. Learned counsel of the petitioner submits that the petitioner was never served and the ex parte decision in the circumstances is not justified. He further submits that it is mentioned in the order dated 3-3-1999 that service of respondent No.| petitioner was effected through post which does not mean that notice was received to the petitioner. He further submits that the Chairman has decided the case as quasi-judicial Tribunal and procedure. Prescribed under Order 5, C.P.C. for effecting service of summons and enforcing attendance’ of the parties is applicable but the impugned order was passed by the Chairman without adopting the method prescribed under Order 5, C.P.C. therefore, impugned order is hit by the principle of natural justice. He further submits that impugned order is without lawful authority as the same is passed in violation of the mandatory provisions of law. He further submits that nobody has entered appearance before the Chairman, therefore, impugned order passed by the respondent/ Chairman is arbitrary and passed in haste ignoring the provisions of law. The property in question was transferred in favor of the petitioner during. the year 1988. The Administrator Evacuee Trust Property did not challenge the same before any higher forum. He further submits that presumption of truth is attached to the entries, in the Revenue Record by efflux of time, which has attained finality. The land m question has been exchanged in so many hands and at present it has become a well-developed area having modern facilities and displacement at such a belated stage, without notice, is not only harsh but unjust and unfair. 3. Learned counsel of the respondents submits that Constitutional pet'in is not main tamable, as the petitioner has filed revision petition before the Federal Government, which has been subsequently withdrawn as is evident from para. of the contents of the writ petition. He further submits that respondent has passed the order after completing all w. the legal formalities and the service of the petitioner was effected as is evident from Annexures R-2 and R-3 attached with the written statement field by the respondents. He further submits that the Chairman passed the impugned order after application of mind with reasons; therefore, Constitutional petition is liable to be dismissed. 4. I have given my anxious consideration to the contentions of the learned counsel of the parties and perused the record. 5. It is admitted fact that respondent No.2 has decided the controversy between the parties, as a quasi-judicial Tribunal under the provisions of law, Order 5, C.P.C. is applicable. It is better and appropriate to reproduce the operative portions of the Annexures R-2 and R-3 and section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 to resolve the controversy between the parties: - WIA -c/1/'J Received Notice No.3122 29-9- 1998 for 20-10-1998 "Section

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1170?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1170 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-04-12): 5, C.P.C. is applicable. It is better and appropriate to reproduce the operative portions of the Annexures R-2 and R-3 and section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 to resolve the controversy between the parties: - WIA -c/1/'J Received Notice No.3122 29-9- 1998 for 20-10-1998 "Section 21. Power of Chairman etc. as Civil Court.-The Federal Government or any person authorized by it, the Chairman and every officer appointed under this Act shall, for the purposes of making any inquiry or harem any appeal or revision under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:--. - ’ ft (a) summoning and enforcing the. attendance of any person and examine him on oath; ' 3 ( (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; (c) requisitioning any public record from any Court or office; it (d) issuing commissions for the examination of.witnesses;. 1" (e) apporting guardians or next friends of persons who are Moors or of unsound mind; a (f) adding legal representatives of deceased applicants or claimants, as parties;. - (g) restoration of cases dismissed for default;. (h) substituting the names of the rightful claimants; J (1) consolidation of cases; ox any other matter which this Act. II a be prescribed by rules made under m (2) The Chairman and every officer appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be a Court for the purposes of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), N and any. proceeding before the Chairman or any such officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of. 1860) and for the purposes of sections 196, 199. and 200, thereof" F in P Mere reading of aforesaid section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 clearly reveals that Order 5 of « J' C.P.C. is applicable qua. the proceedings initiated before respondent No.2;, It is no doubt that’ Annexure R/2 reveals that notice was received by the petitioner on 29-9-1998 for 20-10-1998. The report of the Process Server was not on oath as required under the law, therefore, the service of the petitioner-defendant was not in accordance with the mandatory provisions of. law. In arriving to.this. conclusion, I am fortified by the following judgments: Syed Mazda’ Shah's case (1990 MLD 1070); Muhammad Ibrahim's case (1994 CLC 1994); Major TAJ-ud-Din's case (1989 CLC. 2183); Heidi Kara mat Hussain's case (1986 CLC 6) and Sushi Tamil-ud-Dmin's case (PLD 1970 Dacca 483). It is pertinent to mention here that case was not decided by respondent No.2 on 20-10- 1998. Mere reading of Annexure-R/3 clearly reveals that it does not contain any sentence that petitioner-defendant has received the notice, which is not in consonance in terms of Order 5-, C.P.C. and the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1170?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1170 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-04-12): 483). It is pertinent to mention here that case was not decided by respondent No.2 on 20-10- 1998. Mere reading of Annexure-R/3 clearly reveals that it does not contain any sentence that petitioner-defendant has received the notice, which is not in consonance in terms of Order 5-, C.P.C. and the law 1airt down by this'Court in Allah Banish's case (1990 MLD 230). The relevant observation is as follows:. "The Process Server has nowhere stated in his report that copy of the summons was delivered to the defendant". RW for And ex parte order was set aside by this Court in Allah Bath's case supra. Merely on this ground which is applicable in this case in all force. It appears that respondent No.2 without application of dependent mind has decided the case against the petitioner ex parte, which is not in consonance with the mandatory provisions of Order 5, C.P.C. read with section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, therefore, ex parte order" is not in accordance with-the law laid down by the Superior Courts. In arriving to this conclusion, I am fortified by the law laid down by this Court in Main Shabbir Ahmad's case (1991 CLC 1830). It is settled principle of law that it is duty of the Court/authority to observe the process prescribed in Order 5, C.P.C. where the Process Server is not examined in terms of Order 5, Rule 19, C.P.C. The summons is w. neither witnessed by any party/from locality nor an affidavit given, this is not valid service as the law laid down by Court in From Khan v. Muhammad Shriek. (1994 CLC 1465). It is settled principle of law that an ex parte decree, in spite of service of notice cannot be passed unless service effected through summons as the law laid down by this Court n Abdullah Gill v. MST. Eleven >(PLD 1980 LAH. 668). It is also settled principle of law that where service of summons is denied, and Process Server has nowhere stated in his report that copy of the summons is delivered to the defendants, presumption would be that defendant is not properly served. In arriving to this conclusion, I am fortified by the law laid down is Syed Mazda Ah Shah v. Shah Muhammad (1990 MLD 230). Service by post generally would be that summons has duly been served on the addressee by registered post in view of Article 129(e) QAnon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 read with section 27 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 but this presumption is rebutted able as the law laid down mm the following judgments:-- w Peshawar Khan v. Mrs. NACMA Mastaba (1986 CLC 1735); There Muhammad v. Akhtar Hussain (1983 CLC 302); L.C. De Souza, Cawnpore, In re Civil Miscellaneous Case No.714 of 1931 (AIR 1932 Allahabad 374); Emirate Bank International v. Dost Muhammad Cotton Mills (1993 MLD 54); Muhammad Sulaiman Malik and another v. Royal Trust Corporation of Canada and others.1979 CLC 48) and MST. Axial Begum v. Y.M.C.A.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1170?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1170 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-04-12): CLC 302); L.C. De Souza, Cawnpore, In re Civil Miscellaneous Case No.714 of 1931 (AIR 1932 Allahabad 374); Emirate Bank International v. Dost Muhammad Cotton Mills (1993 MLD 54); Muhammad Sulaiman Malik and another v. Royal Trust Corporation of Canada and others.1979 CLC 48) and MST. Axial Begum v. Y.M.C.A. through General Secretory (PLD 1979 SC 18). As mentioned above, in the present case, service of the petitioner-defendant is not effected in terms of Order 5 of C.P.C. read with section 21 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, therefore, impugned order is not valid as the law laid down by the Superior Courts in the following judgments:-- University of Dacca v. Fakir Ahmad (PLD 1965 SC 90) and Pakistan Chrome Mines v. The Inquiry Officer (1983 SCMR 1208).' It is settled principle of law that principle of natural justice must be read in each and every Statute unless and until it is prohibited by the wording of the statute itself as per law laid down by the Honorable Supreme Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Fatal.-Ur-Rehman (PLD 1964 SC 410). In view of what has been discussed above, the impugned order is set aside, and the Constitutional petition is accepted. It is settled principle of law that when the basic order is without lawful authority then superstructure shall fall on the ground automatically as the law laid down in Crescent Sugar Mills and Distillery Ltd. Faisalabad v. Central Board of w. Revenue, Islamabad and 2 others (PLD 1982 LAH. 1), and Yousafzai v. Muhammad Islam Via and 2 others (PLD 1958 SC 104), therefore, notification dated 3-6-1999 is also set aside. Since the basic order is set aside on technical post, therefore, parties are directed to appear before respondent No.2 on 6-5-2004.who is directed to decide the case afresh as expeditiously as possible. In case the parties fail to appear before respondent No.2 on the said date. Then respondent No.2 is well within his right to proceed in accordance with law. M.H./M-258/L Case remanded

Question: What is case 2004 MLD 451 about?
Answer: Case 2004 MLD 451 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2003-12-23. The case involved MUSHTAQ AHMED AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AZADJAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABADAND 11 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include OATHS ACT (X OF 1873) - SS.8, 11 AND 13 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - PREAMBLE. The case was heard by KHAWAJA MUHAMMAD SAEED AND CHAUDHRY MUHAMMAD TAJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 MLD 451?
Answer: In case 2004 MLD 451, the court applied the following statutes: OATHS ACT (X OF 1873) - SS.8, 11 AND 13 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - PREAMBLE. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2003-12-23.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 MLD 451?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 MLD 451 were: . The judges presiding were: KHAWAJA MUHAMMAD SAEED AND CHAUDHRY MUHAMMAD TAJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 MLD 451?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 MLD 451 were: MUSHTAQ AHMED AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AZADJAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABADAND 11 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 MLD 451.
Answer: KHAWAJA MUHAMMAD SAEED, J.-~This appeal, with lea\e-of the Court, is directed against the judgment of the High Court dated 6-5-2003, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants, was dismissed. WW. 2. Admitted facts of the case are that the present appellant and pro forma respondents Nos.6 to 12 filed writ petition in the High Court challenging the orders of respondents Nos. to through Malik Muhammad Yousuf and Initial Ahmed, Advocates. On 24-4- 2002, the. appellants engaged Ch. Muhammad Nadeem and Raja Muhammad m Mathews, Advocates. On 5-5-2003, only Malik Muhammad Yousuf appeared on their behalf in the Court and argued the case whereas on behalf of contesting respondent, Muhammad Afar, Vardar Rehmatullah, Advocate appeared before the Court. The arguments were heard. Before the conclusion of the arguments, appellant No.l and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the appellants, stated at the bar that if contesting respondent Muhammad Afar shall state on Oath that he has not committed any forgery for securing the allotment of disputed shop, the petitioners, therein, will not press their writ petition. On the next day the contesting respondent, Muhammad Afar, appeared in the Court and made a statement on Oath as was suggested by one of the appellants Muhammad Must and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the appellants. The statement was not recorded but according to the judgment under appeal, the contesting respondent stated on Oath that he committed no forgery for obtaining the allotment of shop. The High Court in view of the statement made by Muhammad Afar dismissed the writ petition vide order under challenge dated 6-5-2003. Hence this appeal with leave of the Court. 3. Raja Muhammad Kiddie, the learned counsel for the appellants, argued that appellants had engaged Ch. Muhammad Nadeem and Raja Muhammad Mathews Advocates on 24-4- 2002 to conduct the writ petition in the High Court. This shows that these Advocates had superseded Muhammad Yousuf Advocate who was initially apported by the appellants to conduct their case in the High Court. In view of this fact Male Muhammad Yousuf Advocate was not legally justified to make the offer on behalf of the appellants for decision of the case on Oath. He further argued that no such authority was available with Malik Muhammad Yousuf Advocate to get the dispute resolved on Oath, therefore, the offer made by him was in excess of the powers given to him by the appellants. He further argued that the High Court has not conducted proceedings in accordance with the provisions of the Oaths Act. Even the judgment of this. Court titled Abdul Hammed v. I Muhammad Adeeb (Civil Appeal No.37- of 2000 decided by this Court on 23-11- 2000), was not followed while passing order under appeal before this Court, therefore, the WW. impugned judgment of the High Court being bad in law is liable to be dismissed. 4. On the other hand, Mr. Abdul Marked Wallick, the learned counsel for the respondents, argued that offer was made by the learned counsel for appellants, Malik Muhammad Yousuf, in the High Court whose power of attorney was neither cancelled nor withdrawn. According to him, the other two Advocates who were engaged on 24-4-2002 did not appear in the Court when case was called for hearing, therefore, the objection raised by appellants about the competency of Male Muhammad Yousuf Advocate to make an offer on behalf of the appellants is without any justification; particularly when the authority of Malik Muhammad Yousuf was neither objected on 5-5-2003, the date when case was argued and offer was made, nor on 6-5-2003 when Muhammad Afar the contesting respondent made the statement on Oath in the Court. He in support of his contention placed reliance upon a case titled Quaffer Ali and 2 others v. Ch. Affair Ali (1991 CLC 2110), where the learned Judge while turn mg down a similar objection followed the principle earlier laid down in case reported as Roman and others v. Goal Was and others (AIR 1932 Lahore 414), which is as under:-- ' The power to compromise an appeal is an implied power. Inherent in the position of an Advocate in India and therefore no power of attorney is necessary to empower a counsel to agree to. V a valid and binding compromise. The power to compromise may be' validly exercised by an Advocate who has been authorized only to appear.” 15. The learned counsel also relied upon a case titled Kamal Din and others v. MST. Nawab Bibi and others (PLD 1988 Lahore 281). In this. case offer of Special Oath was. Made by the counsel to the petitioner in the revision petition and not by the petitioners who were also present in the Court. The statement of the counsel was recorded to that effect and the same was also signed by two of the petitioners, namely, Hakim Din and Yaseen who were present-in the Court. The petitioners later on pleaded that other petitioners who were present at the relevant time in the Court were not consulted in the matter as they had not endorsed the offer made by the learned counsel for the petitioners. The objection was finally turned down by making the following observations “4. Since the proposal of the petitioner’s counsel regarding special Oath was also endorsed by two of the petitioners, who were present, the same cannot be taken exception to on the WW. ground that learned counsel for the petitioners put forth the proposal by by-passing the petitioners who were available with him. It FS not the case of the petitioners that in the Vakalatnama given by them to their learned counsel there was no recital authorizing him to make the said offer. Such recitals are generally there in the standard forms of Vakalatnama. I, therefore, see no force in the argument raised by learned counsel. The learned counsel then referred a case titled Abdullah Jan v. Mastaba Khan (1996 SCMR 108), wherein the order-sheet relating to administered of Oath was in the following words “4, The statement referred to in the order-sheet is m following words:- "The plaintiff is given an offer that if he takes oath on the Holy. Quran that the preemption money has not been deposited by Mullah Khan and that the suit of the plaintiff is not Became and that he has not pre-empted the suit property for Ramallah m Khan, then in that case the decree, may be passed in favor of the plaintiff’ I am prepared to take the said Oath/ Note:-The plaintiff has taken the said Oath to satisfaction of the defendant in presence of the defendants.” This proceeding was given effect even by the Supreme Court, and it was laid down that any irregularity committed by the Court was cured under section 13 of the Oaths Act 1873. 6. The learned counsel further argued that Muhammad Must, appellant No.1, also made an offer before the High Court on 5-5- 2003. His statement to that effect was recorded by the High Court. The statement of said appellant was supported by Malik Muhammad Yousuf Advocate who agreed to the offer made by Muhammad Must, appellant No.1, to the effect that if respondent Muhammad Afar, shall state on Oath that he has not obtained the allotment of shop by. committing forgery, their writ petition be dismissed. The statement of Malik Muhammad Yousuf, therefore, was rightly recorded by the Court that dispute between the parties be resolved on the statement of respondent No Jon Oath that he'has not obtained the allotment of disputed shop by committing forgery. The appellants being bound by the conduct of their Advocate are legally stopped to challenge the decision of the High Court given in the light of Oath. He further argued that it was not mandatory for the learned Judge to record the statement of his client which was made by him on Oath. From the judgment it is clear that his client made statement on Oath before the learned Judge which was given effect by. The learned Judge by dismissing the wait petition filed by appellants. According to him, as the dispute between the parties was resolved in‘pursuance of the offer of Oath made by appellant No. and accepted by his client by administering WW. Oath to him, therefore, the decree cannot be interfered with on flimsy and technical grounds that the. statement of his client was not recorded. He in support of his contention relied upon a case titled Muhammad Kiddie v. Noor Muhammad and 2 others (1996 CLC 695), In this case the offer made by the plaintiff was not recorded however the statement made’ by defendant on Oath was recorded by the Court. An objection was raised in the High Court that as the statement of plaintiff was not recorded to the effect that he was willing to get the. matter resolved on Oath. therefore, the entire proceedings of taking Oath and recording the statement of defendant was an illegal exercise liable to be ignored but'TT was held as under:- The plaintiff was present in Court when the offer was made by the defendant, and he must have agreed with the offer, otherwise the learned trial Court would not have proceeded to record the statement of the defendant. Even otherwise the omission to record the plaintiff's statement separately is merely an irregularity which does not, in law, invalidate the entire proceedings of taking Oath and recording statement. Section 13 of the Oaths Act (X of 1873) cover's such v like situation as well and lays down that no omission to take any Oath or make any affirmation and not regularity whatever in the form in which any of them, is administered, shall invalidate any proceedings.” 7. We have considered the respective arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record of the case. From the impugned judgment of the High Court-dated 6-5- 2003, it TS clear that the “ contesting respondent, Muhammad Afar, did make a statement on Oath however, the same was not recorded by the Court. However, we are fully conscious of this fact that offer was competently made by Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the appellants, because his power of attorney was neither cancelled nor withdrawn. It is a proved /f its fact on the record that Muhammad Must was prosecuting the writ petition on behalf of rest of the appellants and pro forma respondents before the High Court. On 5- 5-2003 he was present in the Court. Firstly he made an offer before the Court that litigation with contesting respondent be resolved on Oath. His statement to that offer was recorded by the Court as he had no power of attorney on behalf of rest of the appellants and pro forma respondents. Therefore, mm support of his statement the statement of Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the renaming appellants, was recorded by the Court. It is not the case of the appellants that Oath was not adm mustered by the Court in the terms the offer was made by appellant Muhammad Must and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for rest of the appellants. In the same way the appellants have not disputed that the answering respondents had not accepted the offer and made the statement on Holy Quran to the effect that he had not secured the allotment of the disputed WW. shop without committing any forgery. However, their objection is that the statement of respondent was not recorded by the Court. This Court in Abdul Hammed v. Muhammad Adeeb’s case has held that statement given on Oath must be. recorded. In that case the Division Bench of the High Court had decided the case on Oath without recording the statement of the parties. In our view, the view taken in that case is correct in light of the language applied in section 11 of the Oaths Act, 1873, which reads as follows:- ' “11. The evidence so given shall, as*against the person who offered to be bound as aforesaid, be conclusive proof of the matter stated.” And again in section 8 of the Oaths Act it is laid down that if any party offers to give an evidence on Oath the Court may administer such Oath. Under sections 8 and 11 of the Oaths Act, the word evidence has been used. In civil matters the provisions contained in C.P.C. are to be followed. Under the provisions of the C.P.C. the evidence is to be recorded in writing either by the Judge himself or any other person in his presence and under his guidance which is also to be signed by the Judge. The Presiding Officer of the Court under the scheme of law must consciously participate in all the proceedings from beginning to the end. In the present case even though the offer was competently made by one of the appellants and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, Advocate, *on behalf of rest of the appellants, therefore, to this extent the objection is without lawful authority. We, therefore, while following the dictum of this Court in Abdul Hammed’s case referred to above direct the High Court to decide the dispute after recording the statement of contesting respondent on special Oath. High Court dated 6-5-2003 is set aside. The case is remanded to the High Court for fresh decision in the light of directions given by us mm this judgment. ’ M.B.A./4/SC(AJK) Case remanded. i WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 451?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 451 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-23): KHAWAJA MUHAMMAD SAEED, J.-~This appeal, with lea\e-of the Court, is directed against the judgment of the High Court dated 6-5-2003, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants, was dismissed. WW. 2. Admitted facts of the case are that the present appellant and pro forma respondents Nos.6 to 12 filed writ petition in the High Court challenging the orders of respondents Nos. to through Malik Muhammad Yousuf and Initial Ahmed, Advocates. On 24-4- 2002, the. appellants engaged Ch. Muhammad Nadeem and Raja Muhammad m Mathews, Advocates. On 5-5-2003, only Malik Muhammad Yousuf appeared on their behalf in the Court and argued the case whereas on behalf of contesting respondent, Muhammad Afar, Vardar Rehmatullah, Advocate appeared before the Court. The arguments were heard. Before the conclusion of the arguments, appellant No.l and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the appellants, stated at the bar that if contesting respondent Muhammad Afar shall state on Oath that he has not committed any forgery for securing the allotment of disputed shop, the petitioners, therein, will not press their writ petition. On the next day the contesting respondent, Muhammad Afar, appeared in the Court and made a statement on Oath as was suggested by one of the appellants Muhammad Must and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the appellants. The statement was not recorded but according to the judgment under appeal, the contesting respondent stated on Oath that he committed no forgery for obtaining the allotment of shop. The High Court in view of the statement made by Muhammad Afar dismissed the writ petition vide order under challenge dated 6-5-2003. Hence this appeal with leave of the Court. 3. Raja Muhammad Kiddie, the learned counsel for the appellants, argued that appellants had engaged Ch. Muhammad Nadeem and Raja Muhammad Mathews Advocates on 24-4- 2002 to conduct the writ petition in the High Court. This shows that these Advocates had superseded Muhammad Yousuf Advocate who was initially apported by the appellants to conduct their case in the High Court. In view of this fact Male Muhammad Yousuf Advocate was not legally justified to make the offer on behalf of the appellants for decision of the case on Oath. He further argued that no such authority was available with Malik Muhammad Yousuf Advocate to get the dispute resolved on Oath, therefore, the offer made by him was in excess of the powers given to him by the appellants. He further argued that the High Court has not conducted proceedings in accordance with the provisions of the Oaths Act. Even the judgment of this. Court titled Abdul Hammed v. I Muhammad Adeeb (Civil Appeal No.37- of 2000 decided by this Court on 23-11- 2000), was not followed while passing order under appeal before this Court, therefore, the WW. impugned judgment of the High Court being bad in law is liable to be dismissed. 4. On the other hand, Mr. Abdul Marked Wallick, the learned counsel for the respondents, argued that offer was made by the learned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 451?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 451 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-23): followed while passing order under appeal before this Court, therefore, the WW. impugned judgment of the High Court being bad in law is liable to be dismissed. 4. On the other hand, Mr. Abdul Marked Wallick, the learned counsel for the respondents, argued that offer was made by the learned counsel for appellants, Malik Muhammad Yousuf, in the High Court whose power of attorney was neither cancelled nor withdrawn. According to him, the other two Advocates who were engaged on 24-4-2002 did not appear in the Court when case was called for hearing, therefore, the objection raised by appellants about the competency of Male Muhammad Yousuf Advocate to make an offer on behalf of the appellants is without any justification; particularly when the authority of Malik Muhammad Yousuf was neither objected on 5-5-2003, the date when case was argued and offer was made, nor on 6-5-2003 when Muhammad Afar the contesting respondent made the statement on Oath in the Court. He in support of his contention placed reliance upon a case titled Quaffer Ali and 2 others v. Ch. Affair Ali (1991 CLC 2110), where the learned Judge while turn mg down a similar objection followed the principle earlier laid down in case reported as Roman and others v. Goal Was and others (AIR 1932 Lahore 414), which is as under:-- ' The power to compromise an appeal is an implied power. Inherent in the position of an Advocate in India and therefore no power of attorney is necessary to empower a counsel to agree to. V a valid and binding compromise. The power to compromise may be' validly exercised by an Advocate who has been authorized only to appear.” 15. The learned counsel also relied upon a case titled Kamal Din and others v. MST. Nawab Bibi and others (PLD 1988 Lahore 281). In this. case offer of Special Oath was. Made by the counsel to the petitioner in the revision petition and not by the petitioners who were also present in the Court. The statement of the counsel was recorded to that effect and the same was also signed by two of the petitioners, namely, Hakim Din and Yaseen who were present-in the Court. The petitioners later on pleaded that other petitioners who were present at the relevant time in the Court were not consulted in the matter as they had not endorsed the offer made by the learned counsel for the petitioners. The objection was finally turned down by making the following observations “4. Since the proposal of the petitioner’s counsel regarding special Oath was also endorsed by two of the petitioners, who were present, the same cannot be taken exception to on the WW. ground that learned counsel for the petitioners put forth the proposal by by-passing the petitioners who were available with him. It FS not the case of the petitioners that in the Vakalatnama given by them to their learned counsel there was no recital authorizing him to make the said offer. Such recitals

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 451?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 451 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-23): learned counsel for the petitioners put forth the proposal by by-passing the petitioners who were available with him. It FS not the case of the petitioners that in the Vakalatnama given by them to their learned counsel there was no recital authorizing him to make the said offer. Such recitals are generally there in the standard forms of Vakalatnama. I, therefore, see no force in the argument raised by learned counsel. The learned counsel then referred a case titled Abdullah Jan v. Mastaba Khan (1996 SCMR 108), wherein the order-sheet relating to administered of Oath was in the following words “4, The statement referred to in the order-sheet is m following words:- "The plaintiff is given an offer that if he takes oath on the Holy. Quran that the preemption money has not been deposited by Mullah Khan and that the suit of the plaintiff is not Became and that he has not pre-empted the suit property for Ramallah m Khan, then in that case the decree, may be passed in favor of the plaintiff’ I am prepared to take the said Oath/ Note:-The plaintiff has taken the said Oath to satisfaction of the defendant in presence of the defendants.” This proceeding was given effect even by the Supreme Court, and it was laid down that any irregularity committed by the Court was cured under section 13 of the Oaths Act 1873. 6. The learned counsel further argued that Muhammad Must, appellant No.1, also made an offer before the High Court on 5-5- 2003. His statement to that effect was recorded by the High Court. The statement of said appellant was supported by Malik Muhammad Yousuf Advocate who agreed to the offer made by Muhammad Must, appellant No.1, to the effect that if respondent Muhammad Afar, shall state on Oath that he has not obtained the allotment of shop by. committing forgery, their writ petition be dismissed. The statement of Malik Muhammad Yousuf, therefore, was rightly recorded by the Court that dispute between the parties be resolved on the statement of respondent No Jon Oath that he'has not obtained the allotment of disputed shop by committing forgery. The appellants being bound by the conduct of their Advocate are legally stopped to challenge the decision of the High Court given in the light of Oath. He further argued that it was not mandatory for the learned Judge to record the statement of his client which was made by him on Oath. From the judgment it is clear that his client made statement on Oath before the learned Judge which was given effect by. The learned Judge by dismissing the wait petition filed by appellants. According to him, as the dispute between the parties was resolved in‘pursuance of the offer of Oath made by appellant No. and accepted by his client by administering WW. Oath to him, therefore, the decree cannot be interfered with on flimsy and technical grounds that the. statement of his client was not recorded. He in support of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 451?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 451 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-23): the parties was resolved in‘pursuance of the offer of Oath made by appellant No. and accepted by his client by administering WW. Oath to him, therefore, the decree cannot be interfered with on flimsy and technical grounds that the. statement of his client was not recorded. He in support of his contention relied upon a case titled Muhammad Kiddie v. Noor Muhammad and 2 others (1996 CLC 695), In this case the offer made by the plaintiff was not recorded however the statement made’ by defendant on Oath was recorded by the Court. An objection was raised in the High Court that as the statement of plaintiff was not recorded to the effect that he was willing to get the. matter resolved on Oath. therefore, the entire proceedings of taking Oath and recording the statement of defendant was an illegal exercise liable to be ignored but'TT was held as under:- The plaintiff was present in Court when the offer was made by the defendant, and he must have agreed with the offer, otherwise the learned trial Court would not have proceeded to record the statement of the defendant. Even otherwise the omission to record the plaintiff's statement separately is merely an irregularity which does not, in law, invalidate the entire proceedings of taking Oath and recording statement. Section 13 of the Oaths Act (X of 1873) cover's such v like situation as well and lays down that no omission to take any Oath or make any affirmation and not regularity whatever in the form in which any of them, is administered, shall invalidate any proceedings.” 7. We have considered the respective arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record of the case. From the impugned judgment of the High Court-dated 6-5- 2003, it TS clear that the “ contesting respondent, Muhammad Afar, did make a statement on Oath however, the same was not recorded by the Court. However, we are fully conscious of this fact that offer was competently made by Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the appellants, because his power of attorney was neither cancelled nor withdrawn. It is a proved /f its fact on the record that Muhammad Must was prosecuting the writ petition on behalf of rest of the appellants and pro forma respondents before the High Court. On 5- 5-2003 he was present in the Court. Firstly he made an offer before the Court that litigation with contesting respondent be resolved on Oath. His statement to that offer was recorded by the Court as he had no power of attorney on behalf of rest of the appellants and pro forma respondents. Therefore, mm support of his statement the statement of Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the renaming appellants, was recorded by the Court. It is not the case of the appellants that Oath was not adm mustered by the Court in the terms the offer was made by appellant Muhammad Must and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 451?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 451 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-23): of Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for the renaming appellants, was recorded by the Court. It is not the case of the appellants that Oath was not adm mustered by the Court in the terms the offer was made by appellant Muhammad Must and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, the learned counsel for rest of the appellants. In the same way the appellants have not disputed that the answering respondents had not accepted the offer and made the statement on Holy Quran to the effect that he had not secured the allotment of the disputed WW. shop without committing any forgery. However, their objection is that the statement of respondent was not recorded by the Court. This Court in Abdul Hammed v. Muhammad Adeeb’s case has held that statement given on Oath must be. recorded. In that case the Division Bench of the High Court had decided the case on Oath without recording the statement of the parties. In our view, the view taken in that case is correct in light of the language applied in section 11 of the Oaths Act, 1873, which reads as follows:- ' “11. The evidence so given shall, as*against the person who offered to be bound as aforesaid, be conclusive proof of the matter stated.” And again in section 8 of the Oaths Act it is laid down that if any party offers to give an evidence on Oath the Court may administer such Oath. Under sections 8 and 11 of the Oaths Act, the word evidence has been used. In civil matters the provisions contained in C.P.C. are to be followed. Under the provisions of the C.P.C. the evidence is to be recorded in writing either by the Judge himself or any other person in his presence and under his guidance which is also to be signed by the Judge. The Presiding Officer of the Court under the scheme of law must consciously participate in all the proceedings from beginning to the end. In the present case even though the offer was competently made by one of the appellants and Malik Muhammad Yousuf, Advocate, *on behalf of rest of the appellants, therefore, to this extent the objection is without lawful authority. We, therefore, while following the dictum of this Court in Abdul Hammed’s case referred to above direct the High Court to decide the dispute after recording the statement of contesting respondent on special Oath. High Court dated 6-5-2003 is set aside. The case is remanded to the High Court for fresh decision in the light of directions given by us mm this judgment. ’ M.B.A./4/SC(AJK) Case remanded. i WW.

Question: What is case 2004 MLD 867 about?
Answer: Case 2004 MLD 867 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2001-01-10. The case involved GHULAM RASOOLAND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS MINISTER FOR REHABILITATION AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS.. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.18(7) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44. The case was heard by SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C. J. ANDMUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J *.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: In case 2004 MLD 867, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.18(7) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2001-01-10.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 MLD 867 were: RAJA MUHAMMAD HANIF KHAN, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANTS. ‘. FAROOQ-HUSSAIN KASHMIRI, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENT NO!2.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C. J. ANDMUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J *.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 MLD 867 were: GHULAM RASOOLAND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS MINISTER FOR REHABILITATION AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS.. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 MLD 867.
Answer: 4 4i1SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J;-This appeal has been directed against the judgment of the High Court dated 23-5-2000, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants, herein, challenging the orders of the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian was dismissed. - 2. The brief facts of the case are that the land in dispute comprising survey No. measuring Canals 8 Marla's, along with some other survey number, situate in Band Karim Harder Shah, Thesis and District Muzaffarabad was originally allotted in favor of Qatar Al, the father of appellants Nos.] and 2, who’s use Que in t LY transferred the same vide the sale-deed dated 21-7-1986 MN favor of appellant No.3. According to the appellants, Suleman, respondent No.4 harm, obtained allotment in his favor on 23-11-1974 and on the basis of the said allotment he filed a review petition before the Commissioner Rehabilitation against the entitlement certificate issued in favor of the appellants dated 4-2-1986, in pursuance of which Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was issued in their favor by the Custodian. The Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner, vide his order dated 10-12-1986, held that Suleman, respondent No.4, was genuine allottee of the land MN dispute as a result, of surrender of allotment rights by Qatar Ali, deceased, and thus, he withdrew the entitlement certificate which was earlier issued in favor of successors-m-interest of Qatar Al, deceased. The learned Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner held that allotment was made in favor of respondent No.4, Suleman, on 23-11- 1974 as a result of surrender mg of rights in his favor by Qatar Ali, deceased, and thereafter, Suleman, respondent, also mortgaged the said land with Agricultural Development Bank which was subsequently redeemed by him on 4-4-1981. On the basis of aforesaid order of Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 10-12- 1986 the Custodian cancelled the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order earlier issued by him vide his order date 14-12-1986. It is the case of the appellants that the order of the Custodian whereby the earlier Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was cancelled was without jurisdiction and against facts. The appellants first filed a revision petition before the Custodian against the order of the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 10-12- 1986 and thereafter, when they came to know about the order of the Custodian dated 14- 12-1986, they also filed a review petition before him on 23-6-1987. Both, the revision petition and the review petition were consolidated and were disposed of by the Custodian vide his order dated 20-9-1992. He dismissed the same on the ground that as the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner had withdrawn the entitlement certificate issued in favor of the appellants, the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was not sustainable and that the remedy with the appellants under the law in force at the relevant time was to prefer a WW. revision petition to the High Court against his order and not to file revision petition before the Rehabilitation Commissioner. 3. The appellants, harm, feeling aggrieved by the orders of the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian, filed a writ petition in the High Court which was also dismissed holding that the findings of Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian that in fact Qatar Ali, deceased, had surrendered his rights in favor of respondent No.4 could not be disturbed in exercise of writ jurisdiction; it has been further held by the High Court that even if it is held that the order of the cancellation of allotment in favor of Qatar Ali passed by the Rehabilitation Minister was not sustainable for one reason or the other, the property in dispute would be deemed to have been rightly allotted in favor of respondent No.4 after the same was surrendered by Qatar Ali in his favor. While giving the aforesaid findings, the High Court has referred to some of the cases decided by this Court wherein it has been held that if the Rehabilitation Authorities are satisfied that earlier allottee has surrendered his allotment, the evacuee land can be allotted without the cancellation of first allotment by a formal order. m' 4, Raja Muhammad Han if Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that as the aforesaid revision petition and the review petition were pending before the Custodian when law was amended, the Custodian was empowered to hold an inquiry regarding P the question as to whether in fact Qatar Ali, deceased, had surrendered his right of allotment in favor of respondent No.4, his nephew; APD whether he was included m the family members of Qatar Ali but no such inquiry was held and both the revision petition and review petition were dismissed on the short ground. that the finding given by the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner that Qatar Ali had surrendered his rights of allotment could not be gone into by the Custodian because he had no jurisdiction in the matter. The learned counsel for the appellants has further argued that in the fact Qatar Ali died in the year 1973 while the term order m the file of Rehabilitation Authorities dated 10-2-1974 shows that his statement was recorded on the said date. He has contended that as Qatar Ali was not alive on the aforesaid date, his statement cannot be recorded on the said date. The learned counsel has further submitted that as there is cutting in the file of the Rehabilitation Department which was subsequently sent to the Rehabilitation Minister, the whole proceedings are doubtful; according to said file, in the first instance the recommendations for the cancellation of the allotment of Qatar Ali was WW. not acceded to by the Rehabilitation Secretariat, but it appears that afterward, the cancellation order was t managed somehow or the other by respondent No.4. Thus, according to the learned counsel for the appellants, the proceedings for the ' cancellation of the allotment of Qatar Ali were fictitious and were maneuvered by Suleman, respondent No.4. 5. In reply, Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi, Advocate, the learned counsel for respondent No.4, has controverted the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants. He has argued that Qatar. Ali, deceased, made an application to the Custodian on 29-11- 1972, the copy of which TS Ex.D.A. stating that he had abandoned the allotment of land in dispute in favor of: Suleman, respondent No.4, and thus, necessary proceedings might be taken for the cancellation of his allotment and the allotment of land in dispute to respondent No.4. According to the learned counsel for the respondents, on this application, the case of cancellation of allotment of Qatar Ali was processed by the Rehabilitation Authorities as envisaged under subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel has contended that subsection (7) of section 18 was added vide amending Ordinance No.CLXV of 1983 which was subsequently approved by the Assembly and became an Act; the aforesaid amending Act shows that the provisions contained in subsection (7) of section 18 have been made operative with retrospective effect. Thus, the allotment made in favor of Qatar Ah was cancelled on the recommendations of Rehabilitation Authorities and the land was duly allotted in favor of respondent No.4 on 23-11-1974. In alternative, the learned counsel has argued that even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the allotment in favor of Qatar Ali was not formally cancelled, but it is* proved that he had abandoned his allotment in favor of respondent No.4, the allotment in favor of respondent No.4, would be valid in view of the dictum of this Court in a number of cases that the formal cancellation of previous allotment is not necessary if abandonment of allotment is proved. The learned counsel has relied upon the cases reported as Her Ahmad by. Custodian of Evacuee Property (PLD 1983 SC (AJ&K) 78), Bashir Ahmad Khan v. Custodian, Evacuee Property Azad Jammu and Kashmir, Muzaffarabad (PLD 1987 SC (AJ&K) 118) and an unreported case entitled Muhammad Sharif v. Custodian of Evacuee Property (Civil Appeal No. of 1993, decided on 30-10-1993) in support of his contention that in case of abandonment of the first allotment second allotment WW. can be made without formal order of the cancellation of the. First allotment. He has further submitted that the Rehabilitation Commissioner could legally review his order despite the fact that the proprietary rights have been given to the appellants, the heirs of Qatar Ali, allottee. He has relied upon a case reported as Muhammad Radio v. Heidi Muhammad Shaft Khan (PLD 1991 SC (AJ&K) 47) in support of his contention. The learned counsel has further submitted that the fact that land in dispute has been in the possession of respondent No.4 further supports his contention that in fact Qatar Al, deceased, had surrendered the right of his allotment in favor of said respondent before his death. 6. We have given due consideration to the arguments raised. There are two moot ports in the instant case which need resolution, Le. (1) whether the allotment of Qatar Ali was cancelled on his application dated 29-11-1972; and (11) even if it is assumed that the same was not formally cancelled, the allotment in favor of respondent No.4 is valid in view of the fact that Qatar Ali had abandoned his rights of allotment of the land in dispute. It may be observed that the ma'am argument advanced oft behalf of the appellants was that Rehabilitation Minister was not competent to cancel the allotment of Qatar Ali and that in any case, the cancellation proceedings are doubtful in view of the reasons given by the learned counsel of the appellants. It may be observed that in view o1 subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act which has been made operative retrospectively, there is hardly any doubt that the Government has the power to cancel an allotment if it is found by the Rehabilitation Authorities on inquiry Thai the same was surrendered by the concerned allottee. In the instant case, the contents of appeal, particularly paragraphs 5(b) and 5(g), that the allotment file was processed by the Rehabilitation Authorities and that 2 cancellation order was. also made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. However, the grievance of the: appellants is that the contents of that Hie are fake because Qatar Ali had died in the year 1973, but his statement is alleged to have been recorded in 1974. The death of Qatar Ali in the year 1973 is controverted by the respondent; the High Court has also declined to accept the aforesaid contention of the appellants. The presumption is that the official act of cancellation of allotment of Qatar Ali was performed according to law until it is otherwise proved. Thus, in absence of any reliable material to the contrary, it cannot be said that Qatar Ali, deceased, did not make statement before the Rehabilitation WW. Authorities in support of his application. Dated 29-11-1972. Therefore, it stands amply proved that the allotment of Qatar Ali was cancelled on the recommendations of Rehabilitation Authorities by the Rehabilitation Minister as envisaged in subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property. Act which has been given retrospective effect. As the allotment of Qatar Ali was cancelled, it cannot be accepted that the appellants were not in the knowledge of the said cancellation and, thus, they did not challenge the cancellation order, especially so when the possession of the land in dispute was also with the respondent. Consequently, it can be concluded without any hesitation that when the appellants got the proprietary rights from the Custodian in the year 1986, they willfully concealed the fact that the allotment of Qatar Ali had been cancelled on the basis of his abandonment in favor of Suleman, respondent No.4. M Obviously, this would amount to a fraud and even if it were shown that the orders of the Custodian passed in review petition and revision petition were not legal, the appellants are not entitled to any relief by invoking the writ jurisdiction of the High Court because it is well settled principle of law that a party r which does not come with clean hands cannot be ‘given relief in exercise of writ jurisdiction. 7. Assuming for the sake of argument that the cancellation proceedings on the recommendations of Rehabilitation Authorities are doubtful, the fact remains that the application was made by Qatar Ali before the Custodian on 29-11-1972 wherein he clearly mentioned that he had abandoned his right of allotment MN favor of respondent No.4. This fact is admitted by the appellants in the agreement dated 22-11-1982. Thus, even if it is assumed that the statement of Qatar Ali was not recorded or that no formal cancellation order was made by the Rehabilitation Authorities or the Rehabilitation Minister, the allotment in favor of respondent No.4 would be valid in view of the dictum of this Court in the authorities relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent, referred to above. 8*. There is yet another aspect of the matter. The appellant have never challenged the allotment order made in favor of respondents No.4 in the year 1974; rather they took the stand that the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order in their favor made in the year 1986 is valid because the allotment of Qatar Ali subsisted and was not cancelled. As the order of allotment of respondent No.4 made in 1974 was not challenged and the same remained intact, the natural consequences of the fact would be that the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order in favor of the appellants is not sustainable, especially so when the said fact was not WW. disclosed by them when they obtained the proprietary rights in 1986. It follows from what has been stated above that even fit is assumed that the orders passed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian were not legal, the appellants were rightly dented the relief by the High Court by dismissing their writ petition. In the light of what has been stated above, finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with costs. H.B.T,/11/SC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed. TT

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 867 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2001-01-10): 4 4i1SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J;-This appeal has been directed against the judgment of the High Court dated 23-5-2000, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants, herein, challenging the orders of the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian was dismissed. - 2. The brief facts of the case are that the land in dispute comprising survey No. measuring Canals 8 Marla's, along with some other survey number, situate in Band Karim Harder Shah, Thesis and District Muzaffarabad was originally allotted in favor of Qatar Al, the father of appellants Nos.] and 2, who’s use Que in t LY transferred the same vide the sale-deed dated 21-7-1986 MN favor of appellant No.3. According to the appellants, Suleman, respondent No.4 harm, obtained allotment in his favor on 23-11-1974 and on the basis of the said allotment he filed a review petition before the Commissioner Rehabilitation against the entitlement certificate issued in favor of the appellants dated 4-2-1986, in pursuance of which Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was issued in their favor by the Custodian. The Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner, vide his order dated 10-12-1986, held that Suleman, respondent No.4, was genuine allottee of the land MN dispute as a result, of surrender of allotment rights by Qatar Ali, deceased, and thus, he withdrew the entitlement certificate which was earlier issued in favor of successors-m-interest of Qatar Al, deceased. The learned Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner held that allotment was made in favor of respondent No.4, Suleman, on 23-11- 1974 as a result of surrender mg of rights in his favor by Qatar Ali, deceased, and thereafter, Suleman, respondent, also mortgaged the said land with Agricultural Development Bank which was subsequently redeemed by him on 4-4-1981. On the basis of aforesaid order of Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 10-12- 1986 the Custodian cancelled the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order earlier issued by him vide his order date 14-12-1986. It is the case of the appellants that the order of the Custodian whereby the earlier Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was cancelled was without jurisdiction and against facts. The appellants first filed a revision petition before the Custodian against the order of the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 10-12- 1986 and thereafter, when they came to know about the order of the Custodian dated 14- 12-1986, they also filed a review petition before him on 23-6-1987. Both, the revision petition and the review petition were consolidated and were disposed of by the Custodian vide his order dated 20-9-1992. He dismissed the same on the ground that as the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner had withdrawn the entitlement certificate issued in favor of the appellants, the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was not sustainable and that the remedy with the appellants under the law in force at the relevant time was to prefer a WW. revision petition to the High Court against his order and not to file revision petition before the Rehabilitation Commissioner. 3. The appellants, harm, feeling aggrieved by the orders of the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian, filed a writ petition

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 867 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2001-01-10): force at the relevant time was to prefer a WW. revision petition to the High Court against his order and not to file revision petition before the Rehabilitation Commissioner. 3. The appellants, harm, feeling aggrieved by the orders of the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian, filed a writ petition in the High Court which was also dismissed holding that the findings of Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian that in fact Qatar Ali, deceased, had surrendered his rights in favor of respondent No.4 could not be disturbed in exercise of writ jurisdiction; it has been further held by the High Court that even if it is held that the order of the cancellation of allotment in favor of Qatar Ali passed by the Rehabilitation Minister was not sustainable for one reason or the other, the property in dispute would be deemed to have been rightly allotted in favor of respondent No.4 after the same was surrendered by Qatar Ali in his favor. While giving the aforesaid findings, the High Court has referred to some of the cases decided by this Court wherein it has been held that if the Rehabilitation Authorities are satisfied that earlier allottee has surrendered his allotment, the evacuee land can be allotted without the cancellation of first allotment by a formal order. m' 4, Raja Muhammad Han if Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that as the aforesaid revision petition and the review petition were pending before the Custodian when law was amended, the Custodian was empowered to hold an inquiry regarding P the question as to whether in fact Qatar Ali, deceased, had surrendered his right of allotment in favor of respondent No.4, his nephew; APD whether he was included m the family members of Qatar Ali but no such inquiry was held and both the revision petition and review petition were dismissed on the short ground. that the finding given by the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner that Qatar Ali had surrendered his rights of allotment could not be gone into by the Custodian because he had no jurisdiction in the matter. The learned counsel for the appellants has further argued that in the fact Qatar Ali died in the year 1973 while the term order m the file of Rehabilitation Authorities dated 10-2-1974 shows that his statement was recorded on the said date. He has contended that as Qatar Ali was not alive on the aforesaid date, his statement cannot be recorded on the said date. The learned counsel has further submitted that as there is cutting in the file of the Rehabilitation Department which was subsequently sent to the Rehabilitation Minister, the whole proceedings are doubtful; according to said file, in the first instance the recommendations for the cancellation of the allotment of Qatar Ali was WW. not acceded to by the Rehabilitation Secretariat, but it appears that afterward, the cancellation order was t managed somehow or the other by respondent No.4. Thus, according to the learned counsel for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 867 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2001-01-10): file, in the first instance the recommendations for the cancellation of the allotment of Qatar Ali was WW. not acceded to by the Rehabilitation Secretariat, but it appears that afterward, the cancellation order was t managed somehow or the other by respondent No.4. Thus, according to the learned counsel for the appellants, the proceedings for the ' cancellation of the allotment of Qatar Ali were fictitious and were maneuvered by Suleman, respondent No.4. 5. In reply, Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi, Advocate, the learned counsel for respondent No.4, has controverted the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants. He has argued that Qatar. Ali, deceased, made an application to the Custodian on 29-11- 1972, the copy of which TS Ex.D.A. stating that he had abandoned the allotment of land in dispute in favor of: Suleman, respondent No.4, and thus, necessary proceedings might be taken for the cancellation of his allotment and the allotment of land in dispute to respondent No.4. According to the learned counsel for the respondents, on this application, the case of cancellation of allotment of Qatar Ali was processed by the Rehabilitation Authorities as envisaged under subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel has contended that subsection (7) of section 18 was added vide amending Ordinance No.CLXV of 1983 which was subsequently approved by the Assembly and became an Act; the aforesaid amending Act shows that the provisions contained in subsection (7) of section 18 have been made operative with retrospective effect. Thus, the allotment made in favor of Qatar Ah was cancelled on the recommendations of Rehabilitation Authorities and the land was duly allotted in favor of respondent No.4 on 23-11-1974. In alternative, the learned counsel has argued that even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the allotment in favor of Qatar Ali was not formally cancelled, but it is* proved that he had abandoned his allotment in favor of respondent No.4, the allotment in favor of respondent No.4, would be valid in view of the dictum of this Court in a number of cases that the formal cancellation of previous allotment is not necessary if abandonment of allotment is proved. The learned counsel has relied upon the cases reported as Her Ahmad by. Custodian of Evacuee Property (PLD 1983 SC (AJ&K) 78), Bashir Ahmad Khan v. Custodian, Evacuee Property Azad Jammu and Kashmir, Muzaffarabad (PLD 1987 SC (AJ&K) 118) and an unreported case entitled Muhammad Sharif v. Custodian of Evacuee Property (Civil Appeal No. of 1993, decided on 30-10-1993) in support of his contention that in case of abandonment of the first allotment second allotment WW. can be made without formal order of the cancellation of the. First allotment. He has further submitted that the Rehabilitation Commissioner could legally review his order despite the fact that the proprietary rights have been given to the appellants, the heirs of Qatar Ali, allottee. He has relied upon a case reported as Muhammad Radio v.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 867 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2001-01-10): of the cancellation of the. First allotment. He has further submitted that the Rehabilitation Commissioner could legally review his order despite the fact that the proprietary rights have been given to the appellants, the heirs of Qatar Ali, allottee. He has relied upon a case reported as Muhammad Radio v. Heidi Muhammad Shaft Khan (PLD 1991 SC (AJ&K) 47) in support of his contention. The learned counsel has further submitted that the fact that land in dispute has been in the possession of respondent No.4 further supports his contention that in fact Qatar Al, deceased, had surrendered the right of his allotment in favor of said respondent before his death. 6. We have given due consideration to the arguments raised. There are two moot ports in the instant case which need resolution, Le. (1) whether the allotment of Qatar Ali was cancelled on his application dated 29-11-1972; and (11) even if it is assumed that the same was not formally cancelled, the allotment in favor of respondent No.4 is valid in view of the fact that Qatar Ali had abandoned his rights of allotment of the land in dispute. It may be observed that the ma'am argument advanced oft behalf of the appellants was that Rehabilitation Minister was not competent to cancel the allotment of Qatar Ali and that in any case, the cancellation proceedings are doubtful in view of the reasons given by the learned counsel of the appellants. It may be observed that in view o1 subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act which has been made operative retrospectively, there is hardly any doubt that the Government has the power to cancel an allotment if it is found by the Rehabilitation Authorities on inquiry Thai the same was surrendered by the concerned allottee. In the instant case, the contents of appeal, particularly paragraphs 5(b) and 5(g), that the allotment file was processed by the Rehabilitation Authorities and that 2 cancellation order was. also made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. However, the grievance of the: appellants is that the contents of that Hie are fake because Qatar Ali had died in the year 1973, but his statement is alleged to have been recorded in 1974. The death of Qatar Ali in the year 1973 is controverted by the respondent; the High Court has also declined to accept the aforesaid contention of the appellants. The presumption is that the official act of cancellation of allotment of Qatar Ali was performed according to law until it is otherwise proved. Thus, in absence of any reliable material to the contrary, it cannot be said that Qatar Ali, deceased, did not make statement before the Rehabilitation WW. Authorities in support of his application. Dated 29-11-1972. Therefore, it stands amply proved that the allotment of Qatar Ali was cancelled on the recommendations of Rehabilitation Authorities by the Rehabilitation Minister as envisaged in subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property. Act which has been given

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 867 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2001-01-10): in support of his application. Dated 29-11-1972. Therefore, it stands amply proved that the allotment of Qatar Ali was cancelled on the recommendations of Rehabilitation Authorities by the Rehabilitation Minister as envisaged in subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property. Act which has been given retrospective effect. As the allotment of Qatar Ali was cancelled, it cannot be accepted that the appellants were not in the knowledge of the said cancellation and, thus, they did not challenge the cancellation order, especially so when the possession of the land in dispute was also with the respondent. Consequently, it can be concluded without any hesitation that when the appellants got the proprietary rights from the Custodian in the year 1986, they willfully concealed the fact that the allotment of Qatar Ali had been cancelled on the basis of his abandonment in favor of Suleman, respondent No.4. M Obviously, this would amount to a fraud and even if it were shown that the orders of the Custodian passed in review petition and revision petition were not legal, the appellants are not entitled to any relief by invoking the writ jurisdiction of the High Court because it is well settled principle of law that a party r which does not come with clean hands cannot be ‘given relief in exercise of writ jurisdiction. 7. Assuming for the sake of argument that the cancellation proceedings on the recommendations of Rehabilitation Authorities are doubtful, the fact remains that the application was made by Qatar Ali before the Custodian on 29-11-1972 wherein he clearly mentioned that he had abandoned his right of allotment MN favor of respondent No.4. This fact is admitted by the appellants in the agreement dated 22-11-1982. Thus, even if it is assumed that the statement of Qatar Ali was not recorded or that no formal cancellation order was made by the Rehabilitation Authorities or the Rehabilitation Minister, the allotment in favor of respondent No.4 would be valid in view of the dictum of this Court in the authorities relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent, referred to above. 8*. There is yet another aspect of the matter. The appellant have never challenged the allotment order made in favor of respondents No.4 in the year 1974; rather they took the stand that the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order in their favor made in the year 1986 is valid because the allotment of Qatar Ali subsisted and was not cancelled. As the order of allotment of respondent No.4 made in 1974 was not challenged and the same remained intact, the natural consequences of the fact would be that the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order in favor of the appellants is not sustainable, especially so when the said fact was not WW. disclosed by them when they obtained the proprietary rights in 1986. It follows from what has been stated above that even fit is assumed that the orders passed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian were not legal, the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 867?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 867 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2001-01-10): not sustainable, especially so when the said fact was not WW. disclosed by them when they obtained the proprietary rights in 1986. It follows from what has been stated above that even fit is assumed that the orders passed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Custodian were not legal, the appellants were rightly dented the relief by the High Court by dismissing their writ petition. In the light of what has been stated above, finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with costs. H.B.T,/11/SC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed. TT

Question: What is case 2004 MLD 1569 about?
Answer: Case 2004 MLD 1569 was decided by FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT on 2003-12-12. The case involved SHAHID AHMAD AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS THE STATE RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS. 302/34 OFFENCES AGAINST. PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 17(4). The case was heard by ZAFAR PASHA CHAUDHARYAND S.A. RABBANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: In case 2004 MLD 1569, the court applied the following statutes: PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS. 302/34 OFFENCES AGAINST. PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 17(4). This case was heard in FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT and decided on 2003-12-12.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 MLD 1569 were: FAZAL-UR-REHMAN AWAN FOR APPELLANTS.MISS AKHTAR REHANA FOR THE STATE.. The judges presiding were: ZAFAR PASHA CHAUDHARYAND S.A. RABBANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 MLD 1569 were: SHAHID AHMAD AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS THE STATE RESPONDENT. This case was heard in FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 MLD 1569.
Answer: W ZAFAR PASHA CHAUDHARY, J.-Shahid Ahmad son of TAJ ' Muhammad and Her Muhammad alias Baba son of GUL Muhammad along with their co-accused Kamal alias Kamala son of Hassan (absconder) accused in the F.I.R. No. under section WW. 17(4) of _ k the Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as the Ordinance) registered with Police Station, Karl, Karachi South were sent up to face trial m the Court of Mr. Muhammad Saber Chippy, With Additional Sessions Judge, Karachi South. On conclusion of the trial Shahid Ahmad and Her Muhammad, appellants were convicted under section, P.P.C. and were sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life vide judgment dated 12-4-2002. 2. The prosecution case as spelt out from the F.I.R. lodged by Suleman son of Guitar (P.W.4) and his subsequent statement made in Court is that on 2-11-1995 at 8-30 p.m. he was sitting on the counter of his hotel when three accused persons (Shahid Ahmad, Her Muhammad and Kamal alias Kamala) came there and surrounded him. One who was empty-handed took position at the back and the two who were armed with TT pistols took positions in the front. Accused Shahid Ahmed (who was standing at the back) pulled the drawer of the counter and picked out Rs.8,000 or Rs.8,500 lying therein. After removing the said amount, all the three aforesaid accused persons tried to make their escape. The complainant raised alarm which attracted the people around. They rushed towards the hotel and also chased the accused persons by pelting stones on them. A taxi had been parted nearby. Firing was made from within the taxi towards the people who were chasing the accused persons to apprehend them. As a result of firm Nadeem, Monsieur, Usman Ghana and Ali Muhammad (four persons) received fire-arm juries. Ali Muhammad died at the spot. The remaining three injured persons succumbed to the juries later in the hospital. As a result of firing, the taxi caught fire. Two of the companions of the accused persons sitting in the taxi got burned and expired there in the taxi. The complainant reported the matter within about 25 minutes to the police. On his statement formal F.I.R. (Ex. 13/B) was registered. The police prepared necessary memos and also secured from the spot five empties of Kalashnikov from within the taxi and two empties of.30 bore pistol. A.30 bore pistol along with one steel plate was also recovered from the taxi 3. The investigation was undertaken by the police. A number of police officers participated in the investigation and performed necessary functions for completion of the same. Eftekhari Ahmad, S.J. carried out the main investigation, recorded the statement of witnesses under section 161, Cr.P.C. got autopsy of the dead bodies from the relevant medical officers. He WW. inspected the place of occurrence and prepared necessary memos. He appeared as P.W. 14 and testified the various memos prepared by him and the recoveries effected from the spot. Affair Al Shah, Inspector/S.H.O. Frier, Karachi South also conducted the investigation. He exam med various P. Ws. whose statements had been recorded earlier. He as such verified the investigation already undertaken by the Inspector. On completion of the investigation holding the accused persons as guilty sent up to the Court to face trial. 4. The prosecution in support of its case examined 18 witnesses. Out of them Suleman, complainant (P.W.4) is the most important and r m relevant witness. He, during trial, reiterated his previous statement made to the police and also testified the various memos attested by him. AI5. P.W. Hassium Sewer is a witness who testified in Court that r the incident as narrated by the complainant did take place in front of the shop of the complaint. He also stated about the dead bodies long at the spot which were taken into possession vide memos which were attested by him. ’' P.W.3 Muhammad Kamil who is resident of the Mo hallah where the incident occurred deposed that the dead bodies were taken into possession, and he testified the relevant Mashirnamas memo. 6. P!W.6 Muhammad Umar is son of the complainant. He was present near the place of occurrence. He reached the spot on hearing the reports of firm. He made statement in the line with the statement already made by his father, the complainant. According to him, unknown persons looted his father who raised cries on which the w s- neighboring people were attracted. According to him four persons were injured on account of firm. An injured person succumbed to the juries. A taxi which had been parked near the complainant’s hotel caught fire due to firm. The two persons who were accomplices of the accused got burned in the taxi and as such expired. According to him, Her Muhammad and Shahid were arrested by the police and were got identified by his father, the complainant. Both of them were amongst the looters who robbed the money, thereafter the incident ensued. The witnesses identified both the accused Her Muhammad and Shahid Ahmad in Court who were present there to face trial. WW. 7. Dr. Qatar Ahmad, P.W. 11 conducted autopsy on dead body of Usman Ghana, which was identified by Monsieur Ahmad and Hashem Sewer. Similarly Dr. Abdul Harbor, P.W. 12 conducted post-mortem examination of dead body of Ali Muhammad. t 8. Mr. Diaz Hussain Shah who was posted as SDM City, Karachi South held the identification parade of Shahid Ahmad and Her Muhammad. He furnished the details of the proceedings. The accused I persons were mixed up with 15 dummies. After holding the identification test, he prepared reports Ex.39. He testified the same in Court. According to the report Shahid Ahmad and Her Muhammad were correctly identified and picked up by Suleman, complainant. 9. The remaining prosecution witnesses are mainly from police. They provided the details of the necessary. Functions performed by them during investigation. 10. On close of the prosecution evidence, the appellants were examined under section 342, Cr.P.C. Both the appellants denied the allegations levelled against them and pleaded that they were innocent and falsely implicated because they did not oblige the police. Shahid Ahmad also denied the recovery of pistol which contained four live bullets from him. The appellants neither led any evidence in defense nor they opted to make statements under section 340(2), Cr.P.C. 11. The learned counsel for the appellants have challenged the conviction being not maintainable and contrary to the evidence brought on record. According to the learned counsel, the prosecution has failed to discharge its onus. As against that, the learned counsel on behalf of the State has supported the conviction and argued that six persons lost their lives in the incident. All the assailants including the appellants were acting in furtherance of their common intention. They committed robbery (Barnabas) and also murder as a result of an elaborate pre-planning. 12. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also carefully gone through the evidence and relevant record. The main contention raised on behalf of the appellants is that the identification of the é assailants who are the appellants before this Court was not possible. According to learned counsel, right from the beginning the complainant had been stating that the assailants had muffled their faces. Obviously when the faces had been muffled, they could not be seen either by the complainant or by any other witness. Dur mg course of examination in answer to a question, the complaint explained that during course of incident the face of Shahid became unmuffled and visible. The complaint did not tender any explanation with regard to Her Muhammad, appellant. The learned counsel has therefore, laid emphasis on the identification of the accused persons. It has next been argued that practically the prosecution case hinges on the sole testimony of the complainant. According to him, the huge loss of lives of six persons which included two of the assailants should not in any manner prejudice the mind of the Court. If the identification of the assailants is ¥ not established beyond doubt and the same remains doubtful then the benefit of the same should be extended to the accused persons, and they should be acquitted of the charges. 13. The learned counsel has also taken us through the evidence of the complainant and his son and other supporting witnesses. He has pointed out some discrepancies especially with regard to the positions held by the assailants, the manner they entered the shop and forcibly removed the money. According to the learned counsel there are material discrepancies in the statements made by the complainant and his supporting witnesses. The discrepancies are of the nature that the testimony of the complaint becomes doubtful. It has-been further argued that two distinct offenses have been committed, one is of robbery (Barnabas) and other is of murder. As far as the offense of murder is concerned, the appellants, even according to the prosecution, cannot be held responsible for the same. According to the learned counsel, the firm was made from within the taxi which had been parked at some distance from the complaint's hotel. He, therefore, inferred that murder and robbery had been committed by different sets of persons. The person sitting in the taxi and the accused persons who entered the hotel and forcibly removed money from the counter of the complaint. cannot be associated with commission of murder. It has been argued alternatively that at the best the appellant can be held responsible for commission of robbery. They may be awarded sentence for the same. However, it is added that they have already undergone sufficient punishment and as such have suffered the sentence which would have been imposed for offense of robbery. WW. 14, We take up the pleas raised by the learned counsel one by one. The fact that the accused appellants entered the hotel with muffled faces v has been admitted even in the F.I.R. by the complaint. A question, r m however, arises that in the circumstances of the present case, the complainant would have seen the faces of the assailants requires determination. As it is evident from the facts of the case that the accused who were armed approached the complainant sitting on the counter of his hotel. That demanded money from him and forcibly removed the same T _ from the drawer of the counter. The demand of money appears to have not been accepted by the complainant, therefore, they opened the drawer and removed the amount therefrom. Their coming to the hotel, demanding the money under threat and thereafter removing the same would have definitely consumed some time. The complainant and the accused assailants were very close to each other, and they remained as such for quite some time. After they had robbed the complainant they tried to escape. The complainant raised cries which attracted a number k of persons from the locality. The assailants were chased. During the chase firing was made by the persons who were sitting in the taxi. Obviously the firm had been made in order to defend and rescue the robbers. There remains no doubt to believe that the persons sitting in the taxi were the companions of the robbers and all had come together. They were all accomplices in commission of the offense. Indiscriminate firm on the mob was made. Unfortunately four moment persons received juries who subsequently succumbed to the injuries. The firing was so intense and severe that the taxi itself go- fire and two persons sitting in the taxi who obviously were companions and accomplices of the robbers got burned therein. The entire episode of committing robbery, firm and burning of taxi must have taken a considerable time. Therefore, all,the period it was not possible for the assailants to remain muffled faces. The complainant and other witnesses must have seen the accused/appellants. Mere fact that the complainant in his report to the police has stated that the offenders were muffled faces does not in any manner, m the circumstances of the present case, would create an impression that they could not be seen or identified. 15. The complainant who is absolutely an independent witness has no malice or motive to falsely implicate the appellants. He joined the identification parade before the Magistrate as per identification report Ex.39 submitted by the Magistrate, the complainant correctly picked up and identified the appellants as culprits. The complainant clearly stated in the Court that the appellants who were facing trial had committed the offense. The complainant’s statement in the police report that the faces of the accused were muffled in a way adds to his credibility and truthfulness. The'complainant right from the beginning came forward with the truthful statement. Had he intended to falsely implicate the appellants he could have very conveniently stated in the F.I.R. that the accused had not covered their faces or that their muffles were removed r during the long commotion which took place at the time of occurrence. The statements of the complainant and his supporting witnesses inspire full confidence. The testimony cannot be discarded. The accused were identified during the test identification, and they identified the accused m Court as well Even otherwise the accused persons would have been seen by a number of persons. It would not be possible for the complainant or even for the” police to have substituted the accused/appellants with real culprits. - 16. Various discrepancies pointed out ‘of the learned counsel in the statements of the complainant and the supporting witnesses are firstly insignificant, and secondly it is not understandable as what is sought to be referred from these discrepancies. The occurrence had definitely taken place. On a query from the learned counsel that in case the discrepancies pointed out by him are considered important they will lead to what conclusion? To conclude that no robbery took place or no one was murdered is absolutely impossible. The learned counsel has not been able to explain as what was his aim of posted out the so-called variations or discrepancies in the description of the facts. We are not impressed by this contention. t 17. The next ‘argument that whether the accused persons who actually approached the complainant for robbery and the persons sitting in the taxi were members of the same party, and they were acting in furtherance of their common intention has been detailed above. The persons who were sitting in the taxi opened fire when their co-accused were trying to escape after committing robbery. There is no doubt that the firm was made to defend and protect their co- accused. The very fact that the taxi had been parked close to the hotel and the firm was started m at the moment it was seen that their co-accused might not be apprehended leaves.no doubt in believing that all the accused persons sitting in the taxi and those committing robbery were acting in pursuance of their common object or acting in furtherance of their common intention depending on the number of the accused persons. All of them were members of the same party, and they committed offense of robbery jointly and during commission of the offense they committed murder of four innocent persons. The firing resorted to by the accused persons was so intense and reckless that they had the knowledge that their firm may result in death of some persons. The accused persons committed robbery during course of which four murders have been committed and as such they have committed offense of Barnabas. The conviction has been recorded under section. P.P.C. and the appellants have been sentenced to life imprisonment. The trial Judge has taken a lenient view qua the sentence. In absence of revision for enhancement of sentence, we do not intend to issue notice in this behalf either. Phi* 18. In view of what has been discussed above, the appeal is dismissed. The conviction and sentence of the appellants are upheld and managed. H.B.T./51/FSC, Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1569 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-12-12): W ZAFAR PASHA CHAUDHARY, J.-Shahid Ahmad son of TAJ ' Muhammad and Her Muhammad alias Baba son of GUL Muhammad along with their co-accused Kamal alias Kamala son of Hassan (absconder) accused in the F.I.R. No. under section WW. 17(4) of _ k the Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as the Ordinance) registered with Police Station, Karl, Karachi South were sent up to face trial m the Court of Mr. Muhammad Saber Chippy, With Additional Sessions Judge, Karachi South. On conclusion of the trial Shahid Ahmad and Her Muhammad, appellants were convicted under section, P.P.C. and were sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life vide judgment dated 12-4-2002. 2. The prosecution case as spelt out from the F.I.R. lodged by Suleman son of Guitar (P.W.4) and his subsequent statement made in Court is that on 2-11-1995 at 8-30 p.m. he was sitting on the counter of his hotel when three accused persons (Shahid Ahmad, Her Muhammad and Kamal alias Kamala) came there and surrounded him. One who was empty-handed took position at the back and the two who were armed with TT pistols took positions in the front. Accused Shahid Ahmed (who was standing at the back) pulled the drawer of the counter and picked out Rs.8,000 or Rs.8,500 lying therein. After removing the said amount, all the three aforesaid accused persons tried to make their escape. The complainant raised alarm which attracted the people around. They rushed towards the hotel and also chased the accused persons by pelting stones on them. A taxi had been parted nearby. Firing was made from within the taxi towards the people who were chasing the accused persons to apprehend them. As a result of firm Nadeem, Monsieur, Usman Ghana and Ali Muhammad (four persons) received fire-arm juries. Ali Muhammad died at the spot. The remaining three injured persons succumbed to the juries later in the hospital. As a result of firing, the taxi caught fire. Two of the companions of the accused persons sitting in the taxi got burned and expired there in the taxi. The complainant reported the matter within about 25 minutes to the police. On his statement formal F.I.R. (Ex. 13/B) was registered. The police prepared necessary memos and also secured from the spot five empties of Kalashnikov from within the taxi and two empties of.30 bore pistol. A.30 bore pistol along with one steel plate was also recovered from the taxi 3. The investigation was undertaken by the police. A number of police officers participated in the investigation and performed necessary functions for completion of the same. Eftekhari Ahmad, S.J. carried out the main investigation, recorded the statement of witnesses under section 161, Cr.P.C. got autopsy of the dead bodies from the relevant medical officers. He WW. inspected the place of occurrence and prepared necessary memos. He appeared as P.W. 14 and testified the various memos prepared by him and the recoveries effected from the spot. Affair Al Shah, Inspector/S.H.O. Frier, Karachi South also

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1569 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-12-12): got autopsy of the dead bodies from the relevant medical officers. He WW. inspected the place of occurrence and prepared necessary memos. He appeared as P.W. 14 and testified the various memos prepared by him and the recoveries effected from the spot. Affair Al Shah, Inspector/S.H.O. Frier, Karachi South also conducted the investigation. He exam med various P. Ws. whose statements had been recorded earlier. He as such verified the investigation already undertaken by the Inspector. On completion of the investigation holding the accused persons as guilty sent up to the Court to face trial. 4. The prosecution in support of its case examined 18 witnesses. Out of them Suleman, complainant (P.W.4) is the most important and r m relevant witness. He, during trial, reiterated his previous statement made to the police and also testified the various memos attested by him. AI5. P.W. Hassium Sewer is a witness who testified in Court that r the incident as narrated by the complainant did take place in front of the shop of the complaint. He also stated about the dead bodies long at the spot which were taken into possession vide memos which were attested by him. ’' P.W.3 Muhammad Kamil who is resident of the Mo hallah where the incident occurred deposed that the dead bodies were taken into possession, and he testified the relevant Mashirnamas memo. 6. P!W.6 Muhammad Umar is son of the complainant. He was present near the place of occurrence. He reached the spot on hearing the reports of firm. He made statement in the line with the statement already made by his father, the complainant. According to him, unknown persons looted his father who raised cries on which the w s- neighboring people were attracted. According to him four persons were injured on account of firm. An injured person succumbed to the juries. A taxi which had been parked near the complainant’s hotel caught fire due to firm. The two persons who were accomplices of the accused got burned in the taxi and as such expired. According to him, Her Muhammad and Shahid were arrested by the police and were got identified by his father, the complainant. Both of them were amongst the looters who robbed the money, thereafter the incident ensued. The witnesses identified both the accused Her Muhammad and Shahid Ahmad in Court who were present there to face trial. WW. 7. Dr. Qatar Ahmad, P.W. 11 conducted autopsy on dead body of Usman Ghana, which was identified by Monsieur Ahmad and Hashem Sewer. Similarly Dr. Abdul Harbor, P.W. 12 conducted post-mortem examination of dead body of Ali Muhammad. t 8. Mr. Diaz Hussain Shah who was posted as SDM City, Karachi South held the identification parade of Shahid Ahmad and Her Muhammad. He furnished the details of the proceedings. The accused I persons were mixed up with 15 dummies. After holding the identification test, he prepared reports Ex.39. He testified the same in Court. According to the report Shahid Ahmad and Her Muhammad

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1569 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-12-12): the identification parade of Shahid Ahmad and Her Muhammad. He furnished the details of the proceedings. The accused I persons were mixed up with 15 dummies. After holding the identification test, he prepared reports Ex.39. He testified the same in Court. According to the report Shahid Ahmad and Her Muhammad were correctly identified and picked up by Suleman, complainant. 9. The remaining prosecution witnesses are mainly from police. They provided the details of the necessary. Functions performed by them during investigation. 10. On close of the prosecution evidence, the appellants were examined under section 342, Cr.P.C. Both the appellants denied the allegations levelled against them and pleaded that they were innocent and falsely implicated because they did not oblige the police. Shahid Ahmad also denied the recovery of pistol which contained four live bullets from him. The appellants neither led any evidence in defense nor they opted to make statements under section 340(2), Cr.P.C. 11. The learned counsel for the appellants have challenged the conviction being not maintainable and contrary to the evidence brought on record. According to the learned counsel, the prosecution has failed to discharge its onus. As against that, the learned counsel on behalf of the State has supported the conviction and argued that six persons lost their lives in the incident. All the assailants including the appellants were acting in furtherance of their common intention. They committed robbery (Barnabas) and also murder as a result of an elaborate pre-planning. 12. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also carefully gone through the evidence and relevant record. The main contention raised on behalf of the appellants is that the identification of the é assailants who are the appellants before this Court was not possible. According to learned counsel, right from the beginning the complainant had been stating that the assailants had muffled their faces. Obviously when the faces had been muffled, they could not be seen either by the complainant or by any other witness. Dur mg course of examination in answer to a question, the complaint explained that during course of incident the face of Shahid became unmuffled and visible. The complaint did not tender any explanation with regard to Her Muhammad, appellant. The learned counsel has therefore, laid emphasis on the identification of the accused persons. It has next been argued that practically the prosecution case hinges on the sole testimony of the complainant. According to him, the huge loss of lives of six persons which included two of the assailants should not in any manner prejudice the mind of the Court. If the identification of the assailants is ¥ not established beyond doubt and the same remains doubtful then the benefit of the same should be extended to the accused persons, and they should be acquitted of the charges. 13. The learned counsel has also taken us through the evidence of the complainant and his son and other supporting witnesses. He has pointed out some discrepancies especially with regard to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1569 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-12-12): benefit of the same should be extended to the accused persons, and they should be acquitted of the charges. 13. The learned counsel has also taken us through the evidence of the complainant and his son and other supporting witnesses. He has pointed out some discrepancies especially with regard to the positions held by the assailants, the manner they entered the shop and forcibly removed the money. According to the learned counsel there are material discrepancies in the statements made by the complainant and his supporting witnesses. The discrepancies are of the nature that the testimony of the complaint becomes doubtful. It has-been further argued that two distinct offenses have been committed, one is of robbery (Barnabas) and other is of murder. As far as the offense of murder is concerned, the appellants, even according to the prosecution, cannot be held responsible for the same. According to the learned counsel, the firm was made from within the taxi which had been parked at some distance from the complaint's hotel. He, therefore, inferred that murder and robbery had been committed by different sets of persons. The person sitting in the taxi and the accused persons who entered the hotel and forcibly removed money from the counter of the complaint. cannot be associated with commission of murder. It has been argued alternatively that at the best the appellant can be held responsible for commission of robbery. They may be awarded sentence for the same. However, it is added that they have already undergone sufficient punishment and as such have suffered the sentence which would have been imposed for offense of robbery. WW. 14, We take up the pleas raised by the learned counsel one by one. The fact that the accused appellants entered the hotel with muffled faces v has been admitted even in the F.I.R. by the complaint. A question, r m however, arises that in the circumstances of the present case, the complainant would have seen the faces of the assailants requires determination. As it is evident from the facts of the case that the accused who were armed approached the complainant sitting on the counter of his hotel. That demanded money from him and forcibly removed the same T _ from the drawer of the counter. The demand of money appears to have not been accepted by the complainant, therefore, they opened the drawer and removed the amount therefrom. Their coming to the hotel, demanding the money under threat and thereafter removing the same would have definitely consumed some time. The complainant and the accused assailants were very close to each other, and they remained as such for quite some time. After they had robbed the complainant they tried to escape. The complainant raised cries which attracted a number k of persons from the locality. The assailants were chased. During the chase firing was made by the persons who were sitting in the taxi. Obviously the firm had been made in order to defend and rescue the robbers. There

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1569 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-12-12): to escape. The complainant raised cries which attracted a number k of persons from the locality. The assailants were chased. During the chase firing was made by the persons who were sitting in the taxi. Obviously the firm had been made in order to defend and rescue the robbers. There remains no doubt to believe that the persons sitting in the taxi were the companions of the robbers and all had come together. They were all accomplices in commission of the offense. Indiscriminate firm on the mob was made. Unfortunately four moment persons received juries who subsequently succumbed to the injuries. The firing was so intense and severe that the taxi itself go- fire and two persons sitting in the taxi who obviously were companions and accomplices of the robbers got burned therein. The entire episode of committing robbery, firm and burning of taxi must have taken a considerable time. Therefore, all,the period it was not possible for the assailants to remain muffled faces. The complainant and other witnesses must have seen the accused/appellants. Mere fact that the complainant in his report to the police has stated that the offenders were muffled faces does not in any manner, m the circumstances of the present case, would create an impression that they could not be seen or identified. 15. The complainant who is absolutely an independent witness has no malice or motive to falsely implicate the appellants. He joined the identification parade before the Magistrate as per identification report Ex.39 submitted by the Magistrate, the complainant correctly picked up and identified the appellants as culprits. The complainant clearly stated in the Court that the appellants who were facing trial had committed the offense. The complainant’s statement in the police report that the faces of the accused were muffled in a way adds to his credibility and truthfulness. The'complainant right from the beginning came forward with the truthful statement. Had he intended to falsely implicate the appellants he could have very conveniently stated in the F.I.R. that the accused had not covered their faces or that their muffles were removed r during the long commotion which took place at the time of occurrence. The statements of the complainant and his supporting witnesses inspire full confidence. The testimony cannot be discarded. The accused were identified during the test identification, and they identified the accused m Court as well Even otherwise the accused persons would have been seen by a number of persons. It would not be possible for the complainant or even for the” police to have substituted the accused/appellants with real culprits. - 16. Various discrepancies pointed out ‘of the learned counsel in the statements of the complainant and the supporting witnesses are firstly insignificant, and secondly it is not understandable as what is sought to be referred from these discrepancies. The occurrence had definitely taken place. On a query from the learned counsel that in case the discrepancies pointed out by him are considered important they will lead to what conclusion?

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 MLD 1569?
Answer: From case 2004 MLD 1569 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-12-12): are firstly insignificant, and secondly it is not understandable as what is sought to be referred from these discrepancies. The occurrence had definitely taken place. On a query from the learned counsel that in case the discrepancies pointed out by him are considered important they will lead to what conclusion? To conclude that no robbery took place or no one was murdered is absolutely impossible. The learned counsel has not been able to explain as what was his aim of posted out the so-called variations or discrepancies in the description of the facts. We are not impressed by this contention. t 17. The next ‘argument that whether the accused persons who actually approached the complainant for robbery and the persons sitting in the taxi were members of the same party, and they were acting in furtherance of their common intention has been detailed above. The persons who were sitting in the taxi opened fire when their co-accused were trying to escape after committing robbery. There is no doubt that the firm was made to defend and protect their co- accused. The very fact that the taxi had been parked close to the hotel and the firm was started m at the moment it was seen that their co-accused might not be apprehended leaves.no doubt in believing that all the accused persons sitting in the taxi and those committing robbery were acting in pursuance of their common object or acting in furtherance of their common intention depending on the number of the accused persons. All of them were members of the same party, and they committed offense of robbery jointly and during commission of the offense they committed murder of four innocent persons. The firing resorted to by the accused persons was so intense and reckless that they had the knowledge that their firm may result in death of some persons. The accused persons committed robbery during course of which four murders have been committed and as such they have committed offense of Barnabas. The conviction has been recorded under section. P.P.C. and the appellants have been sentenced to life imprisonment. The trial Judge has taken a lenient view qua the sentence. In absence of revision for enhancement of sentence, we do not intend to issue notice in this behalf either. Phi* 18. In view of what has been discussed above, the appeal is dismissed. The conviction and sentence of the appellants are upheld and managed. H.B.T./51/FSC, Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 2004 YLR 1519 about?
Answer: Case 2004 YLR 1519 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2003-12-26. The case involved MUHAMMAD ATIF KHAN AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS ADMINISTRATOR BALDIA (SDMAC) RAWALAKOT AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PEARL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITYACT 1993 - SS.LL, 12 AND 31 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ORDINANCE, 1984 PEARL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITYACT, 1993 - SS.LL, 12 AND 31 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44(C) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2004/Y LR’/html_txt/Y LR_2004_1519.html 1/11 28/10/2025, 00:11 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2004/Y LR/html_txt/Y LR_2004_1519.html. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: In case 2004 YLR 1519, the court applied the following statutes: PEARL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITYACT 1993 - SS.LL, 12 AND 31 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ORDINANCE, 1984 PEARL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITYACT, 1993 - SS.LL, 12 AND 31 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44(C) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2004/Y LR’/html_txt/Y LR_2004_1519.html 1/11 28/10/2025, 00:11 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2004/Y LR/html_txt/Y LR_2004_1519.html. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2003-12-26.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 YLR 1519 were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD SADIQ KHAN FORPETITIONERS.SARDAR M. SULEMAN KHAN FOR RESPONDENTS NOS.LAND 2.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 YLR 1519 were: MUHAMMAD ATIF KHAN AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS ADMINISTRATOR BALDIA (SDMAC) RAWALAKOT AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 YLR 1519.
Answer: Through this Constitutional petition, the petitioners seek writ of prohibition against official respondents Nos.l and 2 from passing adverse order and deployment of police force to rest ram them from raising construction over their plots allotted to them by Pearl Development Authority as the respondent No.1] is dog so without any lawful authority. 2. The relevant facts as narrated in the writ petition itself necessary for disposal of the instant writ petition are that Plot No.D-3 situated MN the housing scheme was initially allotted to Mr. Khalid Shankar however, the same was transferred to Muhammad AIF petitioner No.l] as it appears from Annexure A. Plot No.D-4 situated in the same housing scheme was allotted to petitioner No.2, Muhammad Asia by the allotment committee Beng Competent Authority as it is evident from Annexure A/1. The petitioners started raising construction over the said plots upon which Administrator Municipal Committee, Walkout stopped the construction raising present controversy. The petitioners asked the Administrator to show as to how and under what authority of law he was restraining them to raise construction over their property consequently, the Administrator had correspondence with Pearl Development Authority resultantly the said authority informed the Administrator Municipal Committee that Plots bear mg Nos.D-3 and D-4 were allotted to the petitioners in accordance with law, and they were bound to raise construction over the plots within two years as required by housing scheme by-laws. The plots, according to Pearl Development Authority (hereafter shall be referred as Authority) were marked therefore, the petitioners were right to raise construction over the said plots and any other body or authority had no jurisdiction to interfere into the construction allowed to be raised under the direction of Authority, as it appears from Annexure-C. However, the Administrator continued obstruction into construction work consequently, another letter issued by Pearl Development Authority Annexure-C/1 was addressed to the Administrator that the Public Housing Scheme, Rawalakot was a scheme approved by the Government and its planning had also been approved by the Government. Plots Nos.D-3 and D-4 were duly marked. The service road passing along with Plot No.D-4 was also under the jurisdiction of the Authority therefore, by-laws of the Authority were fully applicable to it. The disputed work was going to be carried out in accordance with approved planning as such no other institution Or person was entitled to encroach into the jurisdiction of the Authority. The Authority asked the Administrator to desist from stopping the petitioners to raise WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y construction as it was the legal right to raise construction over the plots allotted to them in accordance with law. Despite all that the dispute continued between the petitioners and Administrator, Municipal Committee, Rawalakot. The petitioners approached P.D.A. to resolve the controversy so that they could raise construction over their property. On the request of the petitioners, the Chairman of the Authority wrote a letter to Deputy Commissioner, Pooch Annexed wherein it was disclosed that different Public Housing Schemes were launched at Muzaffarabad and Rawalakot in the year 1978-79. These schemes were initially launched through Public Works Department as a result an area Inked with main Bazaar Rawalakot towards Shark Road was acquired by the Government through an award and after doing so, the land acquired was transferred to the Works Department. The said department after planning under rules marked the plots and consequently, the same were transferred to different applicants under rules. However, the area immediately Inked with ma'am Bazaar remained under the possession of owners of the land as they did not hand over the possession to the department consequently, the plots marked according to planning could not be handed over to the allottees in time. Meanwhile, due to heavy traffic the Works Department keeping in view the timely requirement constructed a link-road which lead from main road towards District Courts so as to provide alternative road to minimize the traffic load. This Ink-road was constructed over awarded area on the temporary basis. After coming into existence of Pearl Development Authority, the Housing Scheme was handed over to the Authority by the Public Works Department through a Government notification. Consequent upon, the Authority negotiated with owners of the land acquired by the Government who did not hand over the possession of the land and as a result of it, the Authority took over the possession of the area. Mr. Mir Muhammad Khan a retired army officer was one of the cases who negotiated with the Authority and entered MTO a deal with the same. As a result of the deal between the said person and the Authority, two plots were decided to be allotted to him. The afore-mentioned link-road was passing through plots decided to be allotted to Mir Muhammad Khan (father of the petitioners) at the time when the parties entered MTO a deal. The said person through an application requested the Authority to transfer the Inroad in accordance with plan upon which the link-road was transferred parallel to the plots instead of its straight position passing through the plots. A photo-copy of the plan was also shown to the Deputy Commissioner, according to which this link road measuring 20 feet in its width is shown passing through another plot owned by LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the same person. It was also disclosed in the said letter that no violation of Highway Act was found by raising construction over the said plots because an area measuring 40 feet on either side of the railroad had been left out for traffic purpose. The Chairman of the Authority requested the Deputy Commissioner that no obstruction should be allowed while raising construction over the said plots as the same was quite in J accordance with approved plan of housing scheme and the plots were legally allotted to the petitioners. It was further disclosed in the same letter that bus/wagon stand was also the ownership of the Authority therefore, bus/wagon stand was required to be transferred so that the possession could be handed over to different allottees. A certificate showing allotment of plots bearing Nos.D-1, D-2, D-3 and D-4 to have been included in the awarded land for housing scheme Annexed/1 has also been placed on record. Through the said certificate it is declared by the Authority that the housings theme is yet to be handed over to any department or institution. 3. After filing of the present writ petition, the respondents were, asked to submit their parawise comments, consequently the respondent did so. The respondent Authority through its comments submitted that the plots bear mg Nos.D-3 and D-4, situated in public housing scheme Rawalakot were legally allotted to the petitioners. The petitioners being allottees of the said plots had also constructed an alternative Ink road 20 feet in its width per agreement with the Authority therefore, the construction over the said plots caused no damage to the Ink road neither the Authority restarted them nor raised any objection to the disputed construction. Respondent No.2 filed no comments however, respondent No.] Administrator, Municipal Corporation raised different objections in view of the powers and jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation envisaged under “The AJ&K Local Government Act’. Later on, respondent No.3 requested the Court to treat the comments as written statement on behalf of Authority whereas respondent No.1 filed his written statement. raising same objections as were available on the file in shape of comments by him. 4. The learned counsel for the petitioners argued that Plots bear mg Nos.D- 3 and D-4 situated in public house scheme under the control and supervision of Authority were legally allotted to the petitioners as such it was their property, and they were fully entitled to take benefits out of their property by raising construction over it as it was their fundamental right enshrined under the AJ&K_ Interim Constitution Act, 1974. It was further submitted LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y that they could not be precluded to make use of their property being their fundamental right unless it was barred by a law suggesting to' do so. The learned counsel contended that the petitioners were aggrieved persons because they were restrained to raise construction over their property by the respondent No.1 without any lawful authority. Therefore, appropriate writ could be issued for enforcement of their fundamental might conferred by the Constitution. It was further argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that Pearl Development Authority was the outcome of a legislation known as “The Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993” and the public house scheme Rawalakot was handed over by the Works Department to the Authority through a Government notification therefore, under the proviso to section 11 of the Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993 (hereinafter shall be called as Act) and subsection (2) of section 11 of the Act, the Authority was competent to issue interim development orders for areas for which master-plan is being contemplated or is under preparation and restrict or prohibit by general or special order any change in the use of land and alteration in buildings, structures and installations. The Authority, according to the learned counsel, Wis further authorized to make additions and alterations as per actual requirements on the approved master plan. The Authority was also competent to enter into an agreement with any person for the acquisition, purchase, lease or exchange /Of any land which the Authority is authorized to acquire, or has any interest in such land. Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the Authority entered MTO an agreement with the petitioners or their father as the case may be through negotiation consequently, the said link road instead of its straight position passing through the plots was changed parallel to the plots allotted to the petitioners. This act of the Authority was permissible under the relevant law therefore, the -construction over the said plots did not offend any provisions of law, -the learned counsel main tamed. The learned counsel while elaborating his wise, further maintained that section 31 the-Act authorized the Authority to retain, lease out, exchange, rent-out or otherwise transfer, any land vested in it subject to such terms and conditions as it may impose in this behalf It was also the argument on the part of the learned counsel that Authority. was also competent notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being MN force, to issue a certificate of title in respect of any lease, sale, exchange or transfer of any piece of land within specified areas and such certificate is admissible in evidence in view of subsection 2 of section 31. The plots were allotted to the petitioners by TB,e allotment committee under law therefore, the petitioners could not be deprived of their use under the Constitutional guarantee in shape of protection of fundamental rights, the learned counsel argued. The learned counsel relied upon a case-LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y law titled “Administrator Municipal Committee and others v. Mumbai Ali and others 2001 SCR 263 in support of his argument and contended that the Act known as “The Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993” being a special law overrode the general law know as “The AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984’. Thus, the provisions of the aforesaid Ordinance being a general law were not applicable while deal mg with the matter under the jurisdiction of Pearl Development Authority available to it through a special law. 5. Conversely, the learned counsel representing respondents Nos.] and 2 contended that the present writ petition was not tamable MN its present form because the petitioners failed to imp lead AI&K Government and Highways Department being necessary party. It was further argued by him that the petitioners were nightly stopped to raise construction over the plots because the respondents Nos.] and 2 were competent to do so under Schedule 5th of “The AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984”. It was further submitted by him that Municipal Committee BMG competent authority had drawn a Master-plan for the municipal area and had approved the same thus, the corporation was competent to impose any restriction upon any activity within municipal area violating any provision of law known as “The AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984”. Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the erection of building by the petitioners being within Master-plan area could be restrained as such the action of respondent No. when seen in view of powers available to him under Local Government Ordinance deserved to be held a valid action. It was also the arguments on the part of learned counsel for the respondents Nos. and 2 that an alternate and efficacious remedy was available to the petitioners therefore, without exhausting the same the extraordinary jurisdiction available to this Court could not be invoked by the petitioners. He while supporting his argument on different grounds relied upon case-laws 2003 SCR 74 and 1999 MLD 1549 which deal with the question of non-implement of necessary party and perpetuation of an illegal order. The learned counsel went on submitting that even if, the report of a commission apported by this Court on the joint request of the parties to ascertain the fact whether the construction was being raised within 40 feet on either side of main-road leading to Mung 1s accepted to be correct, the Ink road was likely to be effected by the act of the petitioners as it was included in the definition of Highways as provided ' under section 2 of West Pakistan Highways Ordinance; 1959 adopted in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the respondent No.l was competent under AJ&K_ Local Government Ordinance to restrict the petitioners from raising construction over the said WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y plots likely to effect the link road leading from main-road to District Courts, Rawalakot. The learned counsel also contended that the Authority was bound to act in accordance with Master-plan, according to which the plots allegedly allotted to the petitioners did not figure anywhere in the plan so, the order or any direction by or on behalf of Authority to raise construction was not warranted by law as such the same was immaterial MN relation to the case of the petitioners. He relied upon case-law 2000 MLD 1305 while addressing the argument, f 6. After having examined the facts of the mutant ease and the law cited at Bar by the respective counsel, the case-law 2000 CLC 1762 was selected to resolve the controversy and I respectfully subscribe to the view taken by the full Bench of Honorable Supreme Court AJ&K. The other case-law relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents when examined was not found helpful in resolving the controversy between the respective parties. Before conclusion, the observation of the learned Judges m the Supreme Court is reproduced as under:- “We have given due consideration to the questions in the light of the arguments advanced at Bar. It may be pointed out that the AJ&K Murmur Development Authority Ordinance, 1974, is a special statute which deals with a specified area, 1¢. commonly known as Mirror Town. The perusal of the aforesaid Ordinance reveals that before its amendment in the year 1984, the Mirror Development Authority was the role Authority to prepare development schemes etc. and the Municipal Committee had limited powers which were subject to the approval of the Mirror Development Authority, as is evident from the provisions contained in sections 12, 16 and 19 of the Ordinance of 1974. It is important to point out here that despite the said amendment, the aforesaid sections were not amended and remained as before. Thus, the aforesaid powers of the Municipal Committee remained limited even after the amendment. After handing over of CERTAM area to the Municipal Committee by virtue of aforesaid amendment and the Government notification the powers of the Municipal Committee regarding said area are circumscribed by the amended provisions of section 3 of the Ordinance of 1974 and the notification dated 14-2-1985. Thus, it can be said that after handing over the control of CERTAM area to the Municipal Committee, it would have all those powers which vested in the Mirror Development Authority; the handing over the control of certain area would not automatically invest the Municipal Committee with the powers which were available to the Mirror Development Authority because no such provision has been made in the amendment Ordinance of 1974. The other statute which deals with the powers of Municipal Committee is the Local Government Act, 1990. It may be pointed out that the said Act is not specifically meant for the Mirror Town but deals with all the local bodies, WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y including the other Town Committees and the Corporations of the State. In other words the provisions contained in the aforesaid Act would be operative in relation to Mirror Town subject to the amended Ordinance of 1974 which is a special law meant for the development etc. of the town. It is well-settled principle of law that when there are more than one statute dealing with the same subject-matter, the provision contained in the special statute would prevail against the provisions of a general statute on the same subject. Thus, the powers which the Municipal Committee would enjoy in the relation to the area which was handed over to it after the amendment of 1984 and the notification of 1985, are to be judged in view of provision contamed in the amended Ordinance of 1974 rather than the general provisions contained in Local Government Act, 1990. However, if a particular situation is not covered by the amended Ordinance of 1974, the provisions contained in the Local Government Act, 1990 would be applicable to such situation, provided they do not offend against the provisions contamed in the Ordinance of 1974. For elucidating the matter, it would be expedient here to reproduce below the amended section 3 of Ordinance of 1974:- (1) The Government may, from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette, declare any part or parts of Mirror District to be specified Areas. (2) (a) That the Mirror Development Authority shall transfer the already developed areas of the Mirror Town to the Municipal Committee on such terms, and conditions as agreed upon by the Mirror Development Authority and the Municipal Committee Mirror. (b) In case any dispute arises between Mirror Development Authority and Municipal Committee Mirror the matter shall be referred to the Government whose decision shall be final. (3) The terms and conditions of the transfer shall be notified by the Government in the Government Gazette. (4) All the powers of allotment, cancellation, transfer of proprietary rights and other matters in these areas shall vest with the Municipal Committee after compliance with (2) and (3) alcove. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or on any other law any such notification as aforesaid may be made so as to be retrospective to any day not earlier than the first day of June 1974, an 7. The perusal of above judgment of Honorable Supreme Court, it may be observed that “The Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993” is a special WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y law. The Authority known as Pearl Development Authority is the outcome of the aforesaid Act. The powers and jurisdiction of the said Authority are provided in the said Act. The public housing scheme Rawalakot was handed over to the said Authority by the Works Department through a Government notification. The respondents are justifying their action while resort mg to different provisions of law known as the AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984 which is a general law extends to whole of Azad Jammu and Kashmir. On the other hand, the petitioners justifying the raising of construction upon the plots while having reference to the different provisions of law known as the Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993 which is a special law governing the matter regarding public housing scheme Rawalakot. It is well-settled principle of law that when there are more than one statute's dealing with the same subject the provisions contained in t/ie special statute would prevail against the provisions of a general statute on the same subject. The present case when tested on the touchstone of the above settled principle of law suggested saying that the respondents are not legally competent to interfere into the proposed construction over the plots allotted to the petitioners. The reasons being that Authority under sections 11, 12, and 31 of the Act is authorized to issue term development orders for areas for which Master-plan is beg contemplated or is under preparation by the general or special order or any change in the use of land and alteration in buildings, structures and installations. The Authority is also competent to make necessary additions and alterations as per actual requirements in the approved master-plan. The Authority is further authorized to enter into an agreement with any person for the acquisition, purchase, lease or exchange of any land which the Authority is authorized to acquire or has any interest MN such land under sections 11 and 12 of the Act. Likewise, under section 31 which deals with powers of the Authority to dispose of the land authorized the Authority to retain, lease, exchange, rent out or transfer any land vested in it, subject to such terms and conditions as it may impose in this behalf. The Authority is competent to issue any certificate regarding title in respect of any lease, sale, exchange or transfer of any piece of land within specified areas and such certificate shall be admissible in evidence of the title in any Court proceedings as envisaged in subsection (2) of section 31. These powers of the Authority are unqualified. Here in this case, the master-plan prepared for the development of public house scheme Rawalakot brought on record at the request of respondents shows the availability and marking of the plots of the petitioners. The learned counsel for the respondents while submitting another master-plan prepared by the Municipal Corporation, Rawalakot argued that the disputed plots did not figure in the master-plan nevertheless the fact remains that the plots figured in LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the master-plan relevant for development of housing scheme at Rawalakot. The master-plan relied upon by the respondents is not relevant in this case. It is not disputed by the respondents that the area where the disputed plots exist belongs to Pearl Development Authority. The public housing scheme Rawalakot has been handed over to the Authority through a Government notification. The record made available to this Court satisfactorily proved the controversy arising out between the parties finds its place within the jurisdictional competence of the Authority. The area specified for housing scheme under the control and supervision of Authority is yet to be handed over to any other body or institution including Municipal Corporation Rawalakot. Under law, unless the housing scheme or any area fall mg within the A jurisdiction of the Authority is handed over to Municipal Corporation through Government notification, the law available under AJ&K Local Government Ordinance and resorted to by the respondents is not applicable. The position therefore, which emerges out is that the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation n presence of special law governing the matters of public housing scheme of the Rawalakot does not extend to preclude any action permissible under special law dealing with the matter falling under the jurisdiction of the Authority. It is for the Authority to supervise the matter arising under its jurisdiction and if any violation is being made, a legal action can only be taken by the Authority. The Authority as stated earlier has time and again"declared that no violation of law by the proposed construction was BMG made therefore, the action of respondent No.l] or 2 as the case may be, is without lawful authority which cannot be allowed to continue. 8. The objection regarding maintainability of the present wait petition on the ground of non- implement of AJ&K Government as party was also considered in the light of facts and law. This objection in the opinion of this Court is misconceived because the Government in the instant case is not a necessary party. Necessary party is the party in whose absence the writ or decree of the Court is not effective. As the respondent No.] is found to have exercised its authority without a legal sanction therefore, the respondents Nos.] and 2 being legal persons in view of section 44(C) of “The AJ&K_ Interim Constitution Act, 1974” could be restrained to take such action as they preclude the petitioners from enjoying benefits of their property. Moreover, it is not the case of the respondents that they were taking action against the petitioners on the direction or order of the Government. The precedent case titled “Muhammad Kamal Khan v. Forest Department” decided on 15-1- 2002 by this Court is not relevant in this case for it pertains to Crown land admittedly a WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Government property. The Government therefore, was rightly held as necessary party in that case. AB 9. Coming to the post of perpetuation 3f an illegal order, it may be observed that he orders of allotment of plots are found to lave been made quite in accordance with aw and no infirmity or flaw is found in the allotment orders in favor of petitioner. The argument regarding use of bus or wagon stand for a couple of years under the management of Municipal Corporation was ISO seen in the light of record. This bushland is found to be a result of timely arrangement by the local administration having no legal sanction behind it. The Municipal Corporation has also shifted its bus or wagon stand to a separate place which is a undeniable foot therefore, a timely arrangement without a lawful authority cannot be allowed to defeat or frustrate the lawful action of an Authority. 10. Another objection was raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioners failed to imp lead Highways Department as party in the present writ petition therefore, it was not maintainable in the eye of law. This objection also merits no consideration because neither the Highways Department raised any objection to the proposed construction, nor it is the case of the petitioners to issue any direction against Highways Department. Their case is confined only to issue direction to respondents Nos.1 and 2 to go by law. 11. The question of alternate remedy when considered in the light of case of the respective parties also appears to be relevant because here in this case there is no dispute between the Authority and Corporation for CERTAM area, but it is a dispute between the petitioners and respondents upon a construction work admittedly in the specified area of housing scheme still under the control and supervisions of Authority. 12. The result is that by allowing this petition, the respondents Nos.] and 2 are directed to stay the hands while interfering into the proposed construction. The petitioners are allowed to raise the construction keeping in view the requirement of by-laws of Pearl Development Authority and the Highways Act. Petition allowed. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): Through this Constitutional petition, the petitioners seek writ of prohibition against official respondents Nos.l and 2 from passing adverse order and deployment of police force to rest ram them from raising construction over their plots allotted to them by Pearl Development Authority as the respondent No.1] is dog so without any lawful authority. 2. The relevant facts as narrated in the writ petition itself necessary for disposal of the instant writ petition are that Plot No.D-3 situated MN the housing scheme was initially allotted to Mr. Khalid Shankar however, the same was transferred to Muhammad AIF petitioner No.l] as it appears from Annexure A. Plot No.D-4 situated in the same housing scheme was allotted to petitioner No.2, Muhammad Asia by the allotment committee Beng Competent Authority as it is evident from Annexure A/1. The petitioners started raising construction over the said plots upon which Administrator Municipal Committee, Walkout stopped the construction raising present controversy. The petitioners asked the Administrator to show as to how and under what authority of law he was restraining them to raise construction over their property consequently, the Administrator had correspondence with Pearl Development Authority resultantly the said authority informed the Administrator Municipal Committee that Plots bear mg Nos.D-3 and D-4 were allotted to the petitioners in accordance with law, and they were bound to raise construction over the plots within two years as required by housing scheme by-laws. The plots, according to Pearl Development Authority (hereafter shall be referred as Authority) were marked therefore, the petitioners were right to raise construction over the said plots and any other body or authority had no jurisdiction to interfere into the construction allowed to be raised under the direction of Authority, as it appears from Annexure-C. However, the Administrator continued obstruction into construction work consequently, another letter issued by Pearl Development Authority Annexure-C/1 was addressed to the Administrator that the Public Housing Scheme, Rawalakot was a scheme approved by the Government and its planning had also been approved by the Government. Plots Nos.D-3 and D-4 were duly marked. The service road passing along with Plot No.D-4 was also under the jurisdiction of the Authority therefore, by-laws of the Authority were fully applicable to it. The disputed work was going to be carried out in accordance with approved planning as such no other institution Or person was entitled to encroach into the jurisdiction of the Authority. The Authority asked the Administrator to desist from stopping the petitioners to raise WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y construction as it was the legal right to raise construction over the plots allotted to them in accordance with law. Despite all that the dispute continued between the petitioners and Administrator, Municipal Committee, Rawalakot. The petitioners approached P.D.A. to resolve the controversy so that they could raise construction over their property. On the request of the petitioners, the Chairman of the Authority wrote a letter to Deputy Commissioner, Pooch Annexed wherein it was disclosed that different Public Housing Schemes were launched at Muzaffarabad and Rawalakot in the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): P.D.A. to resolve the controversy so that they could raise construction over their property. On the request of the petitioners, the Chairman of the Authority wrote a letter to Deputy Commissioner, Pooch Annexed wherein it was disclosed that different Public Housing Schemes were launched at Muzaffarabad and Rawalakot in the year 1978-79. These schemes were initially launched through Public Works Department as a result an area Inked with main Bazaar Rawalakot towards Shark Road was acquired by the Government through an award and after doing so, the land acquired was transferred to the Works Department. The said department after planning under rules marked the plots and consequently, the same were transferred to different applicants under rules. However, the area immediately Inked with ma'am Bazaar remained under the possession of owners of the land as they did not hand over the possession to the department consequently, the plots marked according to planning could not be handed over to the allottees in time. Meanwhile, due to heavy traffic the Works Department keeping in view the timely requirement constructed a link-road which lead from main road towards District Courts so as to provide alternative road to minimize the traffic load. This Ink-road was constructed over awarded area on the temporary basis. After coming into existence of Pearl Development Authority, the Housing Scheme was handed over to the Authority by the Public Works Department through a Government notification. Consequent upon, the Authority negotiated with owners of the land acquired by the Government who did not hand over the possession of the land and as a result of it, the Authority took over the possession of the area. Mr. Mir Muhammad Khan a retired army officer was one of the cases who negotiated with the Authority and entered MTO a deal with the same. As a result of the deal between the said person and the Authority, two plots were decided to be allotted to him. The afore-mentioned link-road was passing through plots decided to be allotted to Mir Muhammad Khan (father of the petitioners) at the time when the parties entered MTO a deal. The said person through an application requested the Authority to transfer the Inroad in accordance with plan upon which the link-road was transferred parallel to the plots instead of its straight position passing through the plots. A photo-copy of the plan was also shown to the Deputy Commissioner, according to which this link road measuring 20 feet in its width is shown passing through another plot owned by LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the same person. It was also disclosed in the said letter that no violation of Highway Act was found by raising construction over the said plots because an area measuring 40 feet on either side of the railroad had been left out for traffic purpose. The Chairman of the Authority requested the Deputy Commissioner that no obstruction should be allowed while raising construction over the said plots as the same was quite in J accordance with approved plan of housing

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): 40 feet on either side of the railroad had been left out for traffic purpose. The Chairman of the Authority requested the Deputy Commissioner that no obstruction should be allowed while raising construction over the said plots as the same was quite in J accordance with approved plan of housing scheme and the plots were legally allotted to the petitioners. It was further disclosed in the same letter that bus/wagon stand was also the ownership of the Authority therefore, bus/wagon stand was required to be transferred so that the possession could be handed over to different allottees. A certificate showing allotment of plots bearing Nos.D-1, D-2, D-3 and D-4 to have been included in the awarded land for housing scheme Annexed/1 has also been placed on record. Through the said certificate it is declared by the Authority that the housings theme is yet to be handed over to any department or institution. 3. After filing of the present writ petition, the respondents were, asked to submit their parawise comments, consequently the respondent did so. The respondent Authority through its comments submitted that the plots bear mg Nos.D-3 and D-4, situated in public housing scheme Rawalakot were legally allotted to the petitioners. The petitioners being allottees of the said plots had also constructed an alternative Ink road 20 feet in its width per agreement with the Authority therefore, the construction over the said plots caused no damage to the Ink road neither the Authority restarted them nor raised any objection to the disputed construction. Respondent No.2 filed no comments however, respondent No.] Administrator, Municipal Corporation raised different objections in view of the powers and jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation envisaged under “The AJ&K Local Government Act’. Later on, respondent No.3 requested the Court to treat the comments as written statement on behalf of Authority whereas respondent No.1 filed his written statement. raising same objections as were available on the file in shape of comments by him. 4. The learned counsel for the petitioners argued that Plots bear mg Nos.D- 3 and D-4 situated in public house scheme under the control and supervision of Authority were legally allotted to the petitioners as such it was their property, and they were fully entitled to take benefits out of their property by raising construction over it as it was their fundamental right enshrined under the AJ&K_ Interim Constitution Act, 1974. It was further submitted LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y that they could not be precluded to make use of their property being their fundamental right unless it was barred by a law suggesting to' do so. The learned counsel contended that the petitioners were aggrieved persons because they were restrained to raise construction over their property by the respondent No.1 without any lawful authority. Therefore, appropriate writ could be issued for enforcement of their fundamental might conferred by the Constitution. It was further argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that Pearl Development Authority was the outcome of a legislation known as “The Pearl Development Authority Act,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): respondent No.1 without any lawful authority. Therefore, appropriate writ could be issued for enforcement of their fundamental might conferred by the Constitution. It was further argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that Pearl Development Authority was the outcome of a legislation known as “The Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993” and the public house scheme Rawalakot was handed over by the Works Department to the Authority through a Government notification therefore, under the proviso to section 11 of the Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993 (hereinafter shall be called as Act) and subsection (2) of section 11 of the Act, the Authority was competent to issue interim development orders for areas for which master-plan is being contemplated or is under preparation and restrict or prohibit by general or special order any change in the use of land and alteration in buildings, structures and installations. The Authority, according to the learned counsel, Wis further authorized to make additions and alterations as per actual requirements on the approved master plan. The Authority was also competent to enter into an agreement with any person for the acquisition, purchase, lease or exchange /Of any land which the Authority is authorized to acquire, or has any interest in such land. Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the Authority entered MTO an agreement with the petitioners or their father as the case may be through negotiation consequently, the said link road instead of its straight position passing through the plots was changed parallel to the plots allotted to the petitioners. This act of the Authority was permissible under the relevant law therefore, the -construction over the said plots did not offend any provisions of law, -the learned counsel main tamed. The learned counsel while elaborating his wise, further maintained that section 31 the-Act authorized the Authority to retain, lease out, exchange, rent-out or otherwise transfer, any land vested in it subject to such terms and conditions as it may impose in this behalf It was also the argument on the part of the learned counsel that Authority. was also competent notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being MN force, to issue a certificate of title in respect of any lease, sale, exchange or transfer of any piece of land within specified areas and such certificate is admissible in evidence in view of subsection 2 of section 31. The plots were allotted to the petitioners by TB,e allotment committee under law therefore, the petitioners could not be deprived of their use under the Constitutional guarantee in shape of protection of fundamental rights, the learned counsel argued. The learned counsel relied upon a case-LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y law titled “Administrator Municipal Committee and others v. Mumbai Ali and others 2001 SCR 263 in support of his argument and contended that the Act known as “The Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993” being a special law overrode the general law know as “The AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984’. Thus, the provisions of the aforesaid Ordinance being a general

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): Ali and others 2001 SCR 263 in support of his argument and contended that the Act known as “The Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993” being a special law overrode the general law know as “The AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984’. Thus, the provisions of the aforesaid Ordinance being a general law were not applicable while deal mg with the matter under the jurisdiction of Pearl Development Authority available to it through a special law. 5. Conversely, the learned counsel representing respondents Nos.] and 2 contended that the present writ petition was not tamable MN its present form because the petitioners failed to imp lead AI&K Government and Highways Department being necessary party. It was further argued by him that the petitioners were nightly stopped to raise construction over the plots because the respondents Nos.] and 2 were competent to do so under Schedule 5th of “The AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984”. It was further submitted by him that Municipal Committee BMG competent authority had drawn a Master-plan for the municipal area and had approved the same thus, the corporation was competent to impose any restriction upon any activity within municipal area violating any provision of law known as “The AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984”. Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the erection of building by the petitioners being within Master-plan area could be restrained as such the action of respondent No. when seen in view of powers available to him under Local Government Ordinance deserved to be held a valid action. It was also the arguments on the part of learned counsel for the respondents Nos. and 2 that an alternate and efficacious remedy was available to the petitioners therefore, without exhausting the same the extraordinary jurisdiction available to this Court could not be invoked by the petitioners. He while supporting his argument on different grounds relied upon case-laws 2003 SCR 74 and 1999 MLD 1549 which deal with the question of non-implement of necessary party and perpetuation of an illegal order. The learned counsel went on submitting that even if, the report of a commission apported by this Court on the joint request of the parties to ascertain the fact whether the construction was being raised within 40 feet on either side of main-road leading to Mung 1s accepted to be correct, the Ink road was likely to be effected by the act of the petitioners as it was included in the definition of Highways as provided ' under section 2 of West Pakistan Highways Ordinance; 1959 adopted in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the respondent No.l was competent under AJ&K_ Local Government Ordinance to restrict the petitioners from raising construction over the said WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y plots likely to effect the link road leading from main-road to District Courts, Rawalakot. The learned counsel also contended that the Authority was bound to act in accordance with Master-plan, according to which the plots allegedly allotted to the petitioners did not figure anywhere in the plan

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y plots likely to effect the link road leading from main-road to District Courts, Rawalakot. The learned counsel also contended that the Authority was bound to act in accordance with Master-plan, according to which the plots allegedly allotted to the petitioners did not figure anywhere in the plan so, the order or any direction by or on behalf of Authority to raise construction was not warranted by law as such the same was immaterial MN relation to the case of the petitioners. He relied upon case-law 2000 MLD 1305 while addressing the argument, f 6. After having examined the facts of the mutant ease and the law cited at Bar by the respective counsel, the case-law 2000 CLC 1762 was selected to resolve the controversy and I respectfully subscribe to the view taken by the full Bench of Honorable Supreme Court AJ&K. The other case-law relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents when examined was not found helpful in resolving the controversy between the respective parties. Before conclusion, the observation of the learned Judges m the Supreme Court is reproduced as under:- “We have given due consideration to the questions in the light of the arguments advanced at Bar. It may be pointed out that the AJ&K Murmur Development Authority Ordinance, 1974, is a special statute which deals with a specified area, 1¢. commonly known as Mirror Town. The perusal of the aforesaid Ordinance reveals that before its amendment in the year 1984, the Mirror Development Authority was the role Authority to prepare development schemes etc. and the Municipal Committee had limited powers which were subject to the approval of the Mirror Development Authority, as is evident from the provisions contained in sections 12, 16 and 19 of the Ordinance of 1974. It is important to point out here that despite the said amendment, the aforesaid sections were not amended and remained as before. Thus, the aforesaid powers of the Municipal Committee remained limited even after the amendment. After handing over of CERTAM area to the Municipal Committee by virtue of aforesaid amendment and the Government notification the powers of the Municipal Committee regarding said area are circumscribed by the amended provisions of section 3 of the Ordinance of 1974 and the notification dated 14-2-1985. Thus, it can be said that after handing over the control of CERTAM area to the Municipal Committee, it would have all those powers which vested in the Mirror Development Authority; the handing over the control of certain area would not automatically invest the Municipal Committee with the powers which were available to the Mirror Development Authority because no such provision has been made in the amendment Ordinance of 1974. The other statute which deals with the powers of Municipal Committee is the Local Government Act, 1990. It may be pointed out that the said Act is not specifically meant for the Mirror Town but deals with all the local bodies, WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y including the other Town Committees and the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): other statute which deals with the powers of Municipal Committee is the Local Government Act, 1990. It may be pointed out that the said Act is not specifically meant for the Mirror Town but deals with all the local bodies, WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y including the other Town Committees and the Corporations of the State. In other words the provisions contained in the aforesaid Act would be operative in relation to Mirror Town subject to the amended Ordinance of 1974 which is a special law meant for the development etc. of the town. It is well-settled principle of law that when there are more than one statute dealing with the same subject-matter, the provision contained in the special statute would prevail against the provisions of a general statute on the same subject. Thus, the powers which the Municipal Committee would enjoy in the relation to the area which was handed over to it after the amendment of 1984 and the notification of 1985, are to be judged in view of provision contamed in the amended Ordinance of 1974 rather than the general provisions contained in Local Government Act, 1990. However, if a particular situation is not covered by the amended Ordinance of 1974, the provisions contained in the Local Government Act, 1990 would be applicable to such situation, provided they do not offend against the provisions contamed in the Ordinance of 1974. For elucidating the matter, it would be expedient here to reproduce below the amended section 3 of Ordinance of 1974:- (1) The Government may, from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette, declare any part or parts of Mirror District to be specified Areas. (2) (a) That the Mirror Development Authority shall transfer the already developed areas of the Mirror Town to the Municipal Committee on such terms, and conditions as agreed upon by the Mirror Development Authority and the Municipal Committee Mirror. (b) In case any dispute arises between Mirror Development Authority and Municipal Committee Mirror the matter shall be referred to the Government whose decision shall be final. (3) The terms and conditions of the transfer shall be notified by the Government in the Government Gazette. (4) All the powers of allotment, cancellation, transfer of proprietary rights and other matters in these areas shall vest with the Municipal Committee after compliance with (2) and (3) alcove. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or on any other law any such notification as aforesaid may be made so as to be retrospective to any day not earlier than the first day of June 1974, an 7. The perusal of above judgment of Honorable Supreme Court, it may be observed that “The Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993” is a special WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y law. The Authority known as Pearl Development Authority is the outcome of the aforesaid Act. The powers and jurisdiction of the said Authority are provided in the said Act. The public housing scheme Rawalakot was handed over to the said Authority by the Works

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): is a special WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y law. The Authority known as Pearl Development Authority is the outcome of the aforesaid Act. The powers and jurisdiction of the said Authority are provided in the said Act. The public housing scheme Rawalakot was handed over to the said Authority by the Works Department through a Government notification. The respondents are justifying their action while resort mg to different provisions of law known as the AJ&K Local Government Ordinance, 1984 which is a general law extends to whole of Azad Jammu and Kashmir. On the other hand, the petitioners justifying the raising of construction upon the plots while having reference to the different provisions of law known as the Pearl Development Authority Act, 1993 which is a special law governing the matter regarding public housing scheme Rawalakot. It is well-settled principle of law that when there are more than one statute's dealing with the same subject the provisions contained in t/ie special statute would prevail against the provisions of a general statute on the same subject. The present case when tested on the touchstone of the above settled principle of law suggested saying that the respondents are not legally competent to interfere into the proposed construction over the plots allotted to the petitioners. The reasons being that Authority under sections 11, 12, and 31 of the Act is authorized to issue term development orders for areas for which Master-plan is beg contemplated or is under preparation by the general or special order or any change in the use of land and alteration in buildings, structures and installations. The Authority is also competent to make necessary additions and alterations as per actual requirements in the approved master-plan. The Authority is further authorized to enter into an agreement with any person for the acquisition, purchase, lease or exchange of any land which the Authority is authorized to acquire or has any interest MN such land under sections 11 and 12 of the Act. Likewise, under section 31 which deals with powers of the Authority to dispose of the land authorized the Authority to retain, lease, exchange, rent out or transfer any land vested in it, subject to such terms and conditions as it may impose in this behalf. The Authority is competent to issue any certificate regarding title in respect of any lease, sale, exchange or transfer of any piece of land within specified areas and such certificate shall be admissible in evidence of the title in any Court proceedings as envisaged in subsection (2) of section 31. These powers of the Authority are unqualified. Here in this case, the master-plan prepared for the development of public house scheme Rawalakot brought on record at the request of respondents shows the availability and marking of the plots of the petitioners. The learned counsel for the respondents while submitting another master-plan prepared by the Municipal Corporation, Rawalakot argued that the disputed plots did not figure in the master-plan nevertheless the fact remains that the plots figured in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): request of respondents shows the availability and marking of the plots of the petitioners. The learned counsel for the respondents while submitting another master-plan prepared by the Municipal Corporation, Rawalakot argued that the disputed plots did not figure in the master-plan nevertheless the fact remains that the plots figured in LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the master-plan relevant for development of housing scheme at Rawalakot. The master-plan relied upon by the respondents is not relevant in this case. It is not disputed by the respondents that the area where the disputed plots exist belongs to Pearl Development Authority. The public housing scheme Rawalakot has been handed over to the Authority through a Government notification. The record made available to this Court satisfactorily proved the controversy arising out between the parties finds its place within the jurisdictional competence of the Authority. The area specified for housing scheme under the control and supervision of Authority is yet to be handed over to any other body or institution including Municipal Corporation Rawalakot. Under law, unless the housing scheme or any area fall mg within the A jurisdiction of the Authority is handed over to Municipal Corporation through Government notification, the law available under AJ&K Local Government Ordinance and resorted to by the respondents is not applicable. The position therefore, which emerges out is that the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation n presence of special law governing the matters of public housing scheme of the Rawalakot does not extend to preclude any action permissible under special law dealing with the matter falling under the jurisdiction of the Authority. It is for the Authority to supervise the matter arising under its jurisdiction and if any violation is being made, a legal action can only be taken by the Authority. The Authority as stated earlier has time and again"declared that no violation of law by the proposed construction was BMG made therefore, the action of respondent No.l] or 2 as the case may be, is without lawful authority which cannot be allowed to continue. 8. The objection regarding maintainability of the present wait petition on the ground of non- implement of AJ&K Government as party was also considered in the light of facts and law. This objection in the opinion of this Court is misconceived because the Government in the instant case is not a necessary party. Necessary party is the party in whose absence the writ or decree of the Court is not effective. As the respondent No.] is found to have exercised its authority without a legal sanction therefore, the respondents Nos.] and 2 being legal persons in view of section 44(C) of “The AJ&K_ Interim Constitution Act, 1974” could be restrained to take such action as they preclude the petitioners from enjoying benefits of their property. Moreover, it is not the case of the respondents that they were taking action against the petitioners on the direction or order of the Government. The precedent case titled “Muhammad Kamal Khan v. Forest Department” decided on 15-1- 2002 by this

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1519?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1519 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-12-26): preclude the petitioners from enjoying benefits of their property. Moreover, it is not the case of the respondents that they were taking action against the petitioners on the direction or order of the Government. The precedent case titled “Muhammad Kamal Khan v. Forest Department” decided on 15-1- 2002 by this Court is not relevant in this case for it pertains to Crown land admittedly a WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Government property. The Government therefore, was rightly held as necessary party in that case. AB 9. Coming to the post of perpetuation 3f an illegal order, it may be observed that he orders of allotment of plots are found to lave been made quite in accordance with aw and no infirmity or flaw is found in the allotment orders in favor of petitioner. The argument regarding use of bus or wagon stand for a couple of years under the management of Municipal Corporation was ISO seen in the light of record. This bushland is found to be a result of timely arrangement by the local administration having no legal sanction behind it. The Municipal Corporation has also shifted its bus or wagon stand to a separate place which is a undeniable foot therefore, a timely arrangement without a lawful authority cannot be allowed to defeat or frustrate the lawful action of an Authority. 10. Another objection was raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioners failed to imp lead Highways Department as party in the present writ petition therefore, it was not maintainable in the eye of law. This objection also merits no consideration because neither the Highways Department raised any objection to the proposed construction, nor it is the case of the petitioners to issue any direction against Highways Department. Their case is confined only to issue direction to respondents Nos.1 and 2 to go by law. 11. The question of alternate remedy when considered in the light of case of the respective parties also appears to be relevant because here in this case there is no dispute between the Authority and Corporation for CERTAM area, but it is a dispute between the petitioners and respondents upon a construction work admittedly in the specified area of housing scheme still under the control and supervisions of Authority. 12. The result is that by allowing this petition, the respondents Nos.] and 2 are directed to stay the hands while interfering into the proposed construction. The petitioners are allowed to raise the construction keeping in view the requirement of by-laws of Pearl Development Authority and the Highways Act. Petition allowed. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2004 YLR 643 about?
Answer: Case 2004 YLR 643 was decided by SHARIAT COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2003-09-30. The case involved MUHAMMAD AKHLAQ AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS THE STATE AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 497 PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - B SS. 302/34 AND 460 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ACT, 1985 - S. 14 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 497 PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS. 302/34 AND 460 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ACT, E 1985 -S. 14. The case was heard by IFTIKHAR HUSSAIN BUTT.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 YLR 643?
Answer: In case 2004 YLR 643, the court applied the following statutes: CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 497 PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - B SS. 302/34 AND 460 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ACT, 1985 - S. 14 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 497 PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS. 302/34 AND 460 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ACT, E 1985 -S. 14. This case was heard in SHARIAT COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2003-09-30.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 YLR 643?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 YLR 643 were: . The judges presiding were: IFTIKHAR HUSSAIN BUTT.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 YLR 643?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 YLR 643 were: MUHAMMAD AKHLAQ AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS THE STATE AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SHARIAT COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 YLR 643.
Answer: single order dated 23-11-2002. It is the aforesaid order which has been assailed by the petitioners through two separate revision petitions. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Arguing on behalf of both the accused/petitioners, Vardar Must Hussain Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel argued with vehemence that the trial Court has committed an illegality while dismissing the second bail application of the accused/petitioners. The learned counsel has further contended that no ocular evidence is available in the present case, and it rests upon the circumstantial evidence, but the chain of the prosecution evidence is broken. The learned counsel also submitted that the identification parade was not held, which was necessary in this case under Article 22 of the QAnon-e-Shahadat Order because the culprits were not nominated in the F.I.R. The learned counsel pressed into service the submission that confessional statement of Muhammad Ashley accused under section 164, Cr.P.C. was recorded on oath after 20 days of his arrest, thus, not admissible in evidence and suffers from an illegality which cannot be cured and relied upon. The learned counsel for the petitioners maintained that another accused Ali Akbar has not yet been arrested and allegation of Zina has also not been proved against the petitioners. The learned counsel also argued that in the light of the prosecution evidence no offense is, prima facie, made out on the allegations against the petitioners, but the trial Court failed to appreciate that the evidence was not sufficient to connect them with the crime. The learned counsel pointed out that accused/petitioners have not been convicted before, who are detained since year 1999 but the trial Court has exercised its discretion in an illegal and arbitrary manner, which is not sustainable. In support of his contentions, the learned counsel has cited the following authorities:- (1) 1990 PCR.LJ 46. (2) (3) (4) G) (6) 1) 1995 SCR 104. 1996 PCR.LJ 1970. 1997 SCMR 971. 2002 PCI 107. 2002 SCR 450. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 2003 PCR.LJ 758. While controverting the arguments by the learned counsel for the raised accused/petitioners, Vardar Abdul Hamid Khan, Advocate, remained counsel for the complainant has zealously argued that Muhammad Ashley, accused/petitioner has not challenged the order of this Court dated 31-8-2000 before the apex Court, which has attained finality, therefore, he is now debarred from raising the same points again. The learned counsel further argued that the perusal of the prosecution evidence recorded by the trial Court and the remaining evidence which prosecution intends to produce at the trial, makes it clear that no fresh ground is available to the accused/petitioners. The learned counsel posted out that the trial Court is yet to record the important evidence of recovery and other material evidence which, prima facie, implicate the accused/petitioners with the commission of crime. The learned counsel maintained that the complaint party or the prosecution witnesses have no animus with the accused/petitioners, therefore, the question of false implication does not arise. The learned counsel has maintained that at the bail stage a Court is not permitted to dive deep into the merits of the case, but it always summarily assess the material collected by the prosecution for the purpose of recording a reasonable conclusion with regard to the involvement of the accused in the offense alleged, but it transpires from the cursory perusal of the prosecution evidence that the accused/ petitioners can safely be connected with the commission of offense charged with. He defended the impugned order on all counts. Raja Mumbai Hussain Kiang, the learned Additional Advocate-General, appearing on behalf of the State, has fully owned and supported the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the complainant. I have carefully taken into consideration the points canvassed by the learned counsel for the parties, after perusing the record made available with care. At the very outset, it all be relevant to note that at bail stage it is neither permissible nor desirable to make deeper appreciation or minute study of the evidence available on record. The Courts are only expected to make a tentative assessment of the evidence either recorded by the Court or by the police under section 161, CRP.C. and the other material collected by the investigating agency and after applying its judicial mind arrive at the conclusion whether in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, reasonable A grounds do exist to connect LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the accused with the commission of offense or not. If reasonable grounds are available and an accused/person is, prima facie, implicated in the commission of an offense punishable with death or imprisonment for life, then the concession of bail cannot be granted to an accused. Let me first deal with the case of It will not be proper for me to Muhammad Ashley, accused who has already approached this Court once before, but his revision petition was dismissed vide order dated 31-8-2000. The perusal of his first bail application filed before the trial Court, the revision petition presented before this Court and the order dated 31-8- 2000 recorded by this Court, reveal that the petitioner has already taken and exhausted all the grounds before this Court which he has agitated in the instant petition, therefore, no fresh ground is available to Muhammad Ashley, accused of grant of bail. After disposal of the revision petition by this Court, the trial Court has recorded the evidence of Muhammad Bashir (P.W.2), Muhammad Amir (P.W.3), MST. Share (P.W.6), MST. Praveen (P.W.7), Antique-ur-Rehman (P.W. 14), Via-ur-Rehman (P.W. 15) and Muhammad Ishtar (P.W. 16) whereas the prosecution has abandoned the P. Ws.8 to 13 and 21. In this manner, the evidence of P. Ws. 17 to 20 and 20 to 41 is yet to be recorded which includes 12 witnesses of recovery and the Investigating Officer along with Magistrates, who have recorded the confessional statements of the petitioners under section 164, Cr.P.C. It transpires from the tentative sifting of the prosecution evidence recorded by the trial Court and the prosecution evidence which it tends to produce at the trial that tangible evidence is available against the accused/petitioners, which, if left unrebutted, may not lead to the inference of acquittal, thus, reasonable grounds to disclose the commission of alleged offense are available in the instant case. determine the metricate legal questions of the case because it may damage the case of the prosecution or the defense. The accused/petitioners are involved in heinous offenses like rape, murder and Arab. The nature of the allegation against them is that they raped a woman, murdered her and took away cash and other valuable articles which were recovered at the rotation coupled with the confessional statements recorded under section 164, Cr.P.C. In such-like cases, the normal rule is the refusal to grant bail. In this manner, the trial Court has exercised its discretion with due care and caution, which does LRV/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y not smack of any arbitrary determination or whimsical thinking, thus, does not warrant any interference by this Court. So far as the case-law referred to by the learned counsel for the petitioners is concerned, have circumstances not identical with the one available in the present case and, therefore, are distinguishable. Even otherwise law in a particular case especially in bail matters has small applicability to the facts of other cases. C Bail refused Lev/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 643?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 643 (SHARIAT COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-09-30): single order dated 23-11-2002. It is the aforesaid order which has been assailed by the petitioners through two separate revision petitions. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Arguing on behalf of both the accused/petitioners, Vardar Must Hussain Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel argued with vehemence that the trial Court has committed an illegality while dismissing the second bail application of the accused/petitioners. The learned counsel has further contended that no ocular evidence is available in the present case, and it rests upon the circumstantial evidence, but the chain of the prosecution evidence is broken. The learned counsel also submitted that the identification parade was not held, which was necessary in this case under Article 22 of the QAnon-e-Shahadat Order because the culprits were not nominated in the F.I.R. The learned counsel pressed into service the submission that confessional statement of Muhammad Ashley accused under section 164, Cr.P.C. was recorded on oath after 20 days of his arrest, thus, not admissible in evidence and suffers from an illegality which cannot be cured and relied upon. The learned counsel for the petitioners maintained that another accused Ali Akbar has not yet been arrested and allegation of Zina has also not been proved against the petitioners. The learned counsel also argued that in the light of the prosecution evidence no offense is, prima facie, made out on the allegations against the petitioners, but the trial Court failed to appreciate that the evidence was not sufficient to connect them with the crime. The learned counsel pointed out that accused/petitioners have not been convicted before, who are detained since year 1999 but the trial Court has exercised its discretion in an illegal and arbitrary manner, which is not sustainable. In support of his contentions, the learned counsel has cited the following authorities:- (1) 1990 PCR.LJ 46. (2) (3) (4) G) (6) 1) 1995 SCR 104. 1996 PCR.LJ 1970. 1997 SCMR 971. 2002 PCI 107. 2002 SCR 450. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 2003 PCR.LJ 758. While controverting the arguments by the learned counsel for the raised accused/petitioners, Vardar Abdul Hamid Khan, Advocate, remained counsel for the complainant has zealously argued that Muhammad Ashley, accused/petitioner has not challenged the order of this Court dated 31-8-2000 before the apex Court, which has attained finality, therefore, he is now debarred from raising the same points again. The learned counsel further argued that the perusal of the prosecution evidence recorded by the trial Court and the remaining evidence which prosecution intends to produce at the trial, makes it clear that no fresh ground is available to the accused/petitioners. The learned counsel posted out that the trial Court is yet to record the important evidence of recovery and other material evidence which, prima facie, implicate the accused/petitioners with the commission of crime. The learned counsel maintained that the complaint party or the prosecution witnesses have no animus with the accused/petitioners, therefore, the question of false implication does not arise. The learned counsel has maintained that at the bail stage a Court is not permitted to dive deep

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 643?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 643 (SHARIAT COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-09-30): with the commission of crime. The learned counsel maintained that the complaint party or the prosecution witnesses have no animus with the accused/petitioners, therefore, the question of false implication does not arise. The learned counsel has maintained that at the bail stage a Court is not permitted to dive deep into the merits of the case, but it always summarily assess the material collected by the prosecution for the purpose of recording a reasonable conclusion with regard to the involvement of the accused in the offense alleged, but it transpires from the cursory perusal of the prosecution evidence that the accused/ petitioners can safely be connected with the commission of offense charged with. He defended the impugned order on all counts. Raja Mumbai Hussain Kiang, the learned Additional Advocate-General, appearing on behalf of the State, has fully owned and supported the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the complainant. I have carefully taken into consideration the points canvassed by the learned counsel for the parties, after perusing the record made available with care. At the very outset, it all be relevant to note that at bail stage it is neither permissible nor desirable to make deeper appreciation or minute study of the evidence available on record. The Courts are only expected to make a tentative assessment of the evidence either recorded by the Court or by the police under section 161, CRP.C. and the other material collected by the investigating agency and after applying its judicial mind arrive at the conclusion whether in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, reasonable A grounds do exist to connect LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the accused with the commission of offense or not. If reasonable grounds are available and an accused/person is, prima facie, implicated in the commission of an offense punishable with death or imprisonment for life, then the concession of bail cannot be granted to an accused. Let me first deal with the case of It will not be proper for me to Muhammad Ashley, accused who has already approached this Court once before, but his revision petition was dismissed vide order dated 31-8-2000. The perusal of his first bail application filed before the trial Court, the revision petition presented before this Court and the order dated 31-8- 2000 recorded by this Court, reveal that the petitioner has already taken and exhausted all the grounds before this Court which he has agitated in the instant petition, therefore, no fresh ground is available to Muhammad Ashley, accused of grant of bail. After disposal of the revision petition by this Court, the trial Court has recorded the evidence of Muhammad Bashir (P.W.2), Muhammad Amir (P.W.3), MST. Share (P.W.6), MST. Praveen (P.W.7), Antique-ur-Rehman (P.W. 14), Via-ur-Rehman (P.W. 15) and Muhammad Ishtar (P.W. 16) whereas the prosecution has abandoned the P. Ws.8 to 13 and 21. In this manner, the evidence of P. Ws. 17 to 20 and 20 to 41 is yet to be recorded which includes 12 witnesses of recovery and the Investigating

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 643?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 643 (SHARIAT COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-09-30): 14), Via-ur-Rehman (P.W. 15) and Muhammad Ishtar (P.W. 16) whereas the prosecution has abandoned the P. Ws.8 to 13 and 21. In this manner, the evidence of P. Ws. 17 to 20 and 20 to 41 is yet to be recorded which includes 12 witnesses of recovery and the Investigating Officer along with Magistrates, who have recorded the confessional statements of the petitioners under section 164, Cr.P.C. It transpires from the tentative sifting of the prosecution evidence recorded by the trial Court and the prosecution evidence which it tends to produce at the trial that tangible evidence is available against the accused/petitioners, which, if left unrebutted, may not lead to the inference of acquittal, thus, reasonable grounds to disclose the commission of alleged offense are available in the instant case. determine the metricate legal questions of the case because it may damage the case of the prosecution or the defense. The accused/petitioners are involved in heinous offenses like rape, murder and Arab. The nature of the allegation against them is that they raped a woman, murdered her and took away cash and other valuable articles which were recovered at the rotation coupled with the confessional statements recorded under section 164, Cr.P.C. In such-like cases, the normal rule is the refusal to grant bail. In this manner, the trial Court has exercised its discretion with due care and caution, which does LRV/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y not smack of any arbitrary determination or whimsical thinking, thus, does not warrant any interference by this Court. So far as the case-law referred to by the learned counsel for the petitioners is concerned, have circumstances not identical with the one available in the present case and, therefore, are distinguishable. Even otherwise law in a particular case especially in bail matters has small applicability to the facts of other cases. C Bail refused Lev/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2004 YLR 531 about?
Answer: Case 2004 YLR 531 was decided by SHARIAT COURT OF AZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2003-09-13. The case involved ABDUL RAUF SHAH (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE STATE THROUGH ADVOCATE GENERALPUBLIC PROSECUTOR MUZAFFARABAD RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 339-A PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS. 302/460 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 17(4). The case was heard by SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILLANI, C J.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 YLR 531?
Answer: In case 2004 YLR 531, the court applied the following statutes: CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 339-A PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS. 302/460 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 17(4). This case was heard in SHARIAT COURT OF AZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2003-09-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 YLR 531?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 YLR 531 were: SYED MUJJAHID HUSSAIN NAQVI FOR PETITIONER. SYED MUHAMMAD TAYYAB GILLANT, A. A. G. FOR THE STATE.K.D. KHAN FOR THE COMPLAINANT.. The judges presiding were: SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILLANI, C J.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 YLR 531?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 YLR 531 were: ABDUL RAUF SHAH (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE STATE THROUGH ADVOCATE GENERALPUBLIC PROSECUTOR MUZAFFARABAD RESPONDENT. This case was heard in SHARIAT COURT OF AZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 YLR 531.
Answer: LRV/html_TXT/Y This revision petition is filed against the order passed by District Court of criminal jurisdiction Muzaffarabad on 28-5-2003, whereby the petitioner's request for acquittal under section 339-A, Cr.P.C. is disallowed. 1. The facts necessary for the disposal of this revision petition are that the petitioner was arrested in a case under F.I.R. No.265 of 2001 registered at Police Station City Muzaffarabad on 20-9-2002 in offenses under sections, A.P.C. and 17(4), E.H.O. He offered to become an approver in the case on which his statement under section 164, Cr.P.C. was recorded by Sub- Divisional Magistrate, Muzaffarabad on 2-9-2002 and the District Magistrate, Muzaffarabad tendered pardon to him vide his order dated 2-9- 2002. The petitioner thereafter got his statement recorded before the District Criminal Magistrate Muzaffarabad tendered pardon to him vide his order dated 2-9-2002. The petitioner thereafter got his statement recorded before the District Criminal Court, Muzaffarabad on 27-12-2002, and on 31-12-2002, he reaffirmed the earlier statement. He thereafter sent an application to the Court through jail authorities on 2-6-2003 stating that police forced him to make the confessional statement. He again sent an application from jail on 21-6-2003, residing from the application dated 2-6- 2003. 2. The learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner contended that as petitioner has fulfilled the requirements of section 337, Cr.P.C. hence he is entitled to be acquitted. The learned counsel referred subsection (2) of section 339-A contended that ITAs within the powers of the Court to acquit ~*an approver at any time after the trial begins if he admits and fulfils conditions of pardon. According to Advocate as the accused has fulfilled the conditions, he is entitled to be acquitted. The learned counsel placed reliance upon AIR 1938 PC 266, PLD 1956 FC 7 and AIR 1940 Nagpur Court 1977. 3. The learned Advocates appear mg for the State and complaint contended that the accused cannot be acquitted unless the trial of the case is concluded. They further contended that the accused has changed his position as is evident from his applications sent through Jail Authorities, hence he is not entitled to any concession. They also referred to a judgment of the Sharia Court dated 1-4-2003 whereby bail is refused to him. 4. After hearing the learned Advocates for the parties have gone through the record of the case, and law relied upon by the learned Advocates for the parties. LR/html_TXT/Y LRV/html_TXT/Y 5. The petitioner was disallowed bail by the Sharia Court vide its order dated 1-4-2003 on the ground that under subsection (3) of section 337, Cr.P.C. he is to remain in custody till determination of the trial The contention of the learned Advocate for the petitioner is that as the accused has admitted his earlier statement, and he has complied with the condition on which he was tendered pardon, hence he is entitled to be acquitted. The relevant provision on which the learned Advocate relies is as follows:- [339-A. Procedure in trial of person under section 339.-(1) The Court trying under section 339 a person who has accepted a tender of pardon shall, before the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is taken, ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied with the conditions on which the tender of the pardon was made. (2) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the trial, and shall, before judgment is passed in the case, find whether the accused has complied with the conditions of the pardon, and, if it is found that he has so complied, the Court shall, notwithstanding, anything contamed in this Code, pass judgment of acquittal. ] Irrespective of fact that the petitioner changed his position from the statement on the basis of which he was tendered pardon in view of his application dated 2-6-2003 filed through Jail Authorities, the section hereinbefore quoted does not entitle him to the relief he seeks. 7. Under subsection (2) of section 339-A, Cr.P.C. the approver is entitled to be acquitted before the final judgment is passed in the case, if the trial Court is satisfied that he has complied with the conditions on which he was tendered pardon and after the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is taken, not before that. 8. All the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure regulating trial of a criminal case till the stage of judgment have to be. Complied with and acted upon in accordance with that spirit even in such-like case as the approver is otherwise an accused who has accepted to become a witness of the occurrence against other accused persons being an accomplice MN the case. A 9. Under section 243, Cr.P.C. the Court is to take evidence of the prosecution and after examining him under section 342, Cr.P.C. pass an order of his acquittal or conviction as the case may be, under section 245, Cr.P.C. and pronounce the judgment under section 366, Cr.P.C. after the termination of the trial Same is the spirit of section 337(3) that the approver Is to be kept m detention until the termination of the trial. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 10. The approver remains an accused for all practical purpose till the trial is concluded in the case and he TS entitled to acquittal within the terms of section 339-A, Cr.P.C. before the final judgment in the case for the reason of his being approver, not for the reason that he is not guilty. 11. Hence, the trial Court has not committed any illegality in passing the D impugned order. The authorities of law referred by the learned. Advocate for the petitioner have no relevance in view of the facts of the present case. 12. In view of above, this revision petition is hereby dismissed. Revision petition dismissed. N.H.Q./58/Sh.C(AJ&K) LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 531?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 531 (SHARIAT COURT OF AZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-09-13): LRV/html_TXT/Y This revision petition is filed against the order passed by District Court of criminal jurisdiction Muzaffarabad on 28-5-2003, whereby the petitioner's request for acquittal under section 339-A, Cr.P.C. is disallowed. 1. The facts necessary for the disposal of this revision petition are that the petitioner was arrested in a case under F.I.R. No.265 of 2001 registered at Police Station City Muzaffarabad on 20-9-2002 in offenses under sections, A.P.C. and 17(4), E.H.O. He offered to become an approver in the case on which his statement under section 164, Cr.P.C. was recorded by Sub- Divisional Magistrate, Muzaffarabad on 2-9-2002 and the District Magistrate, Muzaffarabad tendered pardon to him vide his order dated 2-9- 2002. The petitioner thereafter got his statement recorded before the District Criminal Magistrate Muzaffarabad tendered pardon to him vide his order dated 2-9-2002. The petitioner thereafter got his statement recorded before the District Criminal Court, Muzaffarabad on 27-12-2002, and on 31-12-2002, he reaffirmed the earlier statement. He thereafter sent an application to the Court through jail authorities on 2-6-2003 stating that police forced him to make the confessional statement. He again sent an application from jail on 21-6-2003, residing from the application dated 2-6- 2003. 2. The learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner contended that as petitioner has fulfilled the requirements of section 337, Cr.P.C. hence he is entitled to be acquitted. The learned counsel referred subsection (2) of section 339-A contended that ITAs within the powers of the Court to acquit ~*an approver at any time after the trial begins if he admits and fulfils conditions of pardon. According to Advocate as the accused has fulfilled the conditions, he is entitled to be acquitted. The learned counsel placed reliance upon AIR 1938 PC 266, PLD 1956 FC 7 and AIR 1940 Nagpur Court 1977. 3. The learned Advocates appear mg for the State and complaint contended that the accused cannot be acquitted unless the trial of the case is concluded. They further contended that the accused has changed his position as is evident from his applications sent through Jail Authorities, hence he is not entitled to any concession. They also referred to a judgment of the Sharia Court dated 1-4-2003 whereby bail is refused to him. 4. After hearing the learned Advocates for the parties have gone through the record of the case, and law relied upon by the learned Advocates for the parties. LR/html_TXT/Y LRV/html_TXT/Y 5. The petitioner was disallowed bail by the Sharia Court vide its order dated 1-4-2003 on the ground that under subsection (3) of section 337, Cr.P.C. he is to remain in custody till determination of the trial The contention of the learned Advocate for the petitioner is that as the accused has admitted his earlier statement, and he has complied with the condition on which he was tendered pardon, hence he is entitled to be acquitted. The relevant provision on which the learned Advocate relies is as follows:- [339-A. Procedure in trial of person under section 339.-(1) The Court trying under

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 531?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 531 (SHARIAT COURT OF AZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-09-13): has admitted his earlier statement, and he has complied with the condition on which he was tendered pardon, hence he is entitled to be acquitted. The relevant provision on which the learned Advocate relies is as follows:- [339-A. Procedure in trial of person under section 339.-(1) The Court trying under section 339 a person who has accepted a tender of pardon shall, before the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is taken, ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied with the conditions on which the tender of the pardon was made. (2) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the trial, and shall, before judgment is passed in the case, find whether the accused has complied with the conditions of the pardon, and, if it is found that he has so complied, the Court shall, notwithstanding, anything contamed in this Code, pass judgment of acquittal. ] Irrespective of fact that the petitioner changed his position from the statement on the basis of which he was tendered pardon in view of his application dated 2-6-2003 filed through Jail Authorities, the section hereinbefore quoted does not entitle him to the relief he seeks. 7. Under subsection (2) of section 339-A, Cr.P.C. the approver is entitled to be acquitted before the final judgment is passed in the case, if the trial Court is satisfied that he has complied with the conditions on which he was tendered pardon and after the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is taken, not before that. 8. All the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure regulating trial of a criminal case till the stage of judgment have to be. Complied with and acted upon in accordance with that spirit even in such-like case as the approver is otherwise an accused who has accepted to become a witness of the occurrence against other accused persons being an accomplice MN the case. A 9. Under section 243, Cr.P.C. the Court is to take evidence of the prosecution and after examining him under section 342, Cr.P.C. pass an order of his acquittal or conviction as the case may be, under section 245, Cr.P.C. and pronounce the judgment under section 366, Cr.P.C. after the termination of the trial Same is the spirit of section 337(3) that the approver Is to be kept m detention until the termination of the trial. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 10. The approver remains an accused for all practical purpose till the trial is concluded in the case and he TS entitled to acquittal within the terms of section 339-A, Cr.P.C. before the final judgment in the case for the reason of his being approver, not for the reason that he is not guilty. 11. Hence, the trial Court has not committed any illegality in passing the D impugned order. The authorities of law referred by the learned. Advocate for the petitioner have no relevance in view of the facts of the present case. 12. In

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 531?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 531 (SHARIAT COURT OF AZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2003-09-13): for the reason that he is not guilty. 11. Hence, the trial Court has not committed any illegality in passing the D impugned order. The authorities of law referred by the learned. Advocate for the petitioner have no relevance in view of the facts of the present case. 12. In view of above, this revision petition is hereby dismissed. Revision petition dismissed. N.H.Q./58/Sh.C(AJ&K) LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2004 YLR 1592 about?
Answer: Case 2004 YLR 1592 was decided by FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT on 2003-09-22. The case involved AMJAD PERVEZ (APPELLANT) VERSUS THE STATE RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - SS. 17)19(1) PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - S. 397 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 7. The case was heard by CH. EJAZ YOUSAF, C.J. DR. FIDA MUHAMMAD KHAN AND SAEED-UR- REHMAN FARRUKH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2004 YLR 1592?
Answer: In case 2004 YLR 1592, the court applied the following statutes: OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - SS. 17)19(1) PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - S. 397 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 7. This case was heard in FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT and decided on 2003-09-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2004 YLR 1592?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2004 YLR 1592 were: MASOOD SHAHARYAR FOR APPELLANT. M. ARSHAD LODHI, ASSISTANT ADVOCATE-GENERAL FOR THE STATE.. The judges presiding were: CH. EJAZ YOUSAF, C.J. DR. FIDA MUHAMMAD KHAN AND SAEED-UR- REHMAN FARRUKH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2004 YLR 1592?
Answer: The parties in case 2004 YLR 1592 were: AMJAD PERVEZ (APPELLANT) VERSUS THE STATE RESPONDENT. This case was heard in FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2004 YLR 1592.
Answer: LR/html_TXT/Y DR. FIDA MUHAMMAD KHAN, J.-This appeal fed by Ahead Perez son of Main Khan is directed against the judgment dated 16-4- 2002 passed by learned With Additional Sessions Judge, Karachi South whereby he has convicted him under section 17(3) of Offenses Against Property Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, hereafter referred to as the Ordinance, and has awarded him the sentence of amputation of his right hand from the wrist. 2. Briefly stated facts of the prosecution case as revealed in F.I.R. lodged by Muhammad Rican son of Muhammad Ilyas on 2-3- 1998 at about 1715 hours at Napier Police Station, Karachi South, is to the effect that on the same day when the complaint along with businessmen Noor Muhammad and Iqbal Rathole was present in his shop, situated at Muhammad Shah Street, June Market, Karachi, one accused, duly armed, entered their and asked everybody to remain where he was and snatched Rs.65000 from the complainant, Rs. 100000 from Noor Muhammad, dealer and Rs.30,000 from Iqbal Rathole. In the meanwhile his other co- accused whose name was afterward disclosed as Ahead Perez entered the shop and hitting him on his head asked him to hand over whatsoever was in his possession. He also took out of drawers from the table and threw them across. Three other co- accused were standing on guard. Extending them threat not to make any noise, the accused went out and fled away. The complainant added that they had already looted Iraq Ahmad, owner of the adjacent shop, a sum of Rs.20,000. Thereafter, the complaint and other people who gathered over there raised alarm and started chasing the accused up to Muhammad Shah Street. Thereupon the accused fired in the area which attracted In charge of Police Station, Napier who was on a mobile vehicle. He apprehended the appellant/accused Ahead Perez along with his T.T. Pistol While giving description of his co-accused the complainant added that he could identify them by face. 3. After completion of investigation the appellant/accused was challenged to face trial. He was formally charged on 3-12-1999. He did not plead guilty and claimed trial. Subsequently one of the other co-accused namely Bashir alias Bashir was also arrested in the case and produced before the Court. The charge was amended and both of them were formally charged on 23-12-1999, but they did not plead guilty to the charge and claimed to be tried. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y 4. At the trial prosecution examined seven witnesses in all. P.W.] MacBook-ur-Rahman, P.W.2 Muhammad Rican, P.W.3 Iraq Ahmad, P.W.4 Iqbal Rathole and P.W,6 Noor Muhammad are eyewitnesses of the occurrence. P.W.5 Shankar Ali, S.-I. lodged F.LR. as per statement of P.W.2 Muhammad Rican, complaint. P.W.7 is Syed Zulqarnain Akhtar, S.-I. who was available in Muhammad Shah Street, June Market area along with his mobile team. On receipt of information he reached the place of incident and saw that people were having commotion and were chasing the culprits. They also followed the accused who were five/six in numbers but, except Ahead Perez, the other succeeded to escape mm the narrow street. They apprehended the appellant/accused Amy ad Perez and recovered T.T. pistol from his possession with one full magazine and one empty magazine. Five bullets were found loaded in the magazine. The accused had fired one shot in the air but on account of rush and the public, empty of the same could not be traced. He recorded statements of the P. Ws. namely Iqbal Rathole, Noor Muhammad, Iraq Ahmad, Magqbool-Ur-Rahman and Muhammad Saleem. He also prepared Mishima of the place of Ward at. F.1.R. was lodged by Muhammad Rican. He identified the appellant/accused in the Court. During interrogation the accused had disclosed the names of other co-accused as Bashir alias Bashir, Muhammad Axial, Salad Pathan and Lalo Pathan. 5. The appellant/accused made statement under section 342, Cr.P.C. wherein he denied the allegation and pleaded innocence. He stated that the case was false. However, the expressed his inability to say why the P. Ws. had deposed against him. 6. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record with their assistance. After making submissions at some length, the learned counsel for appellant conceded that he does not press the appeal on merits but only prays that the sentence of Had awarded to the appellant being illegal be set aside. After taking MTO account the evidence available on record, learned Assistant Advocate-General also conceded that the sentence of Had was not warranted in the instant case as compliance with the mandatory requirement of Tazkiya-alShuhood was not done. 7. We have appreciated the evidence brought on record in the light of submission made by the learned counsel for the parties. It transpires from the record that the prosecution has WW. LR/html_TXT/Y examined seven witnesses in support of its case. As stated above P.W.1 Maqboolur- Rahman, P.W.2 Muhammad Rican, P.W.3 Iraq Ahmad, P.W.4 Iqbal Rathole and P.W.6 Noor Muhammad are eyewitnesses of the occurrence who have given consistent, coherent and confidence-inspiring account of the occurrence and, excepting Moor discrepancies which in no way adversely affect the case of prosecution, they have remained firm to the test of cross-examination. None of them is even alleged to have any male FIDE or motive worth the A name to falsely implicate him in this case. P.W.7 Syed Zulqarnain, S.-I. who reached the place of occurrence soon after the occurrence and arrested the appellant/ accused red-handed, has fully supported their version. In this view of the matter we have come to the resistible conclusion to believe that the prosecution has successfully established its case against the appellant/ accused beyond any room for doubt. However, the moot question that concerns the infliction of Had punishment would be whether on the basis of this evidence the sentence of Had under sections 17(3)/9(1) would be legally justified. For this purpose it would be beneficial to refer to section 7 of the Ordinance which proscribes proof of theft liable to Had which, in view of the contents of section 16 of the Ordinance, is equally applicable mutatis mutandis, for the proof of Barnabas as well. Section 7 of the Ordinance reads as follows:-- "The proof of theft liable to Had.-The proof of theft able to Had shall be in one of the following forms, namely:- (a) the accused pleads guilty of the commission of theft liable to Had; and (a) at least two Muslim adult male witnesses, other than the victim of the theft, about whom the Court is satisfied, having regard to the requirements of Tazktya-alShuhood, that they are truthful persons and abstain from major sins (Keybase), give evidence as eyewitnesses of the occurrence: Provided that, if the accused is a non-Muslim, the eyewitnesses may be non-Muslim: Provided further that the statement of the victim of the theft or the person authorized by them shall be recorded before the statements of the eyewitnesses are recorded. Explanation. In this section "Tazkiya-AL School' means the mode of inquiry adopted by a Court to satisfy itself as to the credibility of a witness." 7. As is evident from bare perusal of the above, this section makes Tazktya-alShuhood as a mandatory requirement for the imposition of Had punishment. It may be mentioned that the law relating to Had was introduced in 1979 and the term used in the section BMG new needs to be understood in proper prospective. Obviously the law neither prescribes any number of witnesses, required for the purpose of Tazktya-AL-Shuhood, in respect of eyewitnesses of the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y occurrence appearing before the trial Court, nor laid down any particular mode of inquiry to be adopted by a Court to satisfy itself as to the credibility of witness. However, the main object of the law TS to adjudge the credibility of the witnesses as far as possible and exclude all possibility of falsehood, merest, male Fides or any other negative aspect that may render testimony of a witness appearing against an accused loaded with doubt in any degree. Tanya- AL-Shuhood shall be conducted m all cases >1 wherein the sentence of Had is awarded respective of the fact whether the accused raises any objection about the probity and credibility of a witness or not. The Court is bound to conduct an open or secret inquiry for this purpose. It has been mentioned in books of Islamic Fight hat it would be desirable if the witnesses are scrutinized through credible persons preferably of the same weal of life to which the witness belongs if they happen to know or could gather correct information about their dealings, conduct and behavior. Since the person who conducts the inquiry as Muzak is loaded with a very heavy responsibility it would be imperative for the Court to apport only such persons who themselves are highly credible, trust-worthy and well aware of the antecedents of the witnesses appearing on behalf of prosecution. The equity made by said persons may not be necessarily open or confidential, but it should be fully sufficient to convince the Court about the credibility or otherwise to the witnesses. In the instant case the learned trial Court appointed one Maroon-ur-Rashid Hand, Goldsmith, as purgatory in order to ascertain the gentleness of the incident, truthfulness of the witnesses. He just happens to own a shop in the neighborhood. He opined that none of the five witnesses had malice, ill-will or any sort of activity, nor they were involved, apparently to indulge into the habit of commission of offense of "Rabat". The Court considered him as sufficient Muzak for all the P. Ws. and considered him to be the proper person who himself was a believer and did not indulge in any sort of bad activities. Obviously appointment of one Muzak and that too for all P. Ws. who included not only the two shopkeepers but other victims of the case who happened to be there on that unfortunate hour, could not be sufficient satisfaction of the legal requirements as the gentleman, with all his piety, was having only superficial acquaintance with the P. Ws. As stated above, although the law does not specify any particular procedure but, obviously, there was need to appoint at least one Muzak for each witness who should have verified the character, behavior and dealings of each one of the witnesses. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Moreover the same persons were C also required to be present when the prosecution witnesses were being subjected to questioning. Books of Islamic Fiqh contain various details which have been summed up in the preceding Times. 9. The procedure adopted by the learned trial Court thus hardly falls within the legally convincing mode of Tazkiya-AL-Shuhood. Moreover, it is pertinent to mention that the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him) has, on more than one occasion, stressed the need to ward off Had punishment as far as possible, if any scope is found for TT. 10. In the instant case the evidence of prosecution having been found short of meeting the required standard, we have no other alternative to set aside the conviction of Had awarded to the appellant/accused and instead alter his conviction to one of Tapir as required under the provisions of section 397, P.P.C. ] 11. Consequently for the reasons stated above, we alter conviction from under sections 17(3)/9(1) of the Ordinance to that D of under section 397, P.P.C. The sentence of Had punishment is set aside, and instead he is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years. The benefit of section 382-B, Cr.P.C. is extended to the appellant. 12. With this modification in the conviction and sentence of Had, the appeal is dismissed. 13. The Criminal Reference No.I/K of 2002 is not confirmed and is answered in negative. Conviction/sentence altered.: LR’/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1592?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1592 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-09-22): LR/html_TXT/Y DR. FIDA MUHAMMAD KHAN, J.-This appeal fed by Ahead Perez son of Main Khan is directed against the judgment dated 16-4- 2002 passed by learned With Additional Sessions Judge, Karachi South whereby he has convicted him under section 17(3) of Offenses Against Property Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, hereafter referred to as the Ordinance, and has awarded him the sentence of amputation of his right hand from the wrist. 2. Briefly stated facts of the prosecution case as revealed in F.I.R. lodged by Muhammad Rican son of Muhammad Ilyas on 2-3- 1998 at about 1715 hours at Napier Police Station, Karachi South, is to the effect that on the same day when the complaint along with businessmen Noor Muhammad and Iqbal Rathole was present in his shop, situated at Muhammad Shah Street, June Market, Karachi, one accused, duly armed, entered their and asked everybody to remain where he was and snatched Rs.65000 from the complainant, Rs. 100000 from Noor Muhammad, dealer and Rs.30,000 from Iqbal Rathole. In the meanwhile his other co- accused whose name was afterward disclosed as Ahead Perez entered the shop and hitting him on his head asked him to hand over whatsoever was in his possession. He also took out of drawers from the table and threw them across. Three other co- accused were standing on guard. Extending them threat not to make any noise, the accused went out and fled away. The complainant added that they had already looted Iraq Ahmad, owner of the adjacent shop, a sum of Rs.20,000. Thereafter, the complaint and other people who gathered over there raised alarm and started chasing the accused up to Muhammad Shah Street. Thereupon the accused fired in the area which attracted In charge of Police Station, Napier who was on a mobile vehicle. He apprehended the appellant/accused Ahead Perez along with his T.T. Pistol While giving description of his co-accused the complainant added that he could identify them by face. 3. After completion of investigation the appellant/accused was challenged to face trial. He was formally charged on 3-12-1999. He did not plead guilty and claimed trial. Subsequently one of the other co-accused namely Bashir alias Bashir was also arrested in the case and produced before the Court. The charge was amended and both of them were formally charged on 23-12-1999, but they did not plead guilty to the charge and claimed to be tried. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y 4. At the trial prosecution examined seven witnesses in all. P.W.] MacBook-ur-Rahman, P.W.2 Muhammad Rican, P.W.3 Iraq Ahmad, P.W.4 Iqbal Rathole and P.W,6 Noor Muhammad are eyewitnesses of the occurrence. P.W.5 Shankar Ali, S.-I. lodged F.LR. as per statement of P.W.2 Muhammad Rican, complaint. P.W.7 is Syed Zulqarnain Akhtar, S.-I. who was available in Muhammad Shah Street, June Market area along with his mobile team. On receipt of information he reached the place of incident and saw that people were having commotion and were chasing the culprits. They also followed the accused who were five/six in numbers but,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1592?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1592 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-09-22): Akhtar, S.-I. who was available in Muhammad Shah Street, June Market area along with his mobile team. On receipt of information he reached the place of incident and saw that people were having commotion and were chasing the culprits. They also followed the accused who were five/six in numbers but, except Ahead Perez, the other succeeded to escape mm the narrow street. They apprehended the appellant/accused Amy ad Perez and recovered T.T. pistol from his possession with one full magazine and one empty magazine. Five bullets were found loaded in the magazine. The accused had fired one shot in the air but on account of rush and the public, empty of the same could not be traced. He recorded statements of the P. Ws. namely Iqbal Rathole, Noor Muhammad, Iraq Ahmad, Magqbool-Ur-Rahman and Muhammad Saleem. He also prepared Mishima of the place of Ward at. F.1.R. was lodged by Muhammad Rican. He identified the appellant/accused in the Court. During interrogation the accused had disclosed the names of other co-accused as Bashir alias Bashir, Muhammad Axial, Salad Pathan and Lalo Pathan. 5. The appellant/accused made statement under section 342, Cr.P.C. wherein he denied the allegation and pleaded innocence. He stated that the case was false. However, the expressed his inability to say why the P. Ws. had deposed against him. 6. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record with their assistance. After making submissions at some length, the learned counsel for appellant conceded that he does not press the appeal on merits but only prays that the sentence of Had awarded to the appellant being illegal be set aside. After taking MTO account the evidence available on record, learned Assistant Advocate-General also conceded that the sentence of Had was not warranted in the instant case as compliance with the mandatory requirement of Tazkiya-alShuhood was not done. 7. We have appreciated the evidence brought on record in the light of submission made by the learned counsel for the parties. It transpires from the record that the prosecution has WW. LR/html_TXT/Y examined seven witnesses in support of its case. As stated above P.W.1 Maqboolur- Rahman, P.W.2 Muhammad Rican, P.W.3 Iraq Ahmad, P.W.4 Iqbal Rathole and P.W.6 Noor Muhammad are eyewitnesses of the occurrence who have given consistent, coherent and confidence-inspiring account of the occurrence and, excepting Moor discrepancies which in no way adversely affect the case of prosecution, they have remained firm to the test of cross-examination. None of them is even alleged to have any male FIDE or motive worth the A name to falsely implicate him in this case. P.W.7 Syed Zulqarnain, S.-I. who reached the place of occurrence soon after the occurrence and arrested the appellant/ accused red-handed, has fully supported their version. In this view of the matter we have come to the resistible conclusion to believe that the prosecution has successfully established its case against the appellant/ accused beyond any room for doubt. However, the moot question that concerns the infliction of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1592?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1592 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-09-22): the appellant/ accused red-handed, has fully supported their version. In this view of the matter we have come to the resistible conclusion to believe that the prosecution has successfully established its case against the appellant/ accused beyond any room for doubt. However, the moot question that concerns the infliction of Had punishment would be whether on the basis of this evidence the sentence of Had under sections 17(3)/9(1) would be legally justified. For this purpose it would be beneficial to refer to section 7 of the Ordinance which proscribes proof of theft liable to Had which, in view of the contents of section 16 of the Ordinance, is equally applicable mutatis mutandis, for the proof of Barnabas as well. Section 7 of the Ordinance reads as follows:-- "The proof of theft liable to Had.-The proof of theft able to Had shall be in one of the following forms, namely:- (a) the accused pleads guilty of the commission of theft liable to Had; and (a) at least two Muslim adult male witnesses, other than the victim of the theft, about whom the Court is satisfied, having regard to the requirements of Tazktya-alShuhood, that they are truthful persons and abstain from major sins (Keybase), give evidence as eyewitnesses of the occurrence: Provided that, if the accused is a non-Muslim, the eyewitnesses may be non-Muslim: Provided further that the statement of the victim of the theft or the person authorized by them shall be recorded before the statements of the eyewitnesses are recorded. Explanation. In this section "Tazkiya-AL School' means the mode of inquiry adopted by a Court to satisfy itself as to the credibility of a witness." 7. As is evident from bare perusal of the above, this section makes Tazktya-alShuhood as a mandatory requirement for the imposition of Had punishment. It may be mentioned that the law relating to Had was introduced in 1979 and the term used in the section BMG new needs to be understood in proper prospective. Obviously the law neither prescribes any number of witnesses, required for the purpose of Tazktya-AL-Shuhood, in respect of eyewitnesses of the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y occurrence appearing before the trial Court, nor laid down any particular mode of inquiry to be adopted by a Court to satisfy itself as to the credibility of witness. However, the main object of the law TS to adjudge the credibility of the witnesses as far as possible and exclude all possibility of falsehood, merest, male Fides or any other negative aspect that may render testimony of a witness appearing against an accused loaded with doubt in any degree. Tanya- AL-Shuhood shall be conducted m all cases >1 wherein the sentence of Had is awarded respective of the fact whether the accused raises any objection about the probity and credibility of a witness or not. The Court is bound to conduct an open or secret inquiry for this purpose. It has been mentioned in books of Islamic Fight hat it would be desirable if the witnesses are scrutinized

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1592?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1592 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-09-22): fact whether the accused raises any objection about the probity and credibility of a witness or not. The Court is bound to conduct an open or secret inquiry for this purpose. It has been mentioned in books of Islamic Fight hat it would be desirable if the witnesses are scrutinized through credible persons preferably of the same weal of life to which the witness belongs if they happen to know or could gather correct information about their dealings, conduct and behavior. Since the person who conducts the inquiry as Muzak is loaded with a very heavy responsibility it would be imperative for the Court to apport only such persons who themselves are highly credible, trust-worthy and well aware of the antecedents of the witnesses appearing on behalf of prosecution. The equity made by said persons may not be necessarily open or confidential, but it should be fully sufficient to convince the Court about the credibility or otherwise to the witnesses. In the instant case the learned trial Court appointed one Maroon-ur-Rashid Hand, Goldsmith, as purgatory in order to ascertain the gentleness of the incident, truthfulness of the witnesses. He just happens to own a shop in the neighborhood. He opined that none of the five witnesses had malice, ill-will or any sort of activity, nor they were involved, apparently to indulge into the habit of commission of offense of "Rabat". The Court considered him as sufficient Muzak for all the P. Ws. and considered him to be the proper person who himself was a believer and did not indulge in any sort of bad activities. Obviously appointment of one Muzak and that too for all P. Ws. who included not only the two shopkeepers but other victims of the case who happened to be there on that unfortunate hour, could not be sufficient satisfaction of the legal requirements as the gentleman, with all his piety, was having only superficial acquaintance with the P. Ws. As stated above, although the law does not specify any particular procedure but, obviously, there was need to appoint at least one Muzak for each witness who should have verified the character, behavior and dealings of each one of the witnesses. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Moreover the same persons were C also required to be present when the prosecution witnesses were being subjected to questioning. Books of Islamic Fiqh contain various details which have been summed up in the preceding Times. 9. The procedure adopted by the learned trial Court thus hardly falls within the legally convincing mode of Tazkiya-AL-Shuhood. Moreover, it is pertinent to mention that the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him) has, on more than one occasion, stressed the need to ward off Had punishment as far as possible, if any scope is found for TT. 10. In the instant case the evidence of prosecution having been found short of meeting the required standard, we have no other alternative to set aside the conviction of Had awarded to the appellant/accused and instead alter his

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2004 YLR 1592?
Answer: From case 2004 YLR 1592 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 2003-09-22): punishment as far as possible, if any scope is found for TT. 10. In the instant case the evidence of prosecution having been found short of meeting the required standard, we have no other alternative to set aside the conviction of Had awarded to the appellant/accused and instead alter his conviction to one of Tapir as required under the provisions of section 397, P.P.C. ] 11. Consequently for the reasons stated above, we alter conviction from under sections 17(3)/9(1) of the Ordinance to that D of under section 397, P.P.C. The sentence of Had punishment is set aside, and instead he is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years. The benefit of section 382-B, Cr.P.C. is extended to the appellant. 12. With this modification in the conviction and sentence of Had, the appeal is dismissed. 13. The Criminal Reference No.I/K of 2002 is not confirmed and is answered in negative. Conviction/sentence altered.: LR’/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by further Teveals that Aman Ullah, SHO of Police Station Saddar, on . The case involved . The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by .

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in further Teveals that Aman Ullah, SHO of Police Station Saddar, and decided on .

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: . The judges presiding were: .

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: . This case was heard in further Teveals that Aman Ullah, SHO of Police Station Saddar,.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: GS ¢ § 7 SEK SOR y" GES 5 © on DB ES 2S 2 In 5. "¢ B g CS C £€ pH — GG 8 C SB BBO. TT WH — gee Lad Geek OS wee Elea 2o& 2 |S ° BAC Beebe age a (ie race GEUEE < PS UA © Ss SEG Po c SBE 2s: ? Es SERA ESG BS. if 2m er ¢ 7° 68 PEEL UB EE be a MB — © 2. §& F 2 center ERB SOS 6 CG PPRE EEG's F 2 =: & OE EF Fi GPA -2EER IE : BG s § [> «6 COT Fe = Semester yes The One ZI 5.3 5S ES GE © 8 G Bo 5 5 2 pg a 8 an Fe EOS 8 s at > IP OO - pe) © : BG SPREE RS SP A of EB a Mr or N 8&8 SC a 8 re OE Se SEER GSS 2 é MO–€7— § eg on He Sou 2 PS Fe BIE 5 SO ) Ce ARE Fees WP 2 2B PS EGE EE CS bo =e © AR Sf >" (ignite EE SZ ES 6 PP Pip legs €8 Ga BEERS So SS FAE 8 ® +8 see 5 BE RB FE SCS FA GS [FF OOO FF BP Os € RO F 2 Pee scene eye Ge EB ff 2 + OS 8B, coffee get " Reese age 2 8 8 7 3 48 ¢ 2 BF BY +o 8B ft 6 CS ZEB o GE E s 22s 2 8 8 S565 e265 ° TO 2 “ 8s 6 ex FN 2 Of f fetetabiplersi CDG readies e§feae8 GE OE S e< F FPF e GES EO 7 BP EF we § EE AEG f EG KBB GE aeeledagieeiii i pivotal BT oO put ! LEE; poise?is animal PE Ssh Pena ss 282 2 £9923 8. TO. me. « OO PD FF SES ETL eg eye b gee EE BR WO F ff o NM Bodies FREE RR's o DP e,U 8B WO SB SO SB 6 © £9- Beer ERE EE. WG - OC Q a a a. she 85 8 FES EB 8 we EC 5 ow Final. As Per P pe, all F Gibbs eye = & 2 Po free FREES eye o © §-o op SNES ®* 8 o 2 82 8 : PBS et Rae ES Ea's S 6 gr BSE ES gape; epriiteabaaitiiiae B&B eyes =) eye) - OS © PS. So of Per Pezsraigh bargain Q SP 9 N He §& © ¢ 6 G6 3 ¢ ff 5s 8 6 NP BY & OO A Mr o § 58 @£78£ SA Z! OM " 8 &8 2 6 ® SO OS EO ¢@ GS _ €1) a OO >- 6 a <¢ OO zZ8e See Sage ® CE OO. >» 6 B- Melee gig he E GEE p. 8 s =e 5 GI GK IGS f o ct G 6 = 3 5 Pg. few EE § BS S- 8 9 5 ff Sen Sg of B 5 DB ss e535 6 SS — §@ $2 28 3S 5 B HEEB EE Ss To} EO 8g 8 ZF. OO EE a or EE EO 82 o F. 8§ 42s ff 6 6s 3. 3 5 8 8° § BO GE GH Boo e GE a o OO | EO 5 o ” B 7 2 ¢ 8 FE <a FH <p SAB ES Fe see S NM In 8 a o 8 & MO BP 6 BF we >) POA 8 ~3. ” “Establish not Only the fac tum of *recovery, but also its Safe Custody 4th secure Transmission lo the FSL. At this Stage, in the absence of any Plausible “Explanation, the aforesaid discrepancy Makes the Instant Case arguable for the Purpose of bail. Reliance Can also be Place ° n Safe, Ahmed %. The State (2024 SCMR 913), Wherein the Supreme Court Observed. 6. The record Shows that FIR Was "registered on 96.08.2923 4th the 4CCused Was 4rresteq On the Same day, While, 48 per the Report of the Punjab Fore; Science Agency dated *7.10.2023 the Sample of the Char rag Was received by Foreign. Science Laboratory on 98.09.2023 after » delay Of more than » Month. The Provisions relating to the Sending of Samples to the forensic Science Laboratory are Provide In Rule 4(2) of Control] of Narcotic Substance. (Government Analysts) Rules, 2001, “ye Which Provides that the Samples May be dispatched for 4Nalysj. under Cover of Test Memorandum Specified in Form-y all the © earliest, but Not late, than Seventy-two hours Of the Seizure. There Is N0thing ° N record CO show to Whom the alleged "covered Narcotics Were handed Over at the Police Station for safe “custody during that Period. The fact of the Safe Custody Of the "covered Narcotic Substance is to be “Established or Proved by the Prosecution during the trial; however, the 4bove-noted "reasonable delay Of more than One Month Could be “ONSide reg at the time of deciding the bail, Which Makes the case Of the Petitioner One of further inquiry, 5, Moreover. the record Reveals that the Magistrate had authorized the ASHO LO Search the house of Arizona Bib and to Produce any Covered Narcotics With the Warrant to the Court duly € endorsed to Certify the action taken, The Record further Reveals that Aman Allah, SHO of Police Station Saddam, Was not authorized under Search Warrant to Search the house of lady 2CCused, yet in blatant disregard of law, he illegally “third the Premises and attested the 4CCused / Petition, The ( Harbor; Haman) (S.B.) Hon ’BLE Mr. Justice Muhammad Trig A Frida YB 7 6 § = _ Berger ESS, Boo EF EEE EE PHE ET £< € ®._ o a a TP 2 ° 2 BH PO ® ‘ Po SP ¢ 2 § GS BB 46896 S » ~. BE OE PRS PERE GRE ES OE FREER SE: bunt o CA PTE \e - 8 8 see 3 BE SRQLPSEEER She 3S: ; OO Ss Bone FB Ss - 8 @ OS of. ow 8 §£ a 2 6 x as pm 2 B 8&3 Mm FE OO BP Er, HH 38 ® 8 8S 2 B » EP GG ¢ 8 S NO @ § SG 8 8 BE Ss OO OF 5 F 6 e 8B OS GJ 5a eh & B - B&B B -2@e@geess eg 28° Be 2 a 8B 6 3s a § — BP § o 2 SB OO » @ & +s, 3 B mu > B&B BB a I'm 6 SS EB S Sf © - 28 g > § 3 OO 2g 8 6 <. EO 5 5 B = ® — ©. © so. -&. SA OE. : 2. kg s. 27 | 5 8 >» § EP ® BG OO SOE i ~_ 2 8 EEE KE set Fad 5s 8 Es o g | 3 8 SE RSE SEES ee PEK geo CS tigpieki GE heya d: p 8 Beeeeeeeseree eye 8 a b> VA =) ZEE G RPS ES or 538 BY BD Ss @=UI i RT o. Fr OO of 8 aging AOE, % © 3s £8 ¢ 8 8 8 — OO FEE o 2 GT 0 FR SRE RE CBE GE ES CE For S| 3 BS Pose EEG FES Era ° Sot Bog OS EKG 2h OG P28 ° a> § BE ns © “— on) a DS OO o =z ff! pe ~"N g OG C pe) — AQ F s- 1 BH OO 2 e4P5 6B S. =o 9 “siege he, been OS EE 5s un o a. -m 2 5 6 9 go SS OG 2 f =. =. ← FO 8 → 5 © OO o FG fas} o OS! o ff. eye FSG See 8 GEG EE MA x > £, 8 eye ee >- ¢ © t+ ¢ 8 GAA on I o 2 ¢t $82 FF «8 O 99 a ms OO at F Q 2&2 an SS 9 EO) for) BSS SOX, OO |S » 8 Ss <2 old OO = Ned () a LE 5 2 O Sip 8 B 2 e Q Ms eg OE Ss He Ss FS 2 Ff OO 5 A &, 2g for OE SG ° 3 8 RF 8 go" ® 3 5 @, 2. BS Bog oOo Y OO CN & —_ Sos op) @ ever ' 5

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (further Teveals that Aman Ullah, SHO of Police Station Saddar,, ): GS ¢ § 7 SEK SOR y" GES 5 © on DB ES 2S 2 In 5. "¢ B g CS C £€ pH — GG 8 C SB BBO. TT WH — gee Lad Geek OS wee Elea 2o& 2 |S ° BAC Beebe age a (ie race GEUEE < PS UA © Ss SEG Po c SBE 2s: ? Es SERA ESG BS. if 2m er ¢ 7° 68 PEEL UB EE be a MB — © 2. §& F 2 center ERB SOS 6 CG PPRE EEG's F 2 =: & OE EF Fi GPA -2EER IE : BG s § [> «6 COT Fe = Semester yes The One ZI 5.3 5S ES GE © 8 G Bo 5 5 2 pg a 8 an Fe EOS 8 s at > IP OO - pe) © : BG SPREE RS SP A of EB a Mr or N 8&8 SC a 8 re OE Se SEER GSS 2 é MO–€7— § eg on He Sou 2 PS Fe BIE 5 SO ) Ce ARE Fees WP 2 2B PS EGE EE CS bo =e © AR Sf >" (ignite EE SZ ES 6 PP Pip legs €8 Ga BEERS So SS FAE 8 ® +8 see 5 BE RB FE SCS FA GS [FF OOO FF BP Os € RO F 2 Pee scene eye Ge EB ff 2 + OS 8B, coffee get " Reese age 2 8 8 7 3 48 ¢ 2 BF BY +o 8B ft 6 CS ZEB o GE E s 22s 2 8 8 S565 e265 ° TO 2 “ 8s 6 ex FN 2 Of f fetetabiplersi CDG readies e§feae8 GE OE S e< F FPF e GES EO 7 BP EF we § EE AEG f EG KBB GE aeeledagieeiii i pivotal BT oO put ! LEE; poise?is animal PE Ssh Pena ss 282 2 £9923 8. TO. me. « OO PD FF SES ETL eg eye b gee EE BR WO F ff o NM Bodies FREE RR's o DP e,U 8B WO SB SO SB 6 © £9- Beer ERE EE. WG - OC Q a a a. she 85 8 FES EB 8 we EC 5 ow Final. As Per P pe, all F Gibbs eye = & 2 Po free FREES eye o © §-o op SNES ®* 8 o 2 82 8 : PBS et Rae ES Ea's S 6 gr BSE ES gape; epriiteabaaitiiiae B&B eyes =) eye) - OS © PS. So of Per Pezsraigh bargain Q SP 9 N He §& © ¢ 6 G6 3 ¢ ff 5s 8 6 NP BY & OO A Mr o § 58 @£78£ SA Z! OM " 8 &8 2 6 ® SO OS EO ¢@ GS _ €1) a OO >- 6 a <¢ OO zZ8e See Sage ® CE OO. >» 6 B- Melee gig he E GEE p. 8 s =e 5 GI GK IGS f o ct

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (further Teveals that Aman Ullah, SHO of Police Station Saddar,, ): 58 @£78£ SA Z! OM " 8 &8 2 6 ® SO OS EO ¢@ GS _ €1) a OO >- 6 a <¢ OO zZ8e See Sage ® CE OO. >» 6 B- Melee gig he E GEE p. 8 s =e 5 GI GK IGS f o ct G 6 = 3 5 Pg. few EE § BS S- 8 9 5 ff Sen Sg of B 5 DB ss e535 6 SS — §@ $2 28 3S 5 B HEEB EE Ss To} EO 8g 8 ZF. OO EE a or EE EO 82 o F. 8§ 42s ff 6 6s 3. 3 5 8 8° § BO GE GH Boo e GE a o OO | EO 5 o ” B 7 2 ¢ 8 FE <a FH <p SAB ES Fe see S NM In 8 a o 8 & MO BP 6 BF we >) POA 8 ~3. ” “Establish not Only the fac tum of *recovery, but also its Safe Custody 4th secure Transmission lo the FSL. At this Stage, in the absence of any Plausible “Explanation, the aforesaid discrepancy Makes the Instant Case arguable for the Purpose of bail. Reliance Can also be Place ° n Safe, Ahmed %. The State (2024 SCMR 913), Wherein the Supreme Court Observed. 6. The record Shows that FIR Was "registered on 96.08.2923 4th the 4CCused Was 4rresteq On the Same day, While, 48 per the Report of the Punjab Fore; Science Agency dated *7.10.2023 the Sample of the Char rag Was received by Foreign. Science Laboratory on 98.09.2023 after » delay Of more than » Month. The Provisions relating to the Sending of Samples to the forensic Science Laboratory are Provide In Rule 4(2) of Control] of Narcotic Substance. (Government Analysts) Rules, 2001, “ye Which Provides that the Samples May be dispatched for 4Nalysj. under Cover of Test Memorandum Specified in Form-y all the © earliest, but Not late, than Seventy-two hours Of the Seizure. There Is N0thing ° N record CO show to Whom the alleged "covered Narcotics Were handed Over at the Police Station for safe “custody during that Period. The fact of the Safe Custody Of the "covered Narcotic Substance is to be “Established or Proved by the Prosecution during the trial; however, the 4bove-noted "reasonable delay Of more than One Month Could be “ONSide reg at the time of deciding the bail, Which Makes the case Of the Petitioner One of further inquiry, 5, Moreover. the record Reveals that the Magistrate had authorized the ASHO LO Search the house of Arizona Bib and to Produce any Covered Narcotics With the Warrant to the Court duly € endorsed to Certify the action taken, The Record further Reveals that Aman Allah, SHO of Police Station Saddam, Was not authorized under Search Warrant to Search the house of lady 2CCused, yet in blatant disregard of law, he illegally “third the Premises and attested the 4CCused / Petition, The ( Harbor; Haman) (S.B.) Hon ’BLE

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (further Teveals that Aman Ullah, SHO of Police Station Saddar,, ): taken, The Record further Reveals that Aman Allah, SHO of Police Station Saddam, Was not authorized under Search Warrant to Search the house of lady 2CCused, yet in blatant disregard of law, he illegally “third the Premises and attested the 4CCused / Petition, The ( Harbor; Haman) (S.B.) Hon ’BLE Mr. Justice Muhammad Trig A Frida YB 7 6 § = _ Berger ESS, Boo EF EEE EE PHE ET £< € ®._ o a a TP 2 ° 2 BH PO ® ‘ Po SP ¢ 2 § GS BB 46896 S » ~. BE OE PRS PERE GRE ES OE FREER SE: bunt o CA PTE \e - 8 8 see 3 BE SRQLPSEEER She 3S: ; OO Ss Bone FB Ss - 8 @ OS of. ow 8 §£ a 2 6 x as pm 2 B 8&3 Mm FE OO BP Er, HH 38 ® 8 8S 2 B » EP GG ¢ 8 S NO @ § SG 8 8 BE Ss OO OF 5 F 6 e 8B OS GJ 5a eh & B - B&B B -2@e@geess eg 28° Be 2 a 8B 6 3s a § — BP § o 2 SB OO » @ & +s, 3 B mu > B&B BB a I'm 6 SS EB S Sf © - 28 g > § 3 OO 2g 8 6 <. EO 5 5 B = ® — ©. © so. -&. SA OE. : 2. kg s. 27 | 5 8 >» § EP ® BG OO SOE i ~_ 2 8 EEE KE set Fad 5s 8 Es o g | 3 8 SE RSE SEES ee PEK geo CS tigpieki GE heya d: p 8 Beeeeeeeseree eye 8 a b> VA =) ZEE G RPS ES or 538 BY BD Ss @=UI i RT o. Fr OO of 8 aging AOE, % © 3s £8 ¢ 8 8 8 — OO FEE o 2 GT 0 FR SRE RE CBE GE ES CE For S| 3 BS Pose EEG FES Era ° Sot Bog OS EKG 2h OG P28 ° a> § BE ns © “— on) a DS OO o =z ff! pe ~"N g OG C pe) — AQ F s- 1 BH OO 2 e4P5 6B S. =o 9 “siege he, been OS EE 5s un o a. -m 2 5 6 9 go SS OG 2 f =. =. ← FO 8 → 5 © OO o FG fas} o OS! o ff. eye FSG See 8 GEG EE MA x > £, 8 eye ee >- ¢ © t+ ¢ 8 GAA on I o 2 ¢t $82 FF «8 O 99 a ms OO at F Q 2&2 an SS 9 EO) for) BSS SOX, OO |S » 8 Ss <2 old OO = Ned () a LE 5 2 O Sip 8 B 2 e Q Ms eg OE Ss He Ss FS 2 Ff OO 5 A &, 2g for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (further Teveals that Aman Ullah, SHO of Police Station Saddar,, ): ms OO at F Q 2&2 an SS 9 EO) for) BSS SOX, OO |S » 8 Ss <2 old OO = Ned () a LE 5 2 O Sip 8 B 2 e Q Ms eg OE Ss He Ss FS 2 Ff OO 5 A &, 2g for OE SG ° 3 8 RF 8 go" ® 3 5 @, 2. BS Bog oOo Y OO CN & —_ Sos op) @ ever ' 5

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by  on INAM ULLAH KHAN, J.- Through the instant petition. The case involved . The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by .

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in  and decided on INAM ULLAH KHAN, J.- Through the instant petition.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: . The judges presiding were: .

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: . This case was heard in .

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: SHEET PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, D.I.KHAN BENCH (Judicial Department) Cr.M. (BCA) No.476-D/2024. Ahmad Versus The State etc. JUDGMENT For petitioner: M/S Farooq Akhtar and Muhammad Shoal, Advocates. For State: Mr. Nam Allah Khan Fundi AAG. For respondent: Mr. Lazar Muhammad Nazi, Advocate. Date of hearing: 09.9.2025. INAM ULLAH KHAN, J.- Through the instant petition under Section 497(5) Cr.P.C. the petitioner Ahmad son of Meh boob has prayed for cancellation of bail granted to respondents/accused Muhammad Rubier son of Alta Allah and Saeed son of Abdul Rasheed by learned Additional Sessions Judgeship, D.I. Khan, vide order dated 25.10.2024, in case FIR No.510 dated 30.7.2024, registered under Section P.P.C read with Section 53 of The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and Welfare Act, 2010 (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Act No.XIII of 2010) of Police Station Harper, District D.I. Khan. 2. The allegations against the accused/ respondents, as per FIR lodged on the report of petitioner, ) 5 in 0 re S&S B re of £ DB LB OO ON o) Fe) — MB for} for) ° in § =. O © 6 8B S Ss ¢ ° Ss F&F 2 FF OO = S OO Of PS) a. OO 3 ° = : = RO O TO 7) GE ha — in =) — - a ct “< =e © a © in © =o x. =. M4 in GE S >) GA a 5 Coconut, 8 ® 5S GS ff a - Ss 2 S B o i) SS EB “< ct © ct OS °~ — 5 7) — =. © 5 mu MH _— —_ 9 =) a. < © =a =3 an o) We) - — Q as a) 9 5 a. in O Rh me @ S O 3 6 ¢ ¢ ZS S £2 3 g GS OE S 8B F of 86. 8 B B. 2 q¢ F 1 7 ° 5 9 ft 2 =) BOG a © 4+ OO as © 5 © ss FO © ¢€ -—~ OE 8 © © ~ OO 3 5 ) 7 © OS OO eye o) eye - © 2 =a @) EE) @) OO OE) =) GA — =) OF. o) Q = =" an as =) 5 RL © = AIE POE = eye ©. For) love =) = RN St, OO © ct ?) @) OO 5 me Qu Qu. LY OO Q I OO MN = ARN ct 3 in = i © a. Sg. WD a “< a ° 5 S| S STE g - SC ff © 5° So ° & & 8 for) GA of SA ct =) on TI base an CO. m0) the ° 3 5S Fe pe GF 8 a $4 in MO a ¢ 7 OO S a ”, £<£ S EO ¢ Cog GG 2 > 5 co & kg D> O. St fa tie) -_ =} kg 5 — “n a gape) pe) TO OT REA K< CE c a RO Q 8 © 2 5 ° S. a 8 a — for) to 2s g 66 a 4°45 #§ 2 5) O & =e CO 3s €& ¢ ff ) S 2 § O He £ o) OF Ss a EO) 5 © 5 o) a MT OO O — OE) i) o) a. ) OO OS GE MT OS 2. Rh O OS 68 ° for) - Se OO O 7 a PR ff 7 ZS 7) mm BH OO + SC x) O o.|6|UP -F NM O 3 a - & © © © TO. © Ko sot EO CS = a 3 = 3 o) OT OO ' _e in. ' 5 gunman so 3 S =3 aaecuaese8B as FS =, ZB ° BRe2c8a7e 3G 8 SELEBESEELTES Of FS w s+ - B8etE ORT F CB BESBSEEETEPES GG g MN 6S, 8 e 2 S&S 55a 882 e8 EEE eye 2 OBS & B F » mph. Clear BASE GG FF Ba B Sees SLES 5. 33 a. PQ BS AE of B37 7 -2 a SesseSBeoR8 8 “Set seas won for) o) Z. >a°f8ogB tea @ 3 8 OO atop SF €8 OT 5 O AO 5 © Ad Fug a for 7 hr BF 3o Bree mm Ss A<Magda For ZA a FP D o "SON Sec OS eye. O So My O EAE) of GG ESE BESS Ss COSA Ss x eyes - : Ss Of Seesaws> 8B Stressed s¢5¢585 FM FF R GF § GE 6 a neg £. c2g8 SFO Of S 6 3 + O S35 in 3} OT op oO ct > © - EU) =" eye © & RM i. OT =" OO 7 5 csBBr3 OG BS F&F SaeZ2oas on Ff \ Ss AZ =) =) an > OO AO} — ran) GA OO a O fa 5 EU 425s 8.2 pe] a " ” Pope SES Bu eats as TT 80 O s OO is GS 6&6 a78 Ss OS so BU s A FF e. 25 ° Cost in n SA FAE a EEE Ss op a’) — AAN Of <8 are a OS a8 o 6 a 5 £2620 O see more go 7 SAS for) 2 Fe) OO BG GQ ha a —_— 5 @rOonR To OG © eye 5 OO S — So page RF FW 2B °22°R FE So 5 « ms © —=e. To 7 3 OP WV an 2.47 OO - @ 5S S50 a5 7 FH we SSsS3R0R88B 8S s+ OO o 5 TO. o 8 nomers © NA DO t+ Os» 5 2) c re) OF. a 5 S 5 S : Q Say AO a °* EU. - OO Jo) OT \o Rh : in Q on! né — OF =3 o) © =) > Cc S} @ O AA e for) EO) _ 3 © for) i) a C a QS EEE a2e e ho an’s+ — av) BP OS O - e OO 3 RS Se's as EC EEE|e2e 8 5 —) = OT =" @ -a =.=: QF OO Lessees a B am OE) © RN RO in = 7 ° SEg8eeh esse ZO FP o o o 8 OO. 5. OO €9 ¢ “” pa) ~A OF bo ° O g9 25a¢6 In FEB O O =) Q © Q2f5eo* v- OO <8 of @Ee "as we FS of rho O is in o FS ¢ OO O Boo RO MO O 3 for) O OO 3 OE Oct OST oO =) OO 5–7) Oo Oo ¢ 5 Ss Ic86% EC OG. 8g A &. To Mph To F APAGESMS a: a" PP EE Rest HS. § ¢ Cop § ff ESI ES S ¢ =e o OO 86 OD - 2 a 6 EU. OF Sees took =a — OF. » ¥ <O¢ © BP ” 2oES B ss OO 9 © O O Ogg a Hf QA r on ” foe) ” A OO 2 On Ste ” RO) 5 O OO EE o> ?) - o) OO Yr moss © GA Os ¢é B 8B ESO ease 6S Sep o 8 8 S 328 63 a. BESS Ela 8 Ge © ¢ &, SO A pe of mean?. ° 2 BR ORSH BAE e FS EES 8 8. SS ES S| OO 2 OO OMS as © a — ca Q OS 9 © ¢ © © MO Of SES OT AQ (to 2 at £5 C ; S (Bee GH Sees B 8 F EO 8 B58 8 8 §. =a 2 In. OO OF. St S) OF. a SBE GS g OS 6 Tet a Safe, 5 2 5 ¢€2 eg 8 © a. OS S26 » EO &@ 3B 8 ¢& m a. o Be S| OO =" — on RS 5s SS GF a) n a) iv’) &, =) —_— 5 OF. -~_~™ EO BIOS FC BW eye |S ct, OT ‘ss |IO|6 =. a old g S ~A |S ¥ “BIR g 2 Na a GA ion (@) 3 g on PB Sh B B S. FP) Cc. AK Q.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, INAM ULLAH KHAN, J.- Through the instant petition): SHEET PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, D.I.KHAN BENCH (Judicial Department) Cr.M. (BCA) No.476-D/2024. Ahmad Versus The State etc. JUDGMENT For petitioner: M/S Farooq Akhtar and Muhammad Shoal, Advocates. For State: Mr. Nam Allah Khan Fundi AAG. For respondent: Mr. Lazar Muhammad Nazi, Advocate. Date of hearing: 09.9.2025. INAM ULLAH KHAN, J.- Through the instant petition under Section 497(5) Cr.P.C. the petitioner Ahmad son of Meh boob has prayed for cancellation of bail granted to respondents/accused Muhammad Rubier son of Alta Allah and Saeed son of Abdul Rasheed by learned Additional Sessions Judgeship, D.I. Khan, vide order dated 25.10.2024, in case FIR No.510 dated 30.7.2024, registered under Section P.P.C read with Section 53 of The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and Welfare Act, 2010 (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Act No.XIII of 2010) of Police Station Harper, District D.I. Khan. 2. The allegations against the accused/ respondents, as per FIR lodged on the report of petitioner, ) 5 in 0 re S&S B re of £ DB LB OO ON o) Fe) — MB for} for) ° in § =. O © 6 8B S Ss ¢ ° Ss F&F 2 FF OO = S OO Of PS) a. OO 3 ° = : = RO O TO 7) GE ha — in =) — - a ct “< =e © a © in © =o x. =. M4 in GE S >) GA a 5 Coconut, 8 ® 5S GS ff a - Ss 2 S B o i) SS EB “< ct © ct OS °~ — 5 7) — =. © 5 mu MH _— —_ 9 =) a. < © =a =3 an o) We) - — Q as a) 9 5 a. in O Rh me @ S O 3 6 ¢ ¢ ZS S £2 3 g GS OE S 8B F of 86. 8 B B. 2 q¢ F 1 7 ° 5 9 ft 2 =) BOG a © 4+ OO as © 5 © ss FO © ¢€ -—~ OE 8 © © ~ OO 3 5 ) 7 © OS OO eye o) eye - © 2 =a @) EE) @) OO OE) =) GA — =) OF. o) Q = =" an as =) 5 RL © = AIE POE = eye ©. For) love =) = RN St, OO © ct ?) @) OO 5 me Qu Qu. LY OO Q I OO MN = ARN ct 3 in = i © a. Sg. WD a “< a ° 5 S| S STE g - SC ff © 5° So ° & & 8 for) GA of SA ct =) on TI base an CO. m0) the ° 3 5S Fe pe GF 8 a $4 in MO a ¢ 7 OO S a ”, £<£ S EO ¢ Cog GG 2 > 5 co & kg D> O. St fa tie) -_ =} kg 5 — “n a gape) pe) TO OT REA K< CE c a RO Q 8 © 2 5 °

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, INAM ULLAH KHAN, J.- Through the instant petition): $4 in MO a ¢ 7 OO S a ”, £<£ S EO ¢ Cog GG 2 > 5 co & kg D> O. St fa tie) -_ =} kg 5 — “n a gape) pe) TO OT REA K< CE c a RO Q 8 © 2 5 ° S. a 8 a — for) to 2s g 66 a 4°45 #§ 2 5) O & =e CO 3s €& ¢ ff ) S 2 § O He £ o) OF Ss a EO) 5 © 5 o) a MT OO O — OE) i) o) a. ) OO OS GE MT OS 2. Rh O OS 68 ° for) - Se OO O 7 a PR ff 7 ZS 7) mm BH OO + SC x) O o.|6|UP -F NM O 3 a - & © © © TO. © Ko sot EO CS = a 3 = 3 o) OT OO ' _e in. ' 5 gunman so 3 S =3 aaecuaese8B as FS =, ZB ° BRe2c8a7e 3G 8 SELEBESEELTES Of FS w s+ - B8etE ORT F CB BESBSEEETEPES GG g MN 6S, 8 e 2 S&S 55a 882 e8 EEE eye 2 OBS & B F » mph. Clear BASE GG FF Ba B Sees SLES 5. 33 a. PQ BS AE of B37 7 -2 a SesseSBeoR8 8 “Set seas won for) o) Z. >a°f8ogB tea @ 3 8 OO atop SF €8 OT 5 O AO 5 © Ad Fug a for 7 hr BF 3o Bree mm Ss A<Magda For ZA a FP D o "SON Sec OS eye. O So My O EAE) of GG ESE BESS Ss COSA Ss x eyes - : Ss Of Seesaws> 8B Stressed s¢5¢585 FM FF R GF § GE 6 a neg £. c2g8 SFO Of S 6 3 + O S35 in 3} OT op oO ct > © - EU) =" eye © & RM i. OT =" OO 7 5 csBBr3 OG BS F&F SaeZ2oas on Ff \ Ss AZ =) =) an > OO AO} — ran) GA OO a O fa 5 EU 425s 8.2 pe] a " ” Pope SES Bu eats as TT 80 O s OO is GS 6&6 a78 Ss OS so BU s A FF e. 25 ° Cost in n SA FAE a EEE Ss op a’) — AAN Of <8 are a OS a8 o 6 a 5 £2620 O see more go 7 SAS for) 2 Fe) OO BG GQ ha a —_— 5 @rOonR To OG © eye 5 OO S — So page RF FW 2B °22°R FE So 5 « ms © —=e. To 7 3 OP WV an 2.47 OO - @ 5S S50 a5 7 FH we SSsS3R0R88B 8S s+ OO o 5 TO. o 8 nomers © NA DO t+ Os» 5 2) c re) OF. a 5 S 5 S : Q Say AO a °* EU. - OO Jo) OT \o Rh

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, INAM ULLAH KHAN, J.- Through the instant petition): WV an 2.47 OO - @ 5S S50 a5 7 FH we SSsS3R0R88B 8S s+ OO o 5 TO. o 8 nomers © NA DO t+ Os» 5 2) c re) OF. a 5 S 5 S : Q Say AO a °* EU. - OO Jo) OT \o Rh : in Q on! né — OF =3 o) © =) > Cc S} @ O AA e for) EO) _ 3 © for) i) a C a QS EEE a2e e ho an’s+ — av) BP OS O - e OO 3 RS Se's as EC EEE|e2e 8 5 —) = OT =" @ -a =.=: QF OO Lessees a B am OE) © RN RO in = 7 ° SEg8eeh esse ZO FP o o o 8 OO. 5. OO €9 ¢ “” pa) ~A OF bo ° O g9 25a¢6 In FEB O O =) Q © Q2f5eo* v- OO <8 of @Ee "as we FS of rho O is in o FS ¢ OO O Boo RO MO O 3 for) O OO 3 OE Oct OST oO =) OO 5–7) Oo Oo ¢ 5 Ss Ic86% EC OG. 8g A &. To Mph To F APAGESMS a: a" PP EE Rest HS. § ¢ Cop § ff ESI ES S ¢ =e o OO 86 OD - 2 a 6 EU. OF Sees took =a — OF. » ¥ <O¢ © BP ” 2oES B ss OO 9 © O O Ogg a Hf QA r on ” foe) ” A OO 2 On Ste ” RO) 5 O OO EE o> ?) - o) OO Yr moss © GA Os ¢é B 8B ESO ease 6S Sep o 8 8 S 328 63 a. BESS Ela 8 Ge © ¢ &, SO A pe of mean?. ° 2 BR ORSH BAE e FS EES 8 8. SS ES S| OO 2 OO OMS as © a — ca Q OS 9 © ¢ © © MO Of SES OT AQ (to 2 at £5 C ; S (Bee GH Sees B 8 F EO 8 B58 8 8 §. =a 2 In. OO OF. St S) OF. a SBE GS g OS 6 Tet a Safe, 5 2 5 ¢€2 eg 8 © a. OS S26 » EO &@ 3B 8 ¢& m a. o Be S| OO =" — on RS 5s SS GF a) n a) iv’) &, =) —_— 5 OF. -~_~™ EO BIOS FC BW eye |S ct, OT ‘ss |IO|6 =. a old g S ~A |S ¥ “BIR g 2 Na a GA ion (@) 3 g on PB Sh B B S. FP) Cc. AK Q.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by  on Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,. The case involved . The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by .

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in  and decided on Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: . The judges presiding were: .

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: . This case was heard in .

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: SHEET IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR (Judicial Department) Kansas ¥s ESTIA etc Date of hearing: 09.09.2025, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Biryani, Advocate, for the appellant. Mr. Abdul RAAF Africa, AAG for the State. Nemo for the complainant, IMMDGALENT SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, JR- Through the instant criminal appeal, the appellant Kansas has assailed the judgment dated 05.12.2023, rendered by the learned Sessions Judge, Charade, in case Lansing out of [IR No.15!1 dated 23.05.2019, registered under Sections, PLPC. at Police Station Mandan, District Charade. By time of the impugned judgment, the appellant was convicted under Section 302(bW34 F.P.C. and sentenced Lo imprisonment for life as Ta CFR. He was also saddled with a fine of Rs.1,00,000/- (rupees one '@| lac}, payable to the legal heirs AF the deceased within the contemplation of Section 244-A, CPC. and in default thereof, directed the further undergo simple imprisonment for a term of six months, However, the benefit of Section 382-B, Cr.P.C. was extended in his favor. 2. The backdrop of the prosecution case, as set forth in the Aduravifa (Ex:PA/1), 18 that the dead body of MST. Maria was brought by her relatives to the casualty department of DHO Hospital, Charade, where Initial Khan (complainant) made a statement before Jamal Wiley Khan, AS]. He alleged that the deceased was his real sister who had contracted marriage with accused Kansas some [fleet months prior Io the occurrence. [t was further alleged that relations between the spouses remained strained, and they frequently quarreled. On the fateful day, accused Kaiser, accompanied by his father Harbor, committed the murder of MST. Muhiya by resorting to firearm assault. The motive attributed to the occurrence was domestic discord. One Shah Hussain witnessed and verified the report. Consequently;, the inquest j—_s ml I. Ss of ¢ § O £€ $8 OF H F BY ZB g IL : RC an =; — on - a — c be Pa Rey OF © ¢ ow ff F of FS B&B 6 7 s & ff 8 3 ¢ € €8 FF SB FF FF FG B en by i |OU 7- ” ct, a EO “; CS o ; OO + + a x § =. AWD ~e Cu LR. — - fate TS ¢4o@y € € = 5 F FB E EE FP of © 3 GG OO EE m F cl =i EE —! ' — — RO KM a - Rey AO & FY 5 6 —- £& 4& 2 re EE “a ba IZ a Ce 7 — } E Tc a OS FF #2 — 8@ DD a Sr MT “h a re i ti OD a 7 RO - G “= 5 MO» © GS BP § 5 Sf 4g —- @¢§ he Cry a 7 a o =- =¥. BS by CR cue eye o 8 ff c en OE 1 a pa Cc o a — G eye ti _ Ce >; sh ES he AA a FE. A SP a 6 3& Ss = = re a ss 7 NM OF OS try ay -~ — a CR — =a “a her US ct — — =, a) CS OS a. - i a = a TF — 7 Ge a i. Cr Go FY 5, -. Ta. A at BF FF = i The OO a — — phi, her an =3 of a =a + MH phi the a : in) a : m are. Rey) lee) TO 4. In order to discharge its burden, the prosecution examined as many as thirteen (13} witnesses, including the complainant, medical officer, and investigating officer, and thereafter closed ILS evidence. Upon closure of the prosecution evidence, statements of the accused were recorded under Section 3423, Cr. Pe. wherein they refuted the prosecution allegations in their entirety, professed innocence, and claimed false implication. However, they neither copied to appear as witnesses under Section 340(2}, CRP.c. nor chose to adduce any evidence in defense. The learned final Court, after appraising the evidence on record and fearing the learned counsel for Che parties, convicted The present appellant vide impugned judgment, while co-accused Hathor was acquitted of the charge by extending him the benefit of doubt, Being dissatisfied, the appellant has preferred the instant criminal appeal before this Court. 5, Heard. Record perused. _. 2 a Mr £ &. on or 2 r WW HF = — re a pe 2 UO 3 — RS OT try pi o a an a Gs A “4 Le Le ‘, FB GS 5 2 ¢@ & ee j I A - G ms — La a Wei OC ~ ~ a am CV Taft — 7, SM — m4 _ a TU eye = ES | =) F =" RS o SU — OE ie ’ OO o r FF a FF 2 5 oo Boo Sear - am) - MH, bet, Fe Tu Lie 8 R — o a - Ss of — p=. as E. Lu go bo AA of re a4 a =z of J : a OC A CI a TD a OE a am — a : “ MO =, 2 - it S Ce 3 a) HCT as = —_ a FH co. «4 a =| OT ES. a ct, = a Fe EP 7 £2€ € € SS : (OB F C + EG 8 § 2 &€ Be BE g e of ow F, —t1 “4, MN — ~— a =r Pe of- —ie —_ NM G a =) ie re) a the in Ea a MT 5 me 6h 52's 5 4¢% 23 ¢@ 2 F ¢ GBF g - 606 6U6RlUDCUmUMCUGU OD 5 EF 8S S® €2&€ EB ® ( of Fr NR a OE 3 a = ET —_ G re — CG r= a = ; OS te PS be ™ go 3s 3–2 ¢ &§ 5 © 8B B&B BS FT ES re) me OU a 2 o— mm OO et a en CB 3 of = VE =" a MH 1: CV — r EO co a a =: FP BB FO Se e.g. Fe 8 BFE E EF EF, 2–8 GF ZF 8B G&G 8 F @¢ =“ 2g Bo € B Be EE B® am G a a i e a of a s+ EC ~ IPA BS CB Wei. e Ru me. Fe a3 CE a —- 8 CS “7 for a = OE Rey —- a =r for Bs "TH a 1c ie 7 TS a. CE =n - «@ FF £ ff DGD FF F OC ff 5 c m= OO IG #2 kb OF FF = a 6 FO, Ge - Ss 8 c. in a =i a =. - a e — 5 =- " a Io B. =) <i 5 a CB o a — CTR - NM _ = — PL m2, — — a — ¥. WY a i OT a see — F “fl LL IL a in S PT, Rey fa - Fe ml = MA - — Cu — i. TT — 7 a — CD o Ry pair a Io OS Rey “7 ; TU —_ Fa a i) WW ct Rey 9 Cc. SIA CG _- t G rat rail." rev i a fa EO as) c _. AO a - c i) in =" 3. co Tr a +r F 2 f ft Of = EE §& & AL 5 s+ 9 BB OS OC RM Tr in o s) — S GC - A we a =) EP a — = TN on rum CY id it =f RS 4 ¢ 8 an s TW & of re CD €8& 2 F € FF GS - 2 OO S F&F 5 BB - ¢ Be ad so - FO bi, of 6 re o 3 Fe ¢ Seth 5 53 6&6 § 2 F FS 8B § OO : =" AR St — =) a OT a) © iv =, ah a TH =" - 53 f= DO 8 8 3 & of ¢ 8 dad OS FF, Fr ft =a = HP EF #4 a “ + = a r Bro in CB * Fe a co EB a tog - at o CE = 6 CE 86 o AA ° MO or 2 OE Fe FP f TF S&S 858 FD © F BP FE 6 ¢@ 8 OF 3 “ EF, E FS 8 ° IL ct a 7 o ff ss #£ Ff FM NT a is co 1 Be 8 8 2g ¢ ¢ 8 F 2 RF FF BF +t G b Foo C SQ *) a _ : = CS 5 a E as 8 &§ EE - AR fa 5 = a e GS & 2 © 8 # 2 Sb - Fi for 7 g a OF A a a et G —_ a = 4 i CB pecs of c CP UE : _ fa ty UA = me FH Rey a a a me a Joe! Ba foo fie a NY mi - Ur, a c+ RL. CP e —_ = Ft =! i OT TS RT fa I'm. bo CS — NA 7 CE Tm TU OD 2 OC a £ c PR FB - Sf ta ca —" ran] OJ a CE pi am — —, CS the ex ty 7 — -_ RR ct =: a eye UN = pa RF NC ca i — bad {fa — UE FO — OC =. — Frey Jan, _, EB re =, i fa — a C a 5 =. ca a — i cl Eh an eyer “ it i — FO La id POR 6 CS GT A SF FS = at FE OO <n. § 5 3 Ss 7 GC i me SB F o ff CE Us TF G OS OE ff — — a — it - Fr: art x a — a) a t IG 7 ( ch Ru ‘a am = FF for of OF 5 Fm o 3. of 4 & cc 8 3 5s 5 OC 2 7 OO) |O OO AA an —t i ATL S at 7 Rh — all RF AR - Fee a Th B «8 2 of F OU » & =A Rey i — = “ a= on as i a] or ct I'm 5 pas at oral a ! on Ca = i CP in =. Pa —+ — a co Tr G co S a 5 Sat, it re of I'm or a me arch an as a “* RN =a EU re Cu CRE DL HY pea 7 EO on 5 © a = OC. a RT - a +, EE 3 ct on OS “ a F. 8g F = & an 6 ta - | —_! ms = BS IC a ‘P re —s — Rey or a Fe LF i Due — 1‘ DOB a 8 F TC O in not accompanying the dead body, constitutes a strong incriminating circumstance. These circumstances, taken cumulatively, was heavily upon the judicial mid of this Court and point unmistakably towards the involvement of the appellant in the commission of the valence. ‘The Investigating Officer visited the spot and, on the pointing out of The complainant, prepared the site plan. From the place of occurrence, bloodstains were collected alone with an empty of 30 bare, and a bullet mark was noted on the wall behind the deceased, which was denoted as point “GO” in the site plan. A disturbing factor emerges from the record that the incident occurred at about 03:30 AML, Del the matter was reported at 05:45 AM. For almost two hours the dead body remained insult the house, but neither the appellant, nor any other inmate of the house attempted to shift the deceased to the hospital, nor did they make any c[fort RO inform the neighbors or the complainant, even if they believed the deceased had committed suicide. More alarming is the conquer of the appellant himself, as he CHD MOT remain present AF The NO to =e: cc EF bi RT BA — 1 - o s- =I a EE OG 6 r Fe ‘ Ry try — RS am RM, RI Le “I — oar MO = ct a) the OT re ta G CE - a UA a! Le a — 7. - a —_ a4 cc Rey AA _ WD a 7) all = LC OE Fl GT ca RB OS = am RT, 7 that — FO Lo A — AO — i as — a pa a : i Po —_ - ES CL AL of Le my E a a P Be CE i = Ry pe 7 EF RS a TT PEO r on = a — UE, a =, UE “0 my Fe an TO i pi cc a 7A — of. “ All ANC 8 SO 8&8 FP E “so 2 m« © SC Fe 8 - ; 7 i for G c= =e =: (Fe a o ye Be a re ct =a fF CP AO F- 8 4 ff, VO 6 a e ff 3% &€§ EB FF Fe Ca MH. HY a a a A. a =a Iva Fe = =I —y as n Fe TP a —s it ) = EP CO Fe f= 2 8 a o. VO phi et to BS a US Ss FS - -t km ” CR OO co ss 7 = ff Wei me Fr see FM 3 mm OE : _—- - we all WS F = 8 pm =e a =e Soy EF }> «→ Fe a 2 RP CI a E co ‘A = OT rad 5 ES AL Rey ; : f 7 =f t+ 2 a OF pt a OF cl a) to Ry. — pat — CR: at re =a] CP) co EZ WI ti " — pa fa m CP R a ss UE ca 5 NBA i a VN mu B G In UN —- OE - is a ca «b c ma c TD. C3 of a 5 E >» &§ RB f =» - MO EF OF 2 FF FF ¢ on or en co a AA o. to FF Fa ail SS 7 OO i Ss 2 2% 8 BF 8 FR FF GO G Hi, —T 3 a Go BG a OT eg PLETE PELE: = = # - Se 2 OS = CI NBA" — o Ea = 3 ie IS & OE c = on ™ & 5 & OS ™t 2 = =i =— OO = FF &£ AR S. TS & = - Up UE & = & & MH of f -— & ft 5 r=. — TL “ty So “3 By, i FO a Te “7, m= TS EE: Ore a “™. r. OS ~ ES — EO ty ™ = = a § 2 Ea ff try Res OS, & - & a Foe OR GS ff EE moo: S&S : & Too for some Go © & 2 A ; me 2 y C is. a no — = =, AA pe ft GR ER EE § ad FS of pe. 2 F 5 MO =" OS ZO. =.~ 2 FF CS OE ™ - & 7 2 eye 2 on 2 £8 s Sc 3 _ F op OMA S 8. SF Se. Are EE 1 6g 68 " 2uk q " BE =“ BB -» FB 5 PB OG ~S er BE RES a 3 8 SIA Bea's s no PBs 8 S Peg HY FR B ROS 5 a Rey a =L, of = a ZI eye = =- a =~ & BS » * 3 S MW 2 FG = a Rey, =e a OE ‘ma Ky OU™ Te = =a ‘= by =, JE try >= FE 3 SS & = by 2 = “a 8 RS CF =" Hot =i — Pan a4 r a was Ea, i Se} FM =i m ° HT TO MT 2 Ne a AA G Ba RC OO =i o for =e {0 = A 3 a LOF a t — NI 2 he bet a Ls a - 8 & & 7 -« & A £ £€ &€ 8 A eyes 2 of CE =e we _ VE Be a = 5 Z RD + am i” a. = — SS “ 4 A ss =) o> - TF a 2 BP g —* BR reis am : = i a CE on - a “or cm OO ah : — — OT La fa] — MH CR = mL ™, WS 3 EC ms — a —_* — © FF =F m~ a " GF FB SG TM 8 km 8 RR it 1b CG co ft re) a NI Fe =- is ie ° 2 J as Fe) OT Ce ca eye 9 =e TT = - MD =" Le a re eye ct CR OT! my J CB t a =3 OC NM ff &-F o = SS eye - 2. F Soph 3s "= @ = ss 2 a i IC a cos cat a = a Ls IJ né at _ — RN Fe = — =“ a ~ a : fan) I C » 5 5 5 a + Fe =r or 7 — RW bra =a c? i) cl a - FS B82 8 § a ¢ 2 28 B, " - a, : f 5 2 FF - B € B GF 5 GOP a of f Ce 5 - @ PO § 4 a UO OC =. ; CR “ = ai CN a né cf FF &£ o 2 6 OT e 8 a BY — 8 &§ 2 FF ye FF B&B > 6p ff F DUC eye @ 8 OF 5 : 7 ¢@ o AI -7 air) ie) CE ™ = — a =a = RT — FAE far — MD i - WY Ls " as all — a co —, AR we —+ WU OE pal i.e. —+ — TT RT in —- OT a a ES — a ns a Wi-Fi TB EB Las 9 5 FP 2¢ & EF 5 5 FF BF FF fa > &£ — - a her: » “ EE OE CE €7 & a BS AA a TC OL to a CS on ff S a for =e 8 OOO 7 A =- - TT 5 5 MO a PO, RO £9 RI FP 86 # ©, 8 + FM, EF S&S & a mph J of. « & A © OO FM | 2 o. — =e 5 OG = OE SCOR ff ee - we — @ RR FF ; 2 §€§ B Woe Se F&F 9 2 sf Ea a : ad — =_ I - rant - + ff o in 7 He of a Le ; RJ a _ IA IG. for QA at 7 a as Ce =, — a a4, _. Ce —_ — =— ¢ 6 8 2 a atm ff & ® FC for FF. B B eye OOF Cs o a 5 EE “ phi cl T ES OG Ss OB - MN 3 -. a = = F re 5 EE of a 2 a OU 7 3 ; A of OS at ti is: Rs — =. Fa v0 a = ch a Rey EE t+ a the OT 3 Ru MK — of a E CE a) ca an oh HS Be i a — 2 i a 5 OG = BB - F- 4» 8 ff 7 PR OD i a so ; CR i = oh =I as a - mp a ie me ct OO OG OF Ss SO #8. — CS OU =— = EE: to a + Ss o GF =e BB WF 3 ™ 3 f¢ = co? CP F, £8 2 ¥8 3 8 6 LD. ® Fe a EE a Rh ie Fa w at a né — a ire IH E a G — eh a eye —. “i ie = fart RO = = r] _ cc ms AA er =" ” ° +5 Ff S&S OF B r FF FB FF Cr ch ct on a 0 13 AMD in our considered view, the trial Court was justified in holding him responsible. This indeed a settled principle of criminal jurisprudence the the prosecution is under a bounden duty to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, UND that the burden of proof does not ordinarily shift to The shoulders of the accused, However, keeping in view the peculiar : circumstances of the present case, which rests entirely upon circumstantial evidence, it became equally inurbane to consider the conduct of the appellant m the aftermath of the occurrences, When all the circumstances are taken together UND examined in the true perspective, coupled with the subsequent conduct of the appellant, this Court is persuaded to hold That the chain of events points unerringly towards the guilt of The appellant. Accordingly, we Find no hesitation in affirming that it was the appellant who was responsible for the commission of the offense. It is well-settled that conviction can lawfully be based on circumstantial evidence alone, provided the CHAM of circumstances is complete and — — Ru = — SF AO sf OS RT Rey) —- Ca ti = WO BB OS ~A UA RT = FL ~- a o © is MT UE -— a: re 82. PR OG ; = A i OO. TT MO =. OD —- TT Ley i WI a Z RQ a i ° =. OD 3 a 2 c: a) _. —_ By _ — @ &§ 7 £2 8 & EP 8 2 3 B 7 Rs —- =. Fa Fe ) Poo. FF a o fa o = « FF AQ s OO — L HY = eh RM RL mm RT Lath =z “ Fe a ‘EE “5 =. We Ce RN po is AA a AR LD aw 3 = — Ora a 3 né OO eh a] LE or B EE. e of o. ch Co ch FM Rey Ms fa Fry fa OT 8 8 OG a of — & &§& -F 8S FM fête Ea key bug Se on F GS GC pp " 3 2 ff 5 BS rad pe as FAE) re) S CP Fly am EE x a — MO Es Lt 3 5 eh Ru Fe o Fe “OU SO Ute GC OO a : a CR — NE RAE id on fa ET A mu he a ac fa a. a A C: eye. St ms REL — Fa ‘ac _— — 7 as Fe —. BH Mi 7 ray all _ =e a AA i _ o a o = of Rey 7 (→= BF £ MZ a. g B B 8 #€8 2. F SF z 3 co 2 g FB o ES ff S WY 2 c —: hat. a ES RO. 4A O 15 immediately shifted the dead body to the hospital and reported the matter as such, Instead, the unfortunate deceased lost her life due to firearm injury, and neither the appellant, nor the inmates of the house made any effort ta shill her to the hospital. The medical evidence, the recovery of empty, the bloodstains, and the (/ photographs showing the position of the dead body at the spot are the circumstances which connect the appellant with the commission of the offense. True that medical is confirmatory in nature and, it alone cannot confirm the identity of an accused, but equally true that once the prosecution succeeds in establishing the charge against an accused, their too, through trustworthy and confidence inspiring witnesses, then the medical evidence must be taken into consideration and, the present case is no exception. In similar circumstances, we derive wisdom from the judgment of the apex Court killed “DGF Versus The State’, (2023 SCMR 83.1), which reads as follows: - “The medical evidence available on FHE record further corroborates NG EL a co RT a =. re a of CS WOU ch —= "OO 5 SL Pa it a ~y 5 a Haley IH TC ’ " RT ran ray i a ms - £6 8 €3 © o GE R FS FES 1 - RIE. I ™, 7 7 =, 8 all coo a ¢ = 3 a 3 FR SB 2 Ss EF OO 68 :. &£ Rh & Re WP =“ 8 OF ¢2 8 &€&, 2 F FF FF. 7 of GE = s fF F 5 8 © "= SG 2 e s Es § 5 & F 8B at 8 8 » BS £ FF ® RR TT is c FC _ a TRI TH "1 on OS RF OS 13 a NT CB a Rey 7 a) a at § a 2 =" E- Us a PL — = WS 6 o FM GF B w 8 3 8 A 5 & EE._ of = £2 2 35 8 2 EE Sos 7 x A Sf 2 S &:& AA my on s “ ~ ss — | = - Io 5 rho — pe co 5s NM BB 7- BF w® GF CY WI a Cu i pa [J =9 a _ 8 a: IG i a WS TB _ LY 7 a =, a4 Ti, i 7 NBA — ate my fam 3 La) rare NBA : Ce bey all z Rey mm G a > ms ££ a: 8 o FB FF “™ a -r a of. of ff — - a O84 er OT mm WO — FC of ES OS “a. mm, SS -£. >- FF RC we ” “ er 2 EX = KS =. E —_ TT -, & a4 EF ™ S ie “4 CE -™ Tr a eye Fe OE mph 8 F me GO EE 5 - OG & 5 km 3& "€2 8 EG = “ — " i< a EE 8 @€ $8 = F Se OO € ¢ & 2 2 eye 5 a Rh “ CE — — Ls a ct J — i CS Tu 7 7 ok - @ 7 a RER TT —_. ¢ 8 : S&S RRR EE FAB SB BRE BS OS F G ' ‘ AUT," LL phon 1–2 Boo 8 *" B= § F F See RR EE. F re OST : id ~— 5 EF TF 2s 5s SS F i a ad =" re « - rat 7 ms ES sf = SS ff MN ff pe “a : see * FR & — 2 FF 8 FH ™ of - —_ UB OS ff FE FB SF ff F & ms UW «OS RR he, BF § EF A - FB OS. a G3 EE _ = F € SG a So FES & co of f- 7 a NAA a. beak i ARPA a Be 2. 3 Se. B&F Be F see FC F Ix on TS TF & EC 8 Mr ® S o Is POM = TT He EB SB Bs GF * 8 ca re ! 2 “ = be OS o- H SAS & Ry : a Mee 3 FB FS FH COF 2 5 = OS s TT Rey" SF, of. EF FS EE EB mp is ; EEE LG FRR REE GE SSF FE in is 8 SOE & FY FF 3. = FG Pe € FS. F&F EF Pa EO FF F (Z Ls YR on. St Se. on BE '—~ = = OO “ EE — i Pap Be SS o.s as) C- me OCU =, : — re = = CP ca =) ' Rh. OE OO a] i] on. Le) FH, F -- — C t=, AA = =. x ales IA né ; =, (‘TH ™ XT 1. RV RM a Rx = ma, “" —, FN =, = r; I, NT SF», Et's © 2 F F S&S EF BR SZ. 5 Le am of OS PBeaegreik&hEr S&S ¢« 3 ¢s CE i= ! For SF SY we S F OF &€ FS BR we ff = : at 5S - a NBA, 3 VE 8 2 OO © $ B FBP EE HB BE SB Sis BB «a 5 8 OF BF 8 =|5 FS AF #8 a 7 a ¢ 2 me 2 AO a. cc Le or ti of = MO To —s me FM Re = a pe - MLE ¢ #8 f Ss €9 42 ¢ 2 8 a co a pe on AT ¢§ FF 2 3 us OS a Li's G eye MH ; —- BS Fa UE BB - 7 a “| OO — Bi co — co — CE OS 8 8 an mg as £ EF GQ & COC 5S ow FF B. GF o 8 EO o3 OE — to! ' NTS RF FL =: i TM Co ¢ &£ OG Wei 3 ° & KS a ITS NBA a IA) i 2 @ 2 PS Be § FE 2 ® | 7 — MN : ” ® ¢- @ 8 5 BB _ > RR =. Rey = eye a — — =, Pe ca * = Ry AI a =_ = 5 O FO - B - 7, I a 7 a AA FS J a MO MH 2 ES) Fr the CE RR a § CG F 8 = : EE — the = the MT s Ry a OO an 7th eh cl CP co '. 6 BY EB GG F = =a = pa SY a a5 r: RN " RR the, Rh UA LJ AA 3 IA in Ry

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): SHEET IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR (Judicial Department) Kansas ¥s ESTIA etc Date of hearing: 09.09.2025, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Biryani, Advocate, for the appellant. Mr. Abdul RAAF Africa, AAG for the State. Nemo for the complainant, IMMDGALENT SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, JR- Through the instant criminal appeal, the appellant Kansas has assailed the judgment dated 05.12.2023, rendered by the learned Sessions Judge, Charade, in case Lansing out of [IR No.15!1 dated 23.05.2019, registered under Sections, PLPC. at Police Station Mandan, District Charade. By time of the impugned judgment, the appellant was convicted under Section 302(bW34 F.P.C. and sentenced Lo imprisonment for life as Ta CFR. He was also saddled with a fine of Rs.1,00,000/- (rupees one '@| lac}, payable to the legal heirs AF the deceased within the contemplation of Section 244-A, CPC. and in default thereof, directed the further undergo simple imprisonment for a term of six months, However, the benefit of Section 382-B, Cr.P.C. was extended in his favor. 2. The backdrop of the prosecution case, as set forth in the Aduravifa (Ex:PA/1), 18 that the dead body of MST. Maria was brought by her relatives to the casualty department of DHO Hospital, Charade, where Initial Khan (complainant) made a statement before Jamal Wiley Khan, AS]. He alleged that the deceased was his real sister who had contracted marriage with accused Kansas some [fleet months prior Io the occurrence. [t was further alleged that relations between the spouses remained strained, and they frequently quarreled. On the fateful day, accused Kaiser, accompanied by his father Harbor, committed the murder of MST. Muhiya by resorting to firearm assault. The motive attributed to the occurrence was domestic discord. One Shah Hussain witnessed and verified the report. Consequently;, the inquest j—_s ml I. Ss of ¢ § O £€ $8 OF H F BY ZB g IL : RC an =; — on - a — c be Pa Rey OF © ¢ ow ff F of FS B&B 6 7 s & ff 8 3 ¢ € €8 FF SB FF FF FG B en by i |OU 7- ” ct, a EO “; CS o ; OO + + a x § =. AWD ~e Cu LR. — - fate TS ¢4o@y € € = 5 F FB E EE FP of © 3 GG OO EE m F cl =i EE —! ' — — RO KM a - Rey AO & FY 5 6 —- £& 4& 2 re EE “a ba IZ a Ce 7 — } E Tc a OS FF #2 — 8@ DD a Sr MT “h a re i ti OD a 7 RO - G “= 5 MO» © GS BP § 5 Sf 4g —- @¢§ he Cry a 7 a o =- =¥. BS by CR cue eye o 8 ff c en OE 1 a pa Cc o a — G eye ti _ Ce >; sh ES he AA a FE. A SP a 6 3& Ss = =

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): Sf 4g —- @¢§ he Cry a 7 a o =- =¥. BS by CR cue eye o 8 ff c en OE 1 a pa Cc o a — G eye ti _ Ce >; sh ES he AA a FE. A SP a 6 3& Ss = = re a ss 7 NM OF OS try ay -~ — a CR — =a “a her US ct — — =, a) CS OS a. - i a = a TF — 7 Ge a i. Cr Go FY 5, -. Ta. A at BF FF = i The OO a — — phi, her an =3 of a =a + MH phi the a : in) a : m are. Rey) lee) TO 4. In order to discharge its burden, the prosecution examined as many as thirteen (13} witnesses, including the complainant, medical officer, and investigating officer, and thereafter closed ILS evidence. Upon closure of the prosecution evidence, statements of the accused were recorded under Section 3423, Cr. Pe. wherein they refuted the prosecution allegations in their entirety, professed innocence, and claimed false implication. However, they neither copied to appear as witnesses under Section 340(2}, CRP.c. nor chose to adduce any evidence in defense. The learned final Court, after appraising the evidence on record and fearing the learned counsel for Che parties, convicted The present appellant vide impugned judgment, while co-accused Hathor was acquitted of the charge by extending him the benefit of doubt, Being dissatisfied, the appellant has preferred the instant criminal appeal before this Court. 5, Heard. Record perused. _. 2 a Mr £ &. on or 2 r WW HF = — re a pe 2 UO 3 — RS OT try pi o a an a Gs A “4 Le Le ‘, FB GS 5 2 ¢@ & ee j I A - G ms — La a Wei OC ~ ~ a am CV Taft — 7, SM — m4 _ a TU eye = ES | =) F =" RS o SU — OE ie ’ OO o r FF a FF 2 5 oo Boo Sear - am) - MH, bet, Fe Tu Lie 8 R — o a - Ss of — p=. as E. Lu go bo AA of re a4 a =z of J : a OC A CI a TD a OE a am — a : “ MO =, 2 - it S Ce 3 a) HCT as = —_ a FH co. «4 a =| OT ES. a ct, = a Fe EP 7 £2€ € € SS : (OB F C + EG 8 § 2 &€ Be BE g e of ow F, —t1 “4, MN — ~— a =r Pe of- —ie —_ NM G a =) ie re) a the in Ea a MT 5 me 6h 52's 5 4¢% 23 ¢@ 2 F ¢ GBF g - 606 6U6RlUDCUmUMCUGU OD 5 EF 8S S® €2&€ EB ® ( of Fr

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): —t1 “4, MN — ~— a =r Pe of- —ie —_ NM G a =) ie re) a the in Ea a MT 5 me 6h 52's 5 4¢% 23 ¢@ 2 F ¢ GBF g - 606 6U6RlUDCUmUMCUGU OD 5 EF 8S S® €2&€ EB ® ( of Fr NR a OE 3 a = ET —_ G re — CG r= a = ; OS te PS be ™ go 3s 3–2 ¢ &§ 5 © 8B B&B BS FT ES re) me OU a 2 o— mm OO et a en CB 3 of = VE =" a MH 1: CV — r EO co a a =: FP BB FO Se e.g. Fe 8 BFE E EF EF, 2–8 GF ZF 8B G&G 8 F @¢ =“ 2g Bo € B Be EE B® am G a a i e a of a s+ EC ~ IPA BS CB Wei. e Ru me. Fe a3 CE a —- 8 CS “7 for a = OE Rey —- a =r for Bs "TH a 1c ie 7 TS a. CE =n - «@ FF £ ff DGD FF F OC ff 5 c m= OO IG #2 kb OF FF = a 6 FO, Ge - Ss 8 c. in a =i a =. - a e — 5 =- " a Io B. =) <i 5 a CB o a — CTR - NM _ = — PL m2, — — a — ¥. WY a i OT a see — F “fl LL IL a in S PT, Rey fa - Fe ml = MA - — Cu — i. TT — 7 a — CD o Ry pair a Io OS Rey “7 ; TU —_ Fa a i) WW ct Rey 9 Cc. SIA CG _- t G rat rail." rev i a fa EO as) c _. AO a - c i) in =" 3. co Tr a +r F 2 f ft Of = EE §& & AL 5 s+ 9 BB OS OC RM Tr in o s) — S GC - A we a =) EP a — = TN on rum CY id it =f RS 4 ¢ 8 an s TW & of re CD €8& 2 F € FF GS - 2 OO S F&F 5 BB - ¢ Be ad so - FO bi, of 6 re o 3 Fe ¢ Seth 5 53 6&6 § 2 F FS 8B § OO : =" AR St — =) a OT a) © iv =, ah a TH =" - 53 f= DO 8 8 3 & of ¢ 8 dad OS FF, Fr ft =a = HP EF #4 a “ + = a r Bro in CB * Fe a co EB a tog - at o CE = 6 CE 86 o AA ° MO or 2 OE Fe FP f TF S&S 858 FD © F BP FE 6 ¢@ 8 OF

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): = HP EF #4 a “ + = a r Bro in CB * Fe a co EB a tog - at o CE = 6 CE 86 o AA ° MO or 2 OE Fe FP f TF S&S 858 FD © F BP FE 6 ¢@ 8 OF 3 “ EF, E FS 8 ° IL ct a 7 o ff ss #£ Ff FM NT a is co 1 Be 8 8 2g ¢ ¢ 8 F 2 RF FF BF +t G b Foo C SQ *) a _ : = CS 5 a E as 8 &§ EE - AR fa 5 = a e GS & 2 © 8 # 2 Sb - Fi for 7 g a OF A a a et G —_ a = 4 i CB pecs of c CP UE : _ fa ty UA = me FH Rey a a a me a Joe! Ba foo fie a NY mi - Ur, a c+ RL. CP e —_ = Ft =! i OT TS RT fa I'm. bo CS — NA 7 CE Tm TU OD 2 OC a £ c PR FB - Sf ta ca —" ran] OJ a CE pi am — —, CS the ex ty 7 — -_ RR ct =: a eye UN = pa RF NC ca i — bad {fa — UE FO — OC =. — Frey Jan, _, EB re =, i fa — a C a 5 =. ca a — i cl Eh an eyer “ it i — FO La id POR 6 CS GT A SF FS = at FE OO <n. § 5 3 Ss 7 GC i me SB F o ff CE Us TF G OS OE ff — — a — it - Fr: art x a — a) a t IG 7 ( ch Ru ‘a am = FF for of OF 5 Fm o 3. of 4 & cc 8 3 5s 5 OC 2 7 OO) |O OO AA an —t i ATL S at 7 Rh — all RF AR - Fee a Th B «8 2 of F OU » & =A Rey i — = “ a= on as i a] or ct I'm 5 pas at oral a ! on Ca = i CP in =. Pa —+ — a co Tr G co S a 5 Sat, it re of I'm or a me arch an as a “* RN =a EU re Cu CRE DL HY pea 7 EO on 5 © a = OC. a RT - a +, EE 3 ct on OS “ a F. 8g F = & an 6 ta - | —_! ms = BS IC a ‘P re —s — Rey or a Fe LF i Due — 1‘ DOB a 8 F TC O in not accompanying the dead body, constitutes a strong incriminating circumstance. These circumstances, taken cumulatively, was heavily upon the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): & an 6 ta - | —_! ms = BS IC a ‘P re —s — Rey or a Fe LF i Due — 1‘ DOB a 8 F TC O in not accompanying the dead body, constitutes a strong incriminating circumstance. These circumstances, taken cumulatively, was heavily upon the judicial mid of this Court and point unmistakably towards the involvement of the appellant in the commission of the valence. ‘The Investigating Officer visited the spot and, on the pointing out of The complainant, prepared the site plan. From the place of occurrence, bloodstains were collected alone with an empty of 30 bare, and a bullet mark was noted on the wall behind the deceased, which was denoted as point “GO” in the site plan. A disturbing factor emerges from the record that the incident occurred at about 03:30 AML, Del the matter was reported at 05:45 AM. For almost two hours the dead body remained insult the house, but neither the appellant, nor any other inmate of the house attempted to shift the deceased to the hospital, nor did they make any c[fort RO inform the neighbors or the complainant, even if they believed the deceased had committed suicide. More alarming is the conquer of the appellant himself, as he CHD MOT remain present AF The NO to =e: cc EF bi RT BA — 1 - o s- =I a EE OG 6 r Fe ‘ Ry try — RS am RM, RI Le “I — oar MO = ct a) the OT re ta G CE - a UA a! Le a — 7. - a —_ a4 cc Rey AA _ WD a 7) all = LC OE Fl GT ca RB OS = am RT, 7 that — FO Lo A — AO — i as — a pa a : i Po —_ - ES CL AL of Le my E a a P Be CE i = Ry pe 7 EF RS a TT PEO r on = a — UE, a =, UE “0 my Fe an TO i pi cc a 7A — of. “ All ANC 8 SO 8&8 FP E “so 2 m« © SC Fe 8 - ; 7 i for G c= =e =: (Fe a o ye Be a re ct =a fF CP AO F- 8 4 ff, VO 6 a e ff 3% &€§ EB FF Fe Ca MH. HY a a a A. a =a Iva Fe = =I —y as n Fe TP a —s it ) = EP CO Fe f= 2 8 a o. VO phi et to BS a US Ss FS - -t km ” CR OO co ss 7 = ff Wei me Fr see FM 3 mm OE : _—- - we all WS F = 8 pm =e a =e Soy EF }> «→ Fe a 2 RP CI a E co ‘A = OT rad 5 ES AL Rey ; : f 7 =f

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): ss 7 = ff Wei me Fr see FM 3 mm OE : _—- - we all WS F = 8 pm =e a =e Soy EF }> «→ Fe a 2 RP CI a E co ‘A = OT rad 5 ES AL Rey ; : f 7 =f t+ 2 a OF pt a OF cl a) to Ry. — pat — CR: at re =a] CP) co EZ WI ti " — pa fa m CP R a ss UE ca 5 NBA i a VN mu B G In UN —- OE - is a ca «b c ma c TD. C3 of a 5 E >» &§ RB f =» - MO EF OF 2 FF FF ¢ on or en co a AA o. to FF Fa ail SS 7 OO i Ss 2 2% 8 BF 8 FR FF GO G Hi, —T 3 a Go BG a OT eg PLETE PELE: = = # - Se 2 OS = CI NBA" — o Ea = 3 ie IS & OE c = on ™ & 5 & OS ™t 2 = =i =— OO = FF &£ AR S. TS & = - Up UE & = & & MH of f -— & ft 5 r=. — TL “ty So “3 By, i FO a Te “7, m= TS EE: Ore a “™. r. OS ~ ES — EO ty ™ = = a § 2 Ea ff try Res OS, & - & a Foe OR GS ff EE moo: S&S : & Too for some Go © & 2 A ; me 2 y C is. a no — = =, AA pe ft GR ER EE § ad FS of pe. 2 F 5 MO =" OS ZO. =.~ 2 FF CS OE ™ - & 7 2 eye 2 on 2 £8 s Sc 3 _ F op OMA S 8. SF Se. Are EE 1 6g 68 " 2uk q " BE =“ BB -» FB 5 PB OG ~S er BE RES a 3 8 SIA Bea's s no PBs 8 S Peg HY FR B ROS 5 a Rey a =L, of = a ZI eye = =- a =~ & BS » * 3 S MW 2 FG = a Rey, =e a OE ‘ma Ky OU™ Te = =a ‘= by =, JE try >= FE 3 SS & = by 2 = “a 8 RS CF =" Hot =i — Pan a4 r a was Ea, i Se} FM =i m ° HT TO MT 2 Ne a AA G Ba RC OO =i o for =e {0 = A 3 a LOF a t — NI 2 he bet a Ls a - 8 & & 7 -« & A £ £€ &€ 8 A eyes 2 of CE =e we _ VE Be a = 5 Z RD + am i” a. = — SS “ 4 A ss

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): a LOF a t — NI 2 he bet a Ls a - 8 & & 7 -« & A £ £€ &€ 8 A eyes 2 of CE =e we _ VE Be a = 5 Z RD + am i” a. = — SS “ 4 A ss =) o> - TF a 2 BP g —* BR reis am : = i a CE on - a “or cm OO ah : — — OT La fa] — MH CR = mL ™, WS 3 EC ms — a —_* — © FF =F m~ a " GF FB SG TM 8 km 8 RR it 1b CG co ft re) a NI Fe =- is ie ° 2 J as Fe) OT Ce ca eye 9 =e TT = - MD =" Le a re eye ct CR OT! my J CB t a =3 OC NM ff &-F o = SS eye - 2. F Soph 3s "= @ = ss 2 a i IC a cos cat a = a Ls IJ né at _ — RN Fe = — =“ a ~ a : fan) I C » 5 5 5 a + Fe =r or 7 — RW bra =a c? i) cl a - FS B82 8 § a ¢ 2 28 B, " - a, : f 5 2 FF - B € B GF 5 GOP a of f Ce 5 - @ PO § 4 a UO OC =. ; CR “ = ai CN a né cf FF &£ o 2 6 OT e 8 a BY — 8 &§ 2 FF ye FF B&B > 6p ff F DUC eye @ 8 OF 5 : 7 ¢@ o AI -7 air) ie) CE ™ = — a =a = RT — FAE far — MD i - WY Ls " as all — a co —, AR we —+ WU OE pal i.e. —+ — TT RT in —- OT a a ES — a ns a Wi-Fi TB EB Las 9 5 FP 2¢ & EF 5 5 FF BF FF fa > &£ — - a her: » “ EE OE CE €7 & a BS AA a TC OL to a CS on ff S a for =e 8 OOO 7 A =- - TT 5 5 MO a PO, RO £9 RI FP 86 # ©, 8 + FM, EF S&S & a mph J of. « & A © OO FM | 2 o. — =e 5 OG = OE SCOR ff ee - we — @ RR FF ; 2 §€§ B Woe Se F&F 9 2 sf Ea a : ad — =_ I - rant - + ff o in 7 He of a Le ; RJ a _ IA IG. for QA at 7 a as Ce =, — a a4, _. Ce —_ — =— ¢ 6 8 2 a atm ff & ® FC for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): : ad — =_ I - rant - + ff o in 7 He of a Le ; RJ a _ IA IG. for QA at 7 a as Ce =, — a a4, _. Ce —_ — =— ¢ 6 8 2 a atm ff & ® FC for FF. B B eye OOF Cs o a 5 EE “ phi cl T ES OG Ss OB - MN 3 -. a = = F re 5 EE of a 2 a OU 7 3 ; A of OS at ti is: Rs — =. Fa v0 a = ch a Rey EE t+ a the OT 3 Ru MK — of a E CE a) ca an oh HS Be i a — 2 i a 5 OG = BB - F- 4» 8 ff 7 PR OD i a so ; CR i = oh =I as a - mp a ie me ct OO OG OF Ss SO #8. — CS OU =— = EE: to a + Ss o GF =e BB WF 3 ™ 3 f¢ = co? CP F, £8 2 ¥8 3 8 6 LD. ® Fe a EE a Rh ie Fa w at a né — a ire IH E a G — eh a eye —. “i ie = fart RO = = r] _ cc ms AA er =" ” ° +5 Ff S&S OF B r FF FB FF Cr ch ct on a 0 13 AMD in our considered view, the trial Court was justified in holding him responsible. This indeed a settled principle of criminal jurisprudence the the prosecution is under a bounden duty to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, UND that the burden of proof does not ordinarily shift to The shoulders of the accused, However, keeping in view the peculiar : circumstances of the present case, which rests entirely upon circumstantial evidence, it became equally inurbane to consider the conduct of the appellant m the aftermath of the occurrences, When all the circumstances are taken together UND examined in the true perspective, coupled with the subsequent conduct of the appellant, this Court is persuaded to hold That the chain of events points unerringly towards the guilt of The appellant. Accordingly, we Find no hesitation in affirming that it was the appellant who was responsible for the commission of the offense. It is well-settled that conviction can lawfully be based on circumstantial evidence alone, provided the CHAM of circumstances is complete and — — Ru = — SF AO sf OS RT Rey) —- Ca ti = WO BB OS ~A UA RT = FL ~- a o © is MT UE -— a: re 82. PR OG ; = A i OO. TT MO =. OD —- TT Ley i WI a Z RQ a i ° =. OD 3 a 2 c: a) _. —_ By _ — @ &§ 7 £2 8 & EP 8 2 3 B 7 Rs

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): a: re 82. PR OG ; = A i OO. TT MO =. OD —- TT Ley i WI a Z RQ a i ° =. OD 3 a 2 c: a) _. —_ By _ — @ &§ 7 £2 8 & EP 8 2 3 B 7 Rs —- =. Fa Fe ) Poo. FF a o fa o = « FF AQ s OO — L HY = eh RM RL mm RT Lath =z “ Fe a ‘EE “5 =. We Ce RN po is AA a AR LD aw 3 = — Ora a 3 né OO eh a] LE or B EE. e of o. ch Co ch FM Rey Ms fa Fry fa OT 8 8 OG a of — & &§& -F 8S FM fête Ea key bug Se on F GS GC pp " 3 2 ff 5 BS rad pe as FAE) re) S CP Fly am EE x a — MO Es Lt 3 5 eh Ru Fe o Fe “OU SO Ute GC OO a : a CR — NE RAE id on fa ET A mu he a ac fa a. a A C: eye. St ms REL — Fa ‘ac _— — 7 as Fe —. BH Mi 7 ray all _ =e a AA i _ o a o = of Rey 7 (→= BF £ MZ a. g B B 8 #€8 2. F SF z 3 co 2 g FB o ES ff S WY 2 c —: hat. a ES RO. 4A O 15 immediately shifted the dead body to the hospital and reported the matter as such, Instead, the unfortunate deceased lost her life due to firearm injury, and neither the appellant, nor the inmates of the house made any effort ta shill her to the hospital. The medical evidence, the recovery of empty, the bloodstains, and the (/ photographs showing the position of the dead body at the spot are the circumstances which connect the appellant with the commission of the offense. True that medical is confirmatory in nature and, it alone cannot confirm the identity of an accused, but equally true that once the prosecution succeeds in establishing the charge against an accused, their too, through trustworthy and confidence inspiring witnesses, then the medical evidence must be taken into consideration and, the present case is no exception. In similar circumstances, we derive wisdom from the judgment of the apex Court killed “DGF Versus The State’, (2023 SCMR 83.1), which reads as follows: - “The medical evidence available on FHE record further corroborates NG EL a co RT a =. re a of CS WOU ch —= "OO 5 SL Pa it a ~y 5 a Haley IH TC ’ " RT ran ray i a ms - £6 8 €3 © o GE R FS FES 1 - RIE. I ™, 7 7 =, 8 all coo a ¢ = 3 a 3 FR SB 2 Ss EF OO

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): Pa it a ~y 5 a Haley IH TC ’ " RT ran ray i a ms - £6 8 €3 © o GE R FS FES 1 - RIE. I ™, 7 7 =, 8 all coo a ¢ = 3 a 3 FR SB 2 Ss EF OO 68 :. &£ Rh & Re WP =“ 8 OF ¢2 8 &€&, 2 F FF FF. 7 of GE = s fF F 5 8 © "= SG 2 e s Es § 5 & F 8B at 8 8 » BS £ FF ® RR TT is c FC _ a TRI TH "1 on OS RF OS 13 a NT CB a Rey 7 a) a at § a 2 =" E- Us a PL — = WS 6 o FM GF B w 8 3 8 A 5 & EE._ of = £2 2 35 8 2 EE Sos 7 x A Sf 2 S &:& AA my on s “ ~ ss — | = - Io 5 rho — pe co 5s NM BB 7- BF w® GF CY WI a Cu i pa [J =9 a _ 8 a: IG i a WS TB _ LY 7 a =, a4 Ti, i 7 NBA — ate my fam 3 La) rare NBA : Ce bey all z Rey mm G a > ms ££ a: 8 o FB FF “™ a -r a of. of ff — - a O84 er OT mm WO — FC of ES OS “a. mm, SS -£. >- FF RC we ” “ er 2 EX = KS =. E —_ TT -, & a4 EF ™ S ie “4 CE -™ Tr a eye Fe OE mph 8 F me GO EE 5 - OG & 5 km 3& "€2 8 EG = “ — " i< a EE 8 @€ $8 = F Se OO € ¢ & 2 2 eye 5 a Rh “ CE — — Ls a ct J — i CS Tu 7 7 ok - @ 7 a RER TT —_. ¢ 8 : S&S RRR EE FAB SB BRE BS OS F G ' ‘ AUT," LL phon 1–2 Boo 8 *" B= § F F See RR EE. F re OST : id ~— 5 EF TF 2s 5s SS F i a ad =" re « - rat 7 ms ES sf = SS ff MN ff pe “a : see * FR & — 2 FF 8 FH ™ of - —_ UB OS ff FE FB SF ff F & ms UW «OS RR he, BF § EF A - FB OS. a G3 EE _ = F € SG a So FES & co of f- 7 a NAA a. beak i ARPA a Be 2. 3 Se. B&F Be F see FC F Ix on TS TF & EC 8 Mr ® S o Is POM = TT He EB SB Bs GF

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,): _ = F € SG a So FES & co of f- 7 a NAA a. beak i ARPA a Be 2. 3 Se. B&F Be F see FC F Ix on TS TF & EC 8 Mr ® S o Is POM = TT He EB SB Bs GF * 8 ca re ! 2 “ = be OS o- H SAS & Ry : a Mee 3 FB FS FH COF 2 5 = OS s TT Rey" SF, of. EF FS EE EB mp is ; EEE LG FRR REE GE SSF FE in is 8 SOE & FY FF 3. = FG Pe € FS. F&F EF Pa EO FF F (Z Ls YR on. St Se. on BE '—~ = = OO “ EE — i Pap Be SS o.s as) C- me OCU =, : — re = = CP ca =) ' Rh. OE OO a] i] on. Le) FH, F -- — C t=, AA = =. x ales IA né ; =, (‘TH ™ XT 1. RV RM a Rx = ma, “" —, FN =, = r; I, NT SF», Et's © 2 F F S&S EF BR SZ. 5 Le am of OS PBeaegreik&hEr S&S ¢« 3 ¢s CE i= ! For SF SY we S F OF &€ FS BR we ff = : at 5S - a NBA, 3 VE 8 2 OO © $ B FBP EE HB BE SB Sis BB «a 5 8 OF BF 8 =|5 FS AF #8 a 7 a ¢ 2 me 2 AO a. cc Le or ti of = MO To —s me FM Re = a pe - MLE ¢ #8 f Ss €9 42 ¢ 2 8 a co a pe on AT ¢§ FF 2 3 us OS a Li's G eye MH ; —- BS Fa UE BB - 7 a “| OO — Bi co — co — CE OS 8 8 an mg as £ EF GQ & COC 5S ow FF B. GF o 8 EO o3 OE — to! ' NTS RF FL =: i TM Co ¢ &£ OG Wei 3 ° & KS a ITS NBA a IA) i 2 @ 2 PS Be § FE 2 ® | 7 — MN : ” ® ¢- @ 8 5 BB _ > RR =. Rey = eye a — — =, Pe ca * = Ry AI a =_ = 5 O FO - B - 7, I a 7 a AA FS J a MO MH 2 ES) Fr the CE RR a § CG F 8 = : EE — the = the MT s Ry a OO an 7th eh cl CP co '. 6 BY EB GG F = =a = pa SY a a5 r: RN " RR the, Rh UA LJ AA 3 IA in Ry

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by  on JUDGMENT                         .. The case involved . The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by .

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in  and decided on JUDGMENT                         ..

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: . The judges presiding were: .

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: . This case was heard in .

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: Sheet 7 PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR ms (Judicial Department) So. Writ Petition No. 2423-P/2024 a _ “Umar Farooq Versus Ar shad Malook, etc.” ' Present: | Mr. Muhammad Fail Khan, Advocate, 7 for the petitioner. Mr. Weimar Command, Advocate, forth - respondent (via video link from District S Marian). Date of hearing: 09.09.2025 no JUDGMENT. MUHAMMAD IJAZ KHAN, J.-. Through this writ petition, petitioner has challenged the order and judgment of the learned Rent Controller, Marian dated 27.09.2023, whereby the petition of the present petitioner for restraining the respondent/. landlord from dispossessing him from: the rented premises were dismissed, and it was directed that due to expiry of the tenancy agreement, petitioner is 7 c in bound to vacate the rented premises within 45 days, and order and judgment of the learned Additional : District Judgeship, Marian dated 14.03.2024, whereby the appeal filed by the present petitioner, has also been dismissed. 2. Precisely, the facts leading to the filing of the eye instant petition are that the present petitioner, being 7 a tenant, filed a petition before the worthy Rent. Controller for issuance of direction to the respondent 3 /landlord not to eject him from the rented premises, in which respondent/landlord was summoned, and who submitted his reply, where his stance was that, since the tenancy agreement has already been : expired, therefore, petitioner/ tenant is liable to be OE evicted. The worthy Rent Controller, without framing ; of any issues and without recording any evidence in support thereof, straightaway passed the impugned order and judgment, whereby the present petitioner | then tenant was directed to vacate the rented premises within 45 days vide one of the impugned order dated 27.09.2023. Petitioner being aggrieved ; of the aforesaid order and judgment, preferred an appeal to the Court of District Judgeable, Marian, however, his appeal was also dismissed vide A second impugned order and judgment dated 7 | 14.03.2024, which order and judgment have now ; been challenged by the petitioner before this Court through the instant petition. 3. Arguments of both the learned counsel for the parties were heard and record perused. } Come S On GE) a) — _. 5 EO 3 § 2% CS so OS SOUTH Ss £2 OE 5 8 3 o § F g Season Gs eases Z OO 6 Gs 7 s OO 2 Goo|OK —~ OF +O OW —. — @O OO a 32 2 Qao52 4505 3 S ® go wo9 & Ss OO 28 1 |5 283 030295° OO 2 @ ® 2 2 2 3 Fa all S9gas3 & ' So 2 SY) os 6 6D co) = Ss 3 |M ; Ry) pad A < MN “~ @ 32 7\|SLO »9%®7200% 8 35 2 i) AQ 2 SG002568 -. AO a s 2 2 qt as a © 2° Fly lo 930, 2 OO © 3 OG + 3 @ & on this s$9°80,<9°7 9° co aw 2° § OD OOO a Jo FS -o ®P of ES 709899–2 OO s FC ss @9 we § o _. 2p ss o. ran q)) © RQ) -—- = O 5.o|, SS ¢¥ o AO a o 6° a. o S 16 SP AME © = OOO ~ -@ 3 Ole o> actor IAD a =) — s+ 2 O OO RO SG CO RLY o2s 7 OD a 7) re) _ OO o 3 = |° |p SAI Gerrard St o S — © 3 °§ o 2 a IO |? <agnation of) ° SC »® D> SV -— © ” Fe |D ago o— %) = 3 (D On, O35 O OO 9 OO OO OO AO ALG @9§ S205 — —~ 2 5 © D 2 a0 go 3 Y © OO j= |a NM OS OO OO OO ox —h OO i ¥ BORNE 58 R225 98 6 DF D DF 5. @o ® “M36 Q ® to o ” o) SG a) D © -—-— gag 2 22 fol BHaS20%R AO GG 9 § a o 2 - ® OG - - — = - 720 UR 2572 OOM A £3£ 8 Bo 8 8 o FF ZF GS S “” sSsa02Rn9 a5 as) 5 a) ROL ©) ” WY - Cc 3 @5 a5 ES 5s § SO sags FS 2. in o) =? =) - J OO TT c &® &. § $8 8B 5 g 1) OO. : — D 0) eye =: 3 Y 2 2 3 >, Foo F F =e LU OG a Y Y OT INES s\OE QO7B ® |E13 (0 |v a OE Eye 2538 =. \F (2.|_ = \2\o BO926 2. 18 2 CG OSS SEE' be sad SPRAGUE S e Se's or Bel Gas 319 JAL \o nor so o0Te228r Six o a5 OF |JA. x 3s 9 OP OO» for OO <z a O O OLA |p |o IS Opposed Boreas O on 2 9 a. |° on TIO \SS\IG Stanzas QoAsR2SQ OLF 8 20% 5 \a\2 23% Rip allows Sagan 2 350 053<" 56 FB Y Q l= |. |O |S SZ OGG w » faRO5 Ss FLE GG SY? S148 a 9 |@ 13 |> 222 BBO®saw 2G FH% \& ¢ Belt 8a783 S288 VLF® 285 ® the SQ: EE —_s ° —_< ~—e - SAE “SOA @883s528 205 “as |e. 33: © |\® |e Sq ®32< Shows @2oO OE on | > oasis +3428 Fane Seat He EG 3 go. PBB F-58383 ®E%o5Sa9 828 o 3 side F¢ D.\< \-r\6 |5 SSE opBDSGGS2SGR F8 ® a5 2 \5 |p YM gash 5232396230 35 &. OS 57 : CE \- 5 So®art avast Red “8S £69 \° 3 i. o Leila |F LE a "0 s =n 9) AEN Fe 3 |. 5 ® \5 c 6 20a 0) <a 3 ) © \2 |S |-- => Z>a OS =n 5 D ® 5 o|\ Jo 2 Gotta→ sF5o2z-80 98 a ~ Le S |S 19 lo |S 9226 =—orange » \O.15 In a -~ S, 2 28g 2 8 8 EB ROL a +» Q 2 6 OE 32 o AG or |D CG OO O O OO a O. =“ OO So a} so 3 B 5 a §& } OS \|7 NG eg FM ° OE is) OO @ 2) OO MH of C 2) ) c OO =. Q. OO =“ both OO Q. QQ. r¢0) OO in =. C pt 5 =. a °& o FM — OT RO) SI S » OO S Oo Oo So OO » - ff 8 5 |® 3 a «a O OO S Ss a OS a 3s o 2 > |p OO GQ AG →D a 2 To Ff o 3 9° s. 0) ) —- Q a OE 6@ 5S F c @O © a WO 7 a g O OO F. § | >< D 50 l(Swablu =) © 5 o 2 7 Go lo on e) 5 2D FS z= 9 TO § © 7 TO o go = © © 4) -~ Q of on! ” OO ad ” - 53 3 s O09 TFT a >, _ A a o @ ss S =) a on © -~ OO by o - OL «(«Oil? § OO o> «© © Fe} © _. » 3 3 9 8 S OO o EB 5 =. a ft 2 g 5 2 3S N) 2 8B G F 2 8B ; 3 2 -~ to ® in Ff 9 3s S @®@ ¢ 2 en) on → 2) O RO) ~~, OO OO OO =n a JOC 5 o9 OS — OO Q. <O ” =, OO NO OT 3 c 2 ) 2. i" 49) On Fe) Co" a a OO 2. OF. Tc. (a -n IQ) Panel <e) =. PL (4) Cc O 5 > T 2. Pa OO O — © OO =: in OD O To. =) =n OO. He) cc O RQ) OO. ™ on ie} a0) 4) ; € §&S » 2g FY GS 7 2 © a |{s c ) a) am a ” = OO : —- — 2) my rat —h = ) 5 © ” © re) to 6 6UL c e) ¢ ° C 5 2 2 8 Sf 9 OO = 5 = a «9 by a 2 OO =. o 2 © » 5 9) C » 2 ~ 8 o a 5 @ ad 2 VO - _ <a x S NM on 8 lucid OE 8 » 2 <« a © z= 2 OO Ss) OL luff ls 8 &§ <5 AF St OS O S =. Ta - D 36 <« EF A Cf 5 A) QA - 2) o Ff 3 35 »o Ss @F of o.60U 7 & 5 ” a. M a) — as (4) she) 0) a —- OO n” =~. « 2 3 AO 2 23 3 = RQ). NE — { WO for) N 7) 0 $9 8 BF : ( NG 2 7s OO D7 FS BF »9 GF D202 FF a2 F&F OD s+ in OD ® ® 35 3 ® > “o ¢@ge ss 2 BS GF 5 o 2 ® @ 5 a2 89 $32 228 § F< Seep e FF EG EB Ss room O ~n a © J OO ) RO =] 2. Oo Oo - 7r- ® a) Cc 2-= © S&S 2 5 © OO - =} is) 5 >= ® » 5 3 D2 F =¢c OO 5 » 808 VD. ® a OO 5 0) 4) AN) OO @) =e fame RS OO OD «© — Jo 4–2 3 32 5 © F o9 FB @ © ff 8 7 >) » OC 3 3 OS OO — FF OO o FF £ SO o@9 ® &¢€9 5 © F GF WD BOOZ ZF 9 HAH OD FY a (@ 3S 7 3 5 WF »@» ® 5 «< o Ss F AO § OL HBO 2 5 8 &@ § BS a. EO 5 2 FSF o BB CLE: F GG FSF 2 o F S 5 8 o> fF DD © o 2 9 PS WF ff «EE ? o a @O@ GS 2 2 DB 5S =|@ AO F F _~ — O09 5 9 9 ©€¢€ AB ff O 989 3S m» £€ GO 5S s o¢ @ OS 2 3s ff. G&G & B » & GS 2 F 8 3 » 7. of 8 2 DW FY 3B 2 5 EO 8 w § $2$ FF F¢ OS D9 8B ©£ §$§ 3 98g o ls 3 3 ® 3 2 97 FER 7 e® 2&2 B 2 = 7) =| c re) © WY) AO 6S o x a O or o> 16 G+ ® ££ €£ 7. w Ff € VS { - NY 2) 2) OO 2 =- OO VE) x3 866 5 - FY DM o =. 14 2) Cc 'e) — FM)) ¥ = 2. Cc -~ a >a Oo oO = = a EE DN>nosy s += 09 B&B F GF *”» 35> 8 3s 2 see = ® ¢g¢ 2 5S 3 7 of 2@ WW» GG § OS ¢ 8 38 F ff 8 Reeves FO ES BY BE 5 2 FT o 2 £5 O FM 9 2 SG @Q F a DD G ” O Fe) o 6S HUD -~- OO - = RO) Fe) i Ss so — Cc S 0) O Sr = OO Ss a in OS — 2 Oo oO 3s = a) RO —- OO — OO a » Q 10 AO _. o SF OO @w 909 3 5 » 3s EE GE 8 8 5 EE Ssh 25 Be EE ESE » FF © 8 2a » 8 &@ ff F&F HR 0D 0D FC ZB AA a OT OO 3) rep) “ — RO) =H [ans — o 8 3 F F OO on o 5 COC 3 8B O © a © OO RQ) 7 9 —, OF OO. on 5. =F OO 6 2 ® we SO ® @2 2 &© yes FM 2 B QA 2 29:5 5 353 2 8 e 2@ 2 ® © &€& 3 8 BF OD, = (Q a OO in 4) Q Le N OO at Rey) (4) Cc — : SZ Cf o a © a i) a =) =) ” So. 2 5 QS f- 9 go 35s B® OGO 6 TO. D =. -) 5 - ct O > 5 2 o FG @ on FSF -¢ FT ~ go» ® G M, © =n NY) o OD 3 a = Q on 2 F SF x OF Oo Oo 3 50 2 ® ® FS OO OO OO re a =- F = OF _, -R QoQ £2 OC room ® SO § 5S 0 2 S| 09 x § FF SD = © a O. OO AA A) OO. WV OO c in s 9 > 8 WW GE F FF SY Bone € F OOO B GE ?) SC for a2 BG D OO eye = o 9 B 35 ox He) =. —_ _. rep) OD pars OO Cc eye Cc Rey) 3 4) pad) FT co § &§ ©@ FSF NBA DOD FS E - ° o 2 Oo Oo Ff ¢& 5 2 D = 6 O = 3 6 Cc RT 2 6 OO = W) a OO TS 2 c 3 > OO a -) O c G 0 © 6 © OO of o 3 a 9 2@ 3 6 = Rey) Q OO Cc = OO a) —_ OO a → «CG ft FSF TF BH F 5 CE T Fr GS en o 9 OO 2 a 9 3 EO 8 EX AO *= §@ 2 ¢ *¥ § §& OO = F B BS S 2 ° S O Cc O O “ =) 5 o —- D & OO 2 NW c QQ °: 5 C< —- —s a J a} OO. 14) OE — @) 0) O —: MH MD - OS ’ 7&5 ® SE ZZ SZ 29 &€< 9 5 OF 2B » OD IQ) 16?) ~” — — pan 14) pa) =) —< 2 5 8 3s 8 ¢ § 3 2 2. GE a 8 ° Q. © ® : 3 a3 rat 3 EO § a 2 : 3 E ‘ — 7) in 5 0) =~ DS Q ” = — OO a né) 3 2) 40 Ko) ; 3 3 3 on OO JE) 5 2) o. =i o © -_ : 3 9 S) *. S Zs -« a 2 o.|U © 5 Ss B® o GG o 5 8 8g OO ) Q. Q, ~ ¢ 3 : :. All Q. — re) red) Cc — is WW = 2 @ AN) =i a x 7% O or 3 FS 8 : S ! x OH F OO o DB 9 3 8 5 5 O ) a 06S§ Q.060U O = 3 ° : 3 3 = = Oo Oo 6) — He) ~” — TO. pa) a. 7a e.g 8 o DoD > OOO 2 : 3 Sate! a) Q. r~) 2. ° :. 2. in) 4) =’ : : : i s = 3 o § 5 a2 3 8 6 «a 2 5 9 a 2 BF SRB 8 ¢ fag Ds 7 Cc ” a) = — < _ =: < 2 a - - O. Y” Fe) Q — ® =. : : : :. © 5 OO (40) in Q. © Q. see) (@) ” ~—” OO. GS O =) 7 see ; a =) =) » O Fe) @ S a : a : : : S 3. Fe) me we re) OO 3 © VO : : : 3 3 S D -“ 09) O RJ)) “—* » 2 O §. Fe 8 :. 8 O — ‘@) Q. ©. @M YW rep) o)6|CU 7 - : : : a 5 3 “t we _ = o” a. r¢)) — 5 : 7) 3 3 : OO me o 3 : 3 : 7 © > a © 3 @f oh) of °. OS {j¢ OO FX = o CS GG §$ &€ (& 8B R s PA © 3 SO €68 © Cc PS OD 'q?) TO RO} — OO So m S S m2 “ ” ° ran ° — KS 3 OO i D ” n OO _ Ss 5 at © © KE) 3 r¢)) ” | a) a O O Def 4 at) © OS 2 Jo Fe a 2 no) re) OD a) OO O OO a - in JT ° © — by 3 _ © OF. an ” S 3 n 2 - or £ F&F IJ ( (2 OO S x Ss OG 62 f 5 |S O S FF ® |. Go OO Q a 6 32 MT 2 Yi in PS a for} T ¢ — a 2 2EEeoe eg @ FE SEB EE B Ss z 3 0 8 LH 3B §& S o 5S f Bob P ff 2 » GS 8 O 3 OO OF men O Cc 2. O © M red) GO 3 5S |» o ss +7 s = EE he 2 o 5 32 BR Ss AO &® & we g D o f BB - x 9 8B & GF FF s ”. |€ 50lUwFlCUDRUlUCDF a e 2b eg S 2 fF o LH U6SlUC«der:Sciences®} ¢@ F ff BW EF a Jo F 3 F co 2 occurs Rey) o 2 |. (6 OO OO OO O ‘'@) 2 © OT 7 o 3 Pam —) =n ” eye O Rh ~ a ° o) - = is; OCUC~<*ST Q a 3 Q a2 a 5 5 &§ @€ 2 F FM EE” IA 232 6 ® & IF S 3 ®&B8 2 28 o ff 2B OG 5 → of 3S of® f+ GB a Ff S Pp OO 7 EC CE [ a 3 a) = RS OD =. a 2 © in BM LG S 2 ¢ Ss kg Q 3, © - ms © OO 2 - JP of GG 35 |£. By |e ® go 3 7 2 8 IG Be £ dB : (| 3 8 o A GS 2 5S ~ 6 FP FG 9 —) A) Au in 7 ” 2. 0) ” =) S Q ? a Roy = Rey) “~ o> — HY ” 3 — ©. Pa is 2 2@ Pe 5 8 5s S of B® F RF DM Fie o 2 o Q : OO s B 6 FW BW LE OF WWW QB 2 2. » go g 3 s 38 e Peg 3 KE a) ” Q O Cc OO —™ 3 a g a : i 3. |o 2 3 OD Q OO O a Y A) 0) S @ reins © =) Fe) a. Q. S 5 5 @ : 3 : J 5 2 To 863 5 FF 5S o ‘S D 3 : 2 = 5 ran) in). RQ) x< RQ) RQ) mm) OO —h OM. OO. zs © ® ° : 5 ; 5: 5 — > 2 C0 HD Fe) $3 |e °@ $3 8 8 7) re) 3 Q. oO Fe) for) OD ¥2 ® 3 2 : : i : 8 7) re) O Cc =n Q. ran) 77) of s DL - 7) OO = —_ Q) = 2 3 d : ® 3 ¢ 2 kg 5S F o 62 LY 7 a [ ® = 3 8 =a > phon 2. O as a : : E 2 2 : a 3 Si ox ” O re) —. ! 2 E : = 5 OD =a a) OO ” a 5 Q) ‘ ” OO ° i ; 3 : in OS © O WY a ) ns 5 3 OO Cc RO) 5 OO =) 5 O- 3 7) Fe a. 6 sf OO a 0) =. OO =. on © — Q. Ni re) 35 @o °? -~ - @ {FD ® S 5 ff 2 eg ° O OO Rey) EO) as Q. 7) OO a) 5 =: AF Cc OT TO. = — © » 9 3 ; : 3 : : : 2 ; —. RO) on a} ) anal —_ ~” > OO Rey 7 =) ° 5 ° a : 3 3 2 _ F Oo Oo J =n o 0) Q. in ” =. —. O D ; : : : ”n OO \e) c OO 7) ° 3 a i ° 8 2 B ) = =s in ” n 3 on OO on : : 2 - RQ) ©, Q (@) as O _ Q a 2 OO. 2. OO © _ : a) S WW e) =. TO © ® : : 5 on 2a O 3 Cc Q y $3 2 ' r¢) ct : a. 2 2 : é g =i. OO 5 : : A = - Cc 2. : 3 S) — 3 - = 3 c x a. o Md @m IQ) 7 =) 2 = A OG OL> To GP OO 5 o —_— ‘ © : o|s at Fe) O 5 at o|\3 =a OO O09 F §& Z Rey — Q. o LP > pt) O o|S A by @ a m — N12 ® a - § 3 TB OO. =, FS) S -* OF © ¢ 2 5 O 38 OO «OC ® OOO ~ S Q. >. OO: ml a = a]. Oo oO 2 o S ® O a 2 2 s# 9 ¢ _ @ a Ss OK 2 _, OO ® 3 a » © s DS 2 A a lo” ox a O TO. © RN) _ Lay) Ry) pe) = ° 3 s O pad) <s < s 5 SD ¢ 3. 5s 5 : a CO O EU a) a o ‘ D 2 © ™ OD a) OS 5 2 FC “a NM 30 ® a F- § ; a — 3 8 c a 9 ” 3 s) Te SP ms re) _ is :. ® 5 TO 8 \

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): Sheet 7 PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR ms (Judicial Department) So. Writ Petition No. 2423-P/2024 a _ “Umar Farooq Versus Ar shad Malook, etc.” ' Present: | Mr. Muhammad Fail Khan, Advocate, 7 for the petitioner. Mr. Weimar Command, Advocate, forth - respondent (via video link from District S Marian). Date of hearing: 09.09.2025 no JUDGMENT. MUHAMMAD IJAZ KHAN, J.-. Through this writ petition, petitioner has challenged the order and judgment of the learned Rent Controller, Marian dated 27.09.2023, whereby the petition of the present petitioner for restraining the respondent/. landlord from dispossessing him from: the rented premises were dismissed, and it was directed that due to expiry of the tenancy agreement, petitioner is 7 c in bound to vacate the rented premises within 45 days, and order and judgment of the learned Additional : District Judgeship, Marian dated 14.03.2024, whereby the appeal filed by the present petitioner, has also been dismissed. 2. Precisely, the facts leading to the filing of the eye instant petition are that the present petitioner, being 7 a tenant, filed a petition before the worthy Rent. Controller for issuance of direction to the respondent 3 /landlord not to eject him from the rented premises, in which respondent/landlord was summoned, and who submitted his reply, where his stance was that, since the tenancy agreement has already been : expired, therefore, petitioner/ tenant is liable to be OE evicted. The worthy Rent Controller, without framing ; of any issues and without recording any evidence in support thereof, straightaway passed the impugned order and judgment, whereby the present petitioner | then tenant was directed to vacate the rented premises within 45 days vide one of the impugned order dated 27.09.2023. Petitioner being aggrieved ; of the aforesaid order and judgment, preferred an appeal to the Court of District Judgeable, Marian, however, his appeal was also dismissed vide A second impugned order and judgment dated 7 | 14.03.2024, which order and judgment have now ; been challenged by the petitioner before this Court through the instant petition. 3. Arguments of both the learned counsel for the parties were heard and record perused. } Come S On GE) a) — _. 5 EO 3 § 2% CS so OS SOUTH Ss £2 OE 5 8 3 o § F g Season Gs eases Z OO 6 Gs 7 s OO 2 Goo|OK —~ OF +O OW —. — @O OO a 32 2 Qao52 4505 3 S ® go wo9 & Ss OO 28 1 |5 283 030295° OO 2 @ ® 2 2 2 3 Fa all S9gas3 & ' So 2 SY) os 6 6D co) = Ss 3 |M ; Ry) pad A < MN “~ @ 32 7\|SLO »9%®7200% 8 35 2 i) AQ 2 SG002568 -. AO a s 2 2 qt as a © 2° Fly lo 930, 2 OO © 3 OG + 3 @ & on this s$9°80,<9°7 9° co aw 2° § OD OOO a Jo FS -o ®P of ES 709899–2

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): 7\|SLO »9%®7200% 8 35 2 i) AQ 2 SG002568 -. AO a s 2 2 qt as a © 2° Fly lo 930, 2 OO © 3 OG + 3 @ & on this s$9°80,<9°7 9° co aw 2° § OD OOO a Jo FS -o ®P of ES 709899–2 OO s FC ss @9 we § o _. 2p ss o. ran q)) © RQ) -—- = O 5.o|, SS ¢¥ o AO a o 6° a. o S 16 SP AME © = OOO ~ -@ 3 Ole o> actor IAD a =) — s+ 2 O OO RO SG CO RLY o2s 7 OD a 7) re) _ OO o 3 = |° |p SAI Gerrard St o S — © 3 °§ o 2 a IO |? <agnation of) ° SC »® D> SV -— © ” Fe |D ago o— %) = 3 (D On, O35 O OO 9 OO OO OO AO ALG @9§ S205 — —~ 2 5 © D 2 a0 go 3 Y © OO j= |a NM OS OO OO OO ox —h OO i ¥ BORNE 58 R225 98 6 DF D DF 5. @o ® “M36 Q ® to o ” o) SG a) D © -—-— gag 2 22 fol BHaS20%R AO GG 9 § a o 2 - ® OG - - — = - 720 UR 2572 OOM A £3£ 8 Bo 8 8 o FF ZF GS S “” sSsa02Rn9 a5 as) 5 a) ROL ©) ” WY - Cc 3 @5 a5 ES 5s § SO sags FS 2. in o) =? =) - J OO TT c &® &. § $8 8B 5 g 1) OO. : — D 0) eye =: 3 Y 2 2 3 >, Foo F F =e LU OG a Y Y OT INES s\OE QO7B ® |E13 (0 |v a OE Eye 2538 =. \F (2.|_ = \2\o BO926 2. 18 2 CG OSS SEE' be sad SPRAGUE S e Se's or Bel Gas 319 JAL \o nor so o0Te228r Six o a5 OF |JA. x 3s 9 OP OO» for OO <z a O O OLA |p |o IS Opposed Boreas O on 2 9 a. |° on TIO \SS\IG Stanzas QoAsR2SQ OLF 8 20% 5 \a\2 23% Rip allows Sagan 2 350 053<" 56 FB Y Q l= |. |O |S SZ OGG w » faRO5 Ss FLE GG SY? S148 a 9 |@ 13 |> 222 BBO®saw 2G FH% \& ¢ Belt 8a783 S288 VLF® 285 ® the SQ: EE —_s ° —_< ~—e - SAE “SOA @883s528 205 “as |e. 33: © |\® |e Sq ®32< Shows @2oO OE on | > oasis +3428 Fane Seat He EG 3 go. PBB F-58383 ®E%o5Sa9 828 o 3 side F¢ D.\< \-r\6 |5 SSE opBDSGGS2SGR F8 ® a5 2 \5 |p YM gash 5232396230 35 &. OS 57 : CE \- 5 So®art avast Red “8S £69 \° 3 i. o Leila |F LE

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): oasis +3428 Fane Seat He EG 3 go. PBB F-58383 ®E%o5Sa9 828 o 3 side F¢ D.\< \-r\6 |5 SSE opBDSGGS2SGR F8 ® a5 2 \5 |p YM gash 5232396230 35 &. OS 57 : CE \- 5 So®art avast Red “8S £69 \° 3 i. o Leila |F LE a "0 s =n 9) AEN Fe 3 |. 5 ® \5 c 6 20a 0) <a 3 ) © \2 |S |-- => Z>a OS =n 5 D ® 5 o|\ Jo 2 Gotta→ sF5o2z-80 98 a ~ Le S |S 19 lo |S 9226 =—orange » \O.15 In a -~ S, 2 28g 2 8 8 EB ROL a +» Q 2 6 OE 32 o AG or |D CG OO O O OO a O. =“ OO So a} so 3 B 5 a §& } OS \|7 NG eg FM ° OE is) OO @ 2) OO MH of C 2) ) c OO =. Q. OO =“ both OO Q. QQ. r¢0) OO in =. C pt 5 =. a °& o FM — OT RO) SI S » OO S Oo Oo So OO » - ff 8 5 |® 3 a «a O OO S Ss a OS a 3s o 2 > |p OO GQ AG →D a 2 To Ff o 3 9° s. 0) ) —- Q a OE 6@ 5S F c @O © a WO 7 a g O OO F. § | >< D 50 l(Swablu =) © 5 o 2 7 Go lo on e) 5 2D FS z= 9 TO § © 7 TO o go = © © 4) -~ Q of on! ” OO ad ” - 53 3 s O09 TFT a >, _ A a o @ ss S =) a on © -~ OO by o - OL «(«Oil? § OO o> «© © Fe} © _. » 3 3 9 8 S OO o EB 5 =. a ft 2 g 5 2 3S N) 2 8B G F 2 8B ; 3 2 -~ to ® in Ff 9 3s S @®@ ¢ 2 en) on → 2) O RO) ~~, OO OO OO =n a JOC 5 o9 OS — OO Q. <O ” =, OO NO OT 3 c 2 ) 2. i" 49) On Fe) Co" a a OO 2. OF. Tc. (a -n IQ) Panel <e) =. PL (4) Cc O 5 > T 2. Pa OO O — © OO =: in OD O To. =) =n OO. He) cc O RQ) OO. ™ on ie} a0) 4) ; € §&S » 2g FY GS 7 2 © a |{s c ) a) am a ” = OO : —- — 2) my rat —h = ) 5 © ” © re) to 6 6UL c e) ¢ ° C 5 2 2 8 Sf 9 OO = 5 = a «9 by a 2 OO =. o 2 © » 5 9)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): am a ” = OO : —- — 2) my rat —h = ) 5 © ” © re) to 6 6UL c e) ¢ ° C 5 2 2 8 Sf 9 OO = 5 = a «9 by a 2 OO =. o 2 © » 5 9) C » 2 ~ 8 o a 5 @ ad 2 VO - _ <a x S NM on 8 lucid OE 8 » 2 <« a © z= 2 OO Ss) OL luff ls 8 &§ <5 AF St OS O S =. Ta - D 36 <« EF A Cf 5 A) QA - 2) o Ff 3 35 »o Ss @F of o.60U 7 & 5 ” a. M a) — as (4) she) 0) a —- OO n” =~. « 2 3 AO 2 23 3 = RQ). NE — { WO for) N 7) 0 $9 8 BF : ( NG 2 7s OO D7 FS BF »9 GF D202 FF a2 F&F OD s+ in OD ® ® 35 3 ® > “o ¢@ge ss 2 BS GF 5 o 2 ® @ 5 a2 89 $32 228 § F< Seep e FF EG EB Ss room O ~n a © J OO ) RO =] 2. Oo Oo - 7r- ® a) Cc 2-= © S&S 2 5 © OO - =} is) 5 >= ® » 5 3 D2 F =¢c OO 5 » 808 VD. ® a OO 5 0) 4) AN) OO @) =e fame RS OO OD «© — Jo 4–2 3 32 5 © F o9 FB @ © ff 8 7 >) » OC 3 3 OS OO — FF OO o FF £ SO o@9 ® &¢€9 5 © F GF WD BOOZ ZF 9 HAH OD FY a (@ 3S 7 3 5 WF »@» ® 5 «< o Ss F AO § OL HBO 2 5 8 &@ § BS a. EO 5 2 FSF o BB CLE: F GG FSF 2 o F S 5 8 o> fF DD © o 2 9 PS WF ff «EE ? o a @O@ GS 2 2 DB 5S =|@ AO F F _~ — O09 5 9 9 ©€¢€ AB ff O 989 3S m» £€ GO 5S s o¢ @ OS 2 3s ff. G&G & B » & GS 2 F 8 3 » 7. of 8 2 DW FY 3B 2 5 EO 8 w § $2$ FF F¢ OS D9 8B ©£ §$§ 3 98g o ls 3 3 ® 3 2 97 FER 7 e® 2&2 B 2 = 7) =| c re) © WY) AO 6S o x a O or o> 16 G+ ® ££ €£ 7. w Ff € VS { - NY 2) 2) OO 2 =- OO VE) x3 866 5 - FY DM o =. 14 2) Cc 'e) — FM)) ¥ = 2. Cc -~ a >a Oo oO = = a EE

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): O or o> 16 G+ ® ££ €£ 7. w Ff € VS { - NY 2) 2) OO 2 =- OO VE) x3 866 5 - FY DM o =. 14 2) Cc 'e) — FM)) ¥ = 2. Cc -~ a >a Oo oO = = a EE DN>nosy s += 09 B&B F GF *”» 35> 8 3s 2 see = ® ¢g¢ 2 5S 3 7 of 2@ WW» GG § OS ¢ 8 38 F ff 8 Reeves FO ES BY BE 5 2 FT o 2 £5 O FM 9 2 SG @Q F a DD G ” O Fe) o 6S HUD -~- OO - = RO) Fe) i Ss so — Cc S 0) O Sr = OO Ss a in OS — 2 Oo oO 3s = a) RO —- OO — OO a » Q 10 AO _. o SF OO @w 909 3 5 » 3s EE GE 8 8 5 EE Ssh 25 Be EE ESE » FF © 8 2a » 8 &@ ff F&F HR 0D 0D FC ZB AA a OT OO 3) rep) “ — RO) =H [ans — o 8 3 F F OO on o 5 COC 3 8B O © a © OO RQ) 7 9 —, OF OO. on 5. =F OO 6 2 ® we SO ® @2 2 &© yes FM 2 B QA 2 29:5 5 353 2 8 e 2@ 2 ® © &€& 3 8 BF OD, = (Q a OO in 4) Q Le N OO at Rey) (4) Cc — : SZ Cf o a © a i) a =) =) ” So. 2 5 QS f- 9 go 35s B® OGO 6 TO. D =. -) 5 - ct O > 5 2 o FG @ on FSF -¢ FT ~ go» ® G M, © =n NY) o OD 3 a = Q on 2 F SF x OF Oo Oo 3 50 2 ® ® FS OO OO OO re a =- F = OF _, -R QoQ £2 OC room ® SO § 5S 0 2 S| 09 x § FF SD = © a O. OO AA A) OO. WV OO c in s 9 > 8 WW GE F FF SY Bone € F OOO B GE ?) SC for a2 BG D OO eye = o 9 B 35 ox He) =. —_ _. rep) OD pars OO Cc eye Cc Rey) 3 4) pad) FT co § &§ ©@ FSF NBA DOD FS E - ° o 2 Oo Oo Ff ¢& 5 2 D = 6 O = 3 6 Cc RT 2 6 OO = W) a OO TS 2 c 3 > OO a -) O c G 0 © 6 © OO of o 3 a 9 2@ 3 6 = Rey) Q OO Cc = OO a) —_ OO a → «CG ft FSF TF BH F 5 CE T

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): OO = W) a OO TS 2 c 3 > OO a -) O c G 0 © 6 © OO of o 3 a 9 2@ 3 6 = Rey) Q OO Cc = OO a) —_ OO a → «CG ft FSF TF BH F 5 CE T Fr GS en o 9 OO 2 a 9 3 EO 8 EX AO *= §@ 2 ¢ *¥ § §& OO = F B BS S 2 ° S O Cc O O “ =) 5 o —- D & OO 2 NW c QQ °: 5 C< —- —s a J a} OO. 14) OE — @) 0) O —: MH MD - OS ’ 7&5 ® SE ZZ SZ 29 &€< 9 5 OF 2B » OD IQ) 16?) ~” — — pan 14) pa) =) —< 2 5 8 3s 8 ¢ § 3 2 2. GE a 8 ° Q. © ® : 3 a3 rat 3 EO § a 2 : 3 E ‘ — 7) in 5 0) =~ DS Q ” = — OO a né) 3 2) 40 Ko) ; 3 3 3 on OO JE) 5 2) o. =i o © -_ : 3 9 S) *. S Zs -« a 2 o.|U © 5 Ss B® o GG o 5 8 8g OO ) Q. Q, ~ ¢ 3 : :. All Q. — re) red) Cc — is WW = 2 @ AN) =i a x 7% O or 3 FS 8 : S ! x OH F OO o DB 9 3 8 5 5 O ) a 06S§ Q.060U O = 3 ° : 3 3 = = Oo Oo 6) — He) ~” — TO. pa) a. 7a e.g 8 o DoD > OOO 2 : 3 Sate! a) Q. r~) 2. ° :. 2. in) 4) =’ : : : i s = 3 o § 5 a2 3 8 6 «a 2 5 9 a 2 BF SRB 8 ¢ fag Ds 7 Cc ” a) = — < _ =: < 2 a - - O. Y” Fe) Q — ® =. : : : :. © 5 OO (40) in Q. © Q. see) (@) ” ~—” OO. GS O =) 7 see ; a =) =) » O Fe) @ S a : a : : : S 3. Fe) me we re) OO 3 © VO : : : 3 3 S D -“ 09) O RJ)) “—* » 2 O §. Fe 8 :. 8 O — ‘@) Q. ©. @M YW rep) o)6|CU 7 - : : : a 5 3 “t we _ = o” a. r¢)) — 5 : 7) 3 3 : OO me o 3 : 3 : 7 © > a © 3 @f oh) of °. OS {j¢ OO FX = o CS GG §$ &€ (& 8B R s PA © 3 SO €68 © Cc PS OD 'q?) TO

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): r¢)) — 5 : 7) 3 3 : OO me o 3 : 3 : 7 © > a © 3 @f oh) of °. OS {j¢ OO FX = o CS GG §$ &€ (& 8B R s PA © 3 SO €68 © Cc PS OD 'q?) TO RO} — OO So m S S m2 “ ” ° ran ° — KS 3 OO i D ” n OO _ Ss 5 at © © KE) 3 r¢)) ” | a) a O O Def 4 at) © OS 2 Jo Fe a 2 no) re) OD a) OO O OO a - in JT ° © — by 3 _ © OF. an ” S 3 n 2 - or £ F&F IJ ( (2 OO S x Ss OG 62 f 5 |S O S FF ® |. Go OO Q a 6 32 MT 2 Yi in PS a for} T ¢ — a 2 2EEeoe eg @ FE SEB EE B Ss z 3 0 8 LH 3B §& S o 5S f Bob P ff 2 » GS 8 O 3 OO OF men O Cc 2. O © M red) GO 3 5S |» o ss +7 s = EE he 2 o 5 32 BR Ss AO &® & we g D o f BB - x 9 8B & GF FF s ”. |€ 50lUwFlCUDRUlUCDF a e 2b eg S 2 fF o LH U6SlUC«der:Sciences®} ¢@ F ff BW EF a Jo F 3 F co 2 occurs Rey) o 2 |. (6 OO OO OO O ‘'@) 2 © OT 7 o 3 Pam —) =n ” eye O Rh ~ a ° o) - = is; OCUC~<*ST Q a 3 Q a2 a 5 5 &§ @€ 2 F FM EE” IA 232 6 ® & IF S 3 ®&B8 2 28 o ff 2B OG 5 → of 3S of® f+ GB a Ff S Pp OO 7 EC CE [ a 3 a) = RS OD =. a 2 © in BM LG S 2 ¢ Ss kg Q 3, © - ms © OO 2 - JP of GG 35 |£. By |e ® go 3 7 2 8 IG Be £ dB : (| 3 8 o A GS 2 5S ~ 6 FP FG 9 —) A) Au in 7 ” 2. 0) ” =) S Q ? a Roy = Rey) “~ o> — HY ” 3 — ©. Pa is 2 2@ Pe 5 8 5s S of B® F RF DM Fie o 2 o Q : OO s B 6 FW BW LE OF WWW QB 2 2. » go g 3 s 38 e Peg 3 KE a) ” Q O Cc OO —™ 3 a g a : i 3. |o 2 3 OD Q OO O a Y A) 0) S @ reins © =) Fe) a. Q. S 5 5 @ : 3 :

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): » go g 3 s 38 e Peg 3 KE a) ” Q O Cc OO —™ 3 a g a : i 3. |o 2 3 OD Q OO O a Y A) 0) S @ reins © =) Fe) a. Q. S 5 5 @ : 3 : J 5 2 To 863 5 FF 5S o ‘S D 3 : 2 = 5 ran) in). RQ) x< RQ) RQ) mm) OO —h OM. OO. zs © ® ° : 5 ; 5: 5 — > 2 C0 HD Fe) $3 |e °@ $3 8 8 7) re) 3 Q. oO Fe) for) OD ¥2 ® 3 2 : : i : 8 7) re) O Cc =n Q. ran) 77) of s DL - 7) OO = —_ Q) = 2 3 d : ® 3 ¢ 2 kg 5S F o 62 LY 7 a [ ® = 3 8 =a > phon 2. O as a : : E 2 2 : a 3 Si ox ” O re) —. ! 2 E : = 5 OD =a a) OO ” a 5 Q) ‘ ” OO ° i ; 3 : in OS © O WY a ) ns 5 3 OO Cc RO) 5 OO =) 5 O- 3 7) Fe a. 6 sf OO a 0) =. OO =. on © — Q. Ni re) 35 @o °? -~ - @ {FD ® S 5 ff 2 eg ° O OO Rey) EO) as Q. 7) OO a) 5 =: AF Cc OT TO. = — © » 9 3 ; : 3 : : : 2 ; —. RO) on a} ) anal —_ ~” > OO Rey 7 =) ° 5 ° a : 3 3 2 _ F Oo Oo J =n o 0) Q. in ” =. —. O D ; : : : ”n OO \e) c OO 7) ° 3 a i ° 8 2 B ) = =s in ” n 3 on OO on : : 2 - RQ) ©, Q (@) as O _ Q a 2 OO. 2. OO © _ : a) S WW e) =. TO © ® : : 5 on 2a O 3 Cc Q y $3 2 ' r¢) ct : a. 2 2 : é g =i. OO 5 : : A = - Cc 2. : 3 S) — 3 - = 3 c x a. o Md @m IQ) 7 =) 2 = A OG OL> To GP OO 5 o —_— ‘ © : o|s at Fe) O 5 at o|\3 =a OO O09 F §& Z Rey — Q. o LP > pt) O o|S A by @ a m — N12 ® a - § 3 TB OO. =, FS) S -* OF © ¢ 2 5 O 38 OO «OC ® OOO ~ S Q. >. OO: ml a = a]. Oo oO 2 o S ® O a 2

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, JUDGMENT                         .): pt) O o|S A by @ a m — N12 ® a - § 3 TB OO. =, FS) S -* OF © ¢ 2 5 O 38 OO «OC ® OOO ~ S Q. >. OO: ml a = a]. Oo oO 2 o S ® O a 2 2 s# 9 ¢ _ @ a Ss OK 2 _, OO ® 3 a » © s DS 2 A a lo” ox a O TO. © RN) _ Lay) Ry) pe) = ° 3 s O pad) <s < s 5 SD ¢ 3. 5s 5 : a CO O EU a) a o ‘ D 2 © ™ OD a) OS 5 2 FC “a NM 30 ® a F- § ; a — 3 8 c a 9 ” 3 s) Te SP ms re) _ is :. ® 5 TO 8 \

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by  on . The case involved Jurisdiction Or by ¢Pproaching the Mujtahid-e- id st Y. The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by .

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in  and decided on .

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: . The judges presiding were: .

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: Jurisdiction Or by ¢Pproaching the Mujtahid-e- id st Y. This case was heard in .

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: Vs SS 5 FM & ¢ & S68 5 © OE US a =) = GE) Q- © OO GA we “* 02) © =) OO. ion 3 -=* 2 2 Rey) © Ss o. Ss GE) 3 » MT ; —W i= Rh SD GA St f ) 7 some BE 3 S ct PS € © m4 a. Q Los SY ® on =" ‘o) i. ”n OO. t. bot 3 a — as) 2 o ff 38 B o 6S S38 ~ — & $8 &@ § {|& =S ON a OO. — OT 2. o. ©. As 3 S =. o 86 =e OE © ai Sos S SN U6 o 8 F- PW F&F ct. Q 5 Ss BM &@ 8 IN *» 8g Ss & ex 32 v Se0@ $8 3 g 2 I, 5 3S S S 3: : — ° OE ° ° NA BS BF FF BF 5 «(O a i) S : : 7 3. 3o 3 WWW eye : 282g 82 8g 8 g Sr 8&8 a RB WB & as 3 : FS 35 g SS Ss ” > ® OE O 3 FH - «2 OO. S OS 8s PA AO _ or @ 3 Q 9 = © GQ AO ff = a © g O ° GQ ” o 3 a OO 2 ¢ a S a © 2 8 EO 4. of — { op 2 GA eye RR OO - BW ” AO BY ES EP) eg GE GS. s 8 3 8 3 8 © < 2 2 S é 3 a : ROS — OO a" _ OO (7a = © a S : : : é z 2 Z a. ct 5 SA © NW S So ES! _ : : s am = on " or OO. OO raw) Q i o OT a. ‘e) ran) on Ry “a OO IN 5 3 ’ : 1) > — AO RO MH EE bo reis Pa A OO ad SY WW 2 = © © Rey @. a : : g EE a 8 < to. 6S ” OS @ OO RS i) O AU 3 Of Q c Nos 7 S : : 3 O. at a O 9 OO an. pe) reis) MB ct © ~” —. Q phon} 3 ; S @ PS N © a Q m* : 3 : 2° 8 5 a o Q s+ o 2 68 Rey?) OF. pe) Q a = ° IGN ann ‘ : : 5 s) OO is OO GA ; q 3 ~ of =) =} OO ” ) rat) OF. a \o) 9 heat = =" O. er 3 BG d : : : : 5 ° OT Q see) a).¢") ' 8 2 x =¥ me > of @ OS s =) PST OO o “< 3 St OO : : : a OO © Ss in 2 : 3 S =} 7) EO) c OE 9) — S — 0 o. EU o. OO © SA 2 : RR EB EE 2 EE EEG ° : ) : : - x ct MH co. S a \o) =) AS OS Q. Q o is OO. a © AU RO) a OF. © ? : i 3 5 \o) Q. MH OO ES 5 ZS ES g. BG pis GS 7. : g a3 AZ RS 47 <«€ o 3 to ™” ct — O AO ¢ e. : : OO a) a. — — SI S a GD = 2 7: : NSS Of ct S SF OO Q. $9 @. OO AA i) EE) - : a 7 8 eg 68 Ss 8 ® = ¢ a 2 8 a ~ 5 @ OS 7 2 5 e+ 9 o) ZA vi < <) i" S. =) z 3 8 ES 8 = OT t > 8 w e 6 g pe (@) 3 > =a Rey) o) — TO. Foe age 2 8 g 6 a Ss gas Lo meet _ ow “8.-.-— 7 2. ° parents 7 need pe era) ° a. © re Sr seas : CE ESE “ed NW S, OO me EEE VO. ‘ss late Fe ere Tia Wales en o S ch AAN? cf EE EER EED as re : OO 5 o a S =s ° Z, OF pe Re Bene's Beets =z OS RT UG = A OO : Less HF Moe he 5 5 8 5 63 -— S <a AS aeons Se AHI —- a+ § RM} 2 OS EE, ma o- EE TS eye OE O a) =" ” —_—e a 1G AIE TES Kate EE VE PURSES ~” _ =e 5 3 9 see O Se THS eye FH Dee Wei OO 99 9 o Sins bye: eye fa Ne ES UA Site a et Sr D we a =7 preprint ES yes ALS Se a) OO. 69 5 OO GS Ss see CEE Seances 2 f 8 a o ES Se etc EE OD 5 a S SOA Nazi see 2S for) 3 » § 2 Ce o @, eye gene State To. “Lens in EE ah was © ES EZ 2 SY O — ° 5 mu Of. a OE) -Y T 5 69 ct a ) \O ANG =) a. o) —~ a _ o 3 i a S S c OO =) RO eye) —. RQ Jon} OO pan 34 3 a. seSe8o § 8 8 a 2 8 § Sow sSSeiscss for) a E ° AG a or (2 8 8380858 8S - Y a OO ES «= 0 w 4") =_TO GOO Y = :, = "XX S85 8 I Ss, \O OO ® 2 9 3 ; i 2 pe) @® RAE) CQ 9 8 5 : S e Szes8o 88 a — O 3 OO an — St S 6S e>SStSesgeg S ® * » 2 go EF soever g SF A Ss s g GG Fees yes £§ 8 § QA §.@) me Sos —T EO} OS" 9 is) O" KE at EU. OT era Ss = E a he EE s 3 8 o F CF GE B S -. =) 2 y= BE 3 ZZ: = 2 OF 3 ; = ~e Segue 8 ® = OO co} EO) a =“ =) ; 3 SSse2 EE ® — + © OO o ) Q sea no -_ PS z S ° 28 Peers: 5 3 2 8 Se a" BT © ; sf eases -3 Q =. — AA CE} =) O : 3 ~S$s83eea3 8 © 8 @ = of ) : s$8a 88s 3 TT 8 o 8, pa) O O< OD Ry 5. - =) OE 3 ® a 3 s : Z : : 2 3 5 BG 3 ° ° as Las) ) EO) D mh 7» 2, Amendment Of Section 4, Ordinance Will of 1967, In the Muslim Family La WS Ordinance, 1967 (VIII of 1967) Section Shall be renumbered @S_ sub. Section (1) thereof and after SUD-Section (1), re- Numbered as aforesaid the following new sub-Sections seal] be added, namely:. (2) If a Muslim Male from Ahl-e-T, ship dies, the share Of widow in the immovable Property eft behind by her deceased husband Shall be as follows:. (a) one-fourth Share of the fixed Price or value of the Property, if there is no Child left behind the deceased husband: and (b) one-eighth Share, if their js Child left behind. ! (3) If there are two or more Widows, the Share, as Mentioned in Sab-section (2), half be divided equally among them, (4) The Price or value of the Property shall be the Price or value existing at the time of Payment ANG Not the price Or value which Existed at the time of death of the husband Provided that if the legal heirs Of the deceased do Not give the Widow her Share Jin the above forms, She seal} become entitled to her due share in the Corpus of immovable Property, (3) A widow IS entitled to her share in the Corpus Of movable Property of her deceased husband Provided that the pro visions of SUB-Sections (2) and (3) half mutatis mutandis apply, (6) Fatah-e-Jafri recognizes right of a husband for get his Share from the Property eft by his deceased Wife, either Movable or immovable, as. WY follows: (a) One-half Share, of there is no Child left behind, and (5) one-fourth Share of the Property if their js Child left being, (7) In case of dispute, the Parties or an Y Of the Parties may have recourse to a Court of Competent Jurisdiction Or by ¢Approaching the Mujtahid-e- id o =m < alt 5¢ 2g) 3s ¢F= Q9 >°O68 classes 2 F 8 e 3 sassy S8R85 58 — ©. — 2 § F GE 7 2 2 8 y Vegas BS eve ohs o a © at FS. O © O WS SRO OG EO =, £& N 3 Boas 225 e8 5 BS Q. 2) = < me — AME 29 2” 422 93 4 ‘Z =3 o z) a 86}. 2@ 207 “2s o2→ 8 GE F go 2 8 g 8 ~83a88 Se =s ass 7 Pe 6B co 6 GW o a 3B 8oa 83 S328 a) =) RS OO Q © O, Q= GS =I a 99 o. o 3 a. Of n= =. ass. N33 — a San O OO 3 D gas PO § § BG 5 OF UL 9583 SPS 25 5 8 TLA. we ~— ans _— ; BA Q. Ss w.™= - § eg F 8 g S 9 o. ES, 558 =" SAE 8e8 7 all O Q $9 = RO) MH — in see Spy Says EEE EE AS! c a 3g 5 5. 2.6 NO LB sos 3 5s OUOE OO 8 3S she so O38 So r OO O ~€5 o 2 kg <— 8 © £8 SAE 2 e8S98e oO x AO S > AA 8 =. S. BG oz "Best"ES 7 an : 2) © “”, OD =) OO e) =o 57> VO ~=Ss S38 p OG B GS FF 3B FO 6 ¢$5 BES see Sots. UB S BW w kg £7 FS FF S3q8 S733 5 2 OE ® © RM OO. 225 OS Baxter !. BF £ —& Ss ®& co F 6 2 o. sae588 ASB=es3 3 Q HY @) 4) a 4) of o — —OMS P So - a o OO “ O Soph Ss @ a 2 S a _ OO. ™ S. To 0 —- “Rh s OO o) =. <. =) is pa) =O Ss £& § OO 35 UC _ g eg 2 B SF o £ F 3 A Se x) I'm OO SY OG o G & PO: £€ 8 BY ££ F 2B FY A BG FS o OO =) =" S a. co) SG =y =) re) © c WD OO 5 SF OO OS TF 5 a2 © x US m The o 99 a 5 GQ O c+ a. a) TU. © ES 0a OO of S> RM 8 a Q o 3 S Fm BB is @ a” Fe) =. $ i) — O. a ° § 8 ¢ 2B QF EF m® & 5 Ss FF FF B O ANE) D eye) in =) 6 Q (a ° G KE) RS] SS 5 t+ PTY Rey 5 ©) rat) OF. OO in eye ® S Ga =s Q — =3 e+ O 5 is CS BS O 2 2 Ss 5 5 FG 2 ¢ GS §$ B f B B ew 8 FES, F 8 OK BE SE B ” on a O 3 TS Ga EE) pe Kr o g Q Pa Ss) 5 § £ BS © F &§& SF SF S WY F&F FM RR F&F - ns © Orr 86S a2 OO 5 OD O = o- a BW — SY — — a o¢ & 5 a = OE GG OE o EF 3x ESE 8 § DS FS & £5£ 6 8 & 7 2 B&B |» 2 & FB 59 Ff O @ — ¢ s SF ff B&B § NE) t o 8B > S €8© 2 o« § &§ 6 § 8S F&F FT » F* B 5b BY F <“ BS G6 Ss ES FG SS &€ F 8g Q tase © =) for) S) =} VA) =e Ss ¢ £ B 2 8S $ B&B o F B § Ff FM a) O OE) ct =} co) HOA OO © he Q, Z TS a. a) is MH e) Q © — G S 2 8 ¢ 7 FB € FF F&F § g Bs 5. UA Ss = me CT ES “n OO FS a ho > _ OO o © a. 9 =: a OO RR S> 8B : 5 8B O =e OO OT =I OO. © OO Io OS a @) OO EE F Se &® €8 see Se § FG B re) : o FSF =p 3p SO ¢ 8S WU F&F F £2 ap LB SB FM Ff GG B 5 @ ) O a — RO a) a OO for) a =) 7 5g o S O 3 8 TM OO 6S 5s » F&F SO O r= “MEZRQ ct a. OD o @ © s FF n- RIS Fe +t OO 93 - QQ = © BS SD o g Sell SS =] © 3 ~” o 2 5. aw OO GA SF Fa TW SQ Ss OO 8 § AO OF 8 = S Ea “ © SZ WY XS & ° S) NM ss 5 GA 5 F OO Q in - SB, ® TRUK 5 GA ct, o To. ‘EO NBA Q QD “< CAA So 5 S © ” o i) Q. O pes ct, © A a2 '° ct © ms ° © EO) 2 S OoSsSREsPe8S 3 2 FF & >» of 2 °F =n 5 FF ¢ a ES z*" GS Q = ¢F FS » BS QQ i 9 Seems EO €$ €2 $2 6 F 5 OO GS boxes © —- OS SG 8 g m OOO of o & Losses — — © <9 a S a © TO “= eh 2. =a — SS u8 § ew 2 Be g 2 5 8 BS Issue BF SE EB e. €23 GE OU 2 eyes - |6hUkOD Ss BB ¢ a 6 a 3 5 Tapes —~ 6 & 5 8 § =&¢ BS 8&8 O 2. BP Grass Q. Ss S & F SE o ss 4S 8 Sauk NM 6B OE a in. WD OO a 8 ©. So WO a. et eg me \e) p9 a} —- C8 9 7 68,CUB as; 5 5 F M 5 She FP 8 5 2 © O a4 O en c o) SY >OO™ — re) — Q PD MH 2) — 5 is Sos s a =} > oO o~ =) OO on} AR Yee © o a =) = for} © EG “> So GS 8 go » 8S o 2 6 “” ct - ™~ as, OO SS ~” EO. I'm =) ET) = PS AO) SY o ~ a © 2 a 3 5 S RS OO. as) AS mm © 2 © 5 © to — i OT an 2 — EB g¢ § 5 Fe BSH g<KS Fee § FB Ss E 6 S £ =» BP ¢€5 SC YM 5 6 ¢ °° FM RO z © as, 3 7) GA a OE. OS EU “ my OD S + on OO O. Q me Q “ 2B EP £ Ff “© 3 5 5 8 F FS $ B BB -* Ea ff SF € 6& SF GE GS £8 ¢g 2 <¢ GG GS @ GA a?) =a OO — ” 3 A 8 - RB ES © Be 5 2? e eg F&F go B 3 — 3B 6 @ SF e BF @® NM OZ 9. 6+ + § ° — are) s) MT o a) Wei 7 g9 OF a on S ° OF O ee <n: RM of FF» SS FM GT OC O < UI Ea a. o. - in a OO » 5B §$§ § £ 5g €5$ F BS. B 5B a E> St A. © o) Ss =" S a 99 a O 6 S o. MH S eye © Rey) $9 is =3 =] Ry OS 5 Rey reins EO in + eye} e) Vs) O OS on A Rey) AO} =) GA — — MH OC SF © 2 5 OO A © Re ff F&F SO =) — CS GG a 5 6 - a BP ¢ <2 $8 § © & @® 8 F * 2B g F&F FB 8 3 *® § 2 8 = 8 42 & @¢ § S FG S =a OD GE: > ct _ — =r 5 f o OO © RF OC OO 7 SO FS 5s 8 ¢- §$ =» & “ GG <s § EF 8B 5 9 in 7. 28 3 in 6 5 =I 2 OU ss 8 A. see SO ¢ B F&F ow» GG 38 o OG 2 EF FR SF 8 OF © © > @ 5 SY) a EE c for) in e) 5 at s OO. OO 2 o. Rey) OT Rey) in BS on) OO =A SL =" $9 Q (OE) © - Q cc BB § © § F § Fe FF € F &§ &€& 2–8 ¢ FF w 5 ¢ § & 8 FF BF F 8 6 B pe) — com OO OS fan is — © A. AO, 5 a am OL O 7 o GO go ” 5 © MA GC mm -& CS is. a 2 B B&B & ol6lUCOlmlC@“EN§$EMC KE SSS Bc EL 3 »o & a OSG!) (CD 3 OO. SS EE) =" © =) —t o. =) O =) OT re EU 5 © @ S =— OO © S. © © c. GA =} o AO) oo ES Of S = pad) Jo} in GA AU OO ct =} OO a ram AOE a F&F. o £8 B GF on her 2) a+ ran) 4) 5 ap © — Ss € €£€ WW» § § & & B & f 8 2 2 Q @ =F o 2% S go Ff CF o BF FF e Sg 2S Se OE § F Be € EB eg MT 5 Rh OG a 3–26 O EO) a) — fore) Po OG 99 © =) RM: o AO) w A. VA @ o- =) 5 in © OF _ © EO) SG i" Q < Rey AO) =e z. IA “< 7 — > Q. a. © an OO a z i a - q EU co c 5 Rey) =" ©) Y am OO S I eh OE) C > SF 6 TF OF RM “Ss OO 5 g so) =a 2 ” GE g a @ in S =y 6 8 @¢ 2 8 OO ff © 2 § § & ¢@ Q 6 © @ o S. FH =O OO 5 a7 ns @ — <«¢ CS BP FM F °e a - 6 2B & BS F of =) OO 2 Re € F © pp KE 7 © GB Ff EF SE o 5 o 2 MH 3 F 5 5 8 =) © RO 99 OO =s ray © © on =" JS a = ONT © OO 5 ) = OF. 99 A OO 8 OO S © a «< OO ~ 7 a. © {i> on SA ye be OS Ss OB So ® GA Se Sg 5 Y Io ie Ln OD S. Hb OO ; 6 ; he OO © MH Ea} 7 pad) an o) co eye ” ch 2 is 2) Sg, O. Z, “a re) (on) =5 or] é A NW} OO a OS WW a. ct 4 her) © pan ~)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): Vs SS 5 FM & ¢ & S68 5 © OE US a =) = GE) Q- © OO GA we “* 02) © =) OO. ion 3 -=* 2 2 Rey) © Ss o. Ss GE) 3 » MT ; —W i= Rh SD GA St f ) 7 some BE 3 S ct PS € © m4 a. Q Los SY ® on =" ‘o) i. ”n OO. t. bot 3 a — as) 2 o ff 38 B o 6S S38 ~ — & $8 &@ § {|& =S ON a OO. — OT 2. o. ©. As 3 S =. o 86 =e OE © ai Sos S SN U6 o 8 F- PW F&F ct. Q 5 Ss BM &@ 8 IN *» 8g Ss & ex 32 v Se0@ $8 3 g 2 I, 5 3S S S 3: : — ° OE ° ° NA BS BF FF BF 5 «(O a i) S : : 7 3. 3o 3 WWW eye : 282g 82 8g 8 g Sr 8&8 a RB WB & as 3 : FS 35 g SS Ss ” > ® OE O 3 FH - «2 OO. S OS 8s PA AO _ or @ 3 Q 9 = © GQ AO ff = a © g O ° GQ ” o 3 a OO 2 ¢ a S a © 2 8 EO 4. of — { op 2 GA eye RR OO - BW ” AO BY ES EP) eg GE GS. s 8 3 8 3 8 © < 2 2 S é 3 a : ROS — OO a" _ OO (7a = © a S : : : é z 2 Z a. ct 5 SA © NW S So ES! _ : : s am = on " or OO. OO raw) Q i o OT a. ‘e) ran) on Ry “a OO IN 5 3 ’ : 1) > — AO RO MH EE bo reis Pa A OO ad SY WW 2 = © © Rey @. a : : g EE a 8 < to. 6S ” OS @ OO RS i) O AU 3 Of Q c Nos 7 S : : 3 O. at a O 9 OO an. pe) reis) MB ct © ~” —. Q phon} 3 ; S @ PS N © a Q m* : 3 : 2° 8 5 a o Q s+ o 2 68 Rey?) OF. pe) Q a = ° IGN ann ‘ : : 5 s) OO is OO GA ; q 3 ~ of =) =} OO ” ) rat) OF. a \o) 9 heat = =" O. er 3 BG d : : : : 5 ° OT Q see) a).¢") ' 8 2 x =¥ me > of @ OS s =) PST OO o “< 3 St OO : : : a OO © Ss in 2 : 3 S =} 7) EO) c

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): O. er 3 BG d : : : : 5 ° OT Q see) a).¢") ' 8 2 x =¥ me > of @ OS s =) PST OO o “< 3 St OO : : : a OO © Ss in 2 : 3 S =} 7) EO) c OE 9) — S — 0 o. EU o. OO © SA 2 : RR EB EE 2 EE EEG ° : ) : : - x ct MH co. S a \o) =) AS OS Q. Q o is OO. a © AU RO) a OF. © ? : i 3 5 \o) Q. MH OO ES 5 ZS ES g. BG pis GS 7. : g a3 AZ RS 47 <«€ o 3 to ™” ct — O AO ¢ e. : : OO a) a. — — SI S a GD = 2 7: : NSS Of ct S SF OO Q. $9 @. OO AA i) EE) - : a 7 8 eg 68 Ss 8 ® = ¢ a 2 8 a ~ 5 @ OS 7 2 5 e+ 9 o) ZA vi < <) i" S. =) z 3 8 ES 8 = OT t > 8 w e 6 g pe (@) 3 > =a Rey) o) — TO. Foe age 2 8 g 6 a Ss gas Lo meet _ ow “8.-.-— 7 2. ° parents 7 need pe era) ° a. © re Sr seas : CE ESE “ed NW S, OO me EEE VO. ‘ss late Fe ere Tia Wales en o S ch AAN? cf EE EER EED as re : OO 5 o a S =s ° Z, OF pe Re Bene's Beets =z OS RT UG = A OO : Less HF Moe he 5 5 8 5 63 -— S <a AS aeons Se AHI —- a+ § RM} 2 OS EE, ma o- EE TS eye OE O a) =" ” —_—e a 1G AIE TES Kate EE VE PURSES ~” _ =e 5 3 9 see O Se THS eye FH Dee Wei OO 99 9 o Sins bye: eye fa Ne ES UA Site a et Sr D we a =7 preprint ES yes ALS Se a) OO. 69 5 OO GS Ss see CEE Seances 2 f 8 a o ES Se etc EE OD 5 a S SOA Nazi see 2S for) 3 » § 2 Ce o @, eye gene State To. “Lens in EE ah was © ES EZ 2 SY O — ° 5 mu Of. a OE) -Y T 5 69 ct a ) \O ANG =) a. o) —~ a _ o 3 i a S S c OO =) RO eye) —. RQ Jon} OO pan 34 3 a. seSe8o § 8 8 a 2 8 § Sow sSSeiscss for) a E ° AG a or (2 8 8380858 8S - Y a OO ES «= 0 w 4") =_TO GOO Y = :,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): S S c OO =) RO eye) —. RQ Jon} OO pan 34 3 a. seSe8o § 8 8 a 2 8 § Sow sSSeiscss for) a E ° AG a or (2 8 8380858 8S - Y a OO ES «= 0 w 4") =_TO GOO Y = :, = "XX S85 8 I Ss, \O OO ® 2 9 3 ; i 2 pe) @® RAE) CQ 9 8 5 : S e Szes8o 88 a — O 3 OO an — St S 6S e>SStSesgeg S ® * » 2 go EF soever g SF A Ss s g GG Fees yes £§ 8 § QA §.@) me Sos —T EO} OS" 9 is) O" KE at EU. OT era Ss = E a he EE s 3 8 o F CF GE B S -. =) 2 y= BE 3 ZZ: = 2 OF 3 ; = ~e Segue 8 ® = OO co} EO) a =“ =) ; 3 SSse2 EE ® — + © OO o ) Q sea no -_ PS z S ° 28 Peers: 5 3 2 8 Se a" BT © ; sf eases -3 Q =. — AA CE} =) O : 3 ~S$s83eea3 8 © 8 @ = of ) : s$8a 88s 3 TT 8 o 8, pa) O O< OD Ry 5. - =) OE 3 ® a 3 s : Z : : 2 3 5 BG 3 ° ° as Las) ) EO) D mh 7» 2, Amendment Of Section 4, Ordinance Will of 1967, In the Muslim Family La WS Ordinance, 1967 (VIII of 1967) Section Shall be renumbered @S_ sub. Section (1) thereof and after SUD-Section (1), re- Numbered as aforesaid the following new sub-Sections seal] be added, namely:. (2) If a Muslim Male from Ahl-e-T, ship dies, the share Of widow in the immovable Property eft behind by her deceased husband Shall be as follows:. (a) one-fourth Share of the fixed Price or value of the Property, if there is no Child left behind the deceased husband: and (b) one-eighth Share, if their js Child left behind. ! (3) If there are two or more Widows, the Share, as Mentioned in Sab-section (2), half be divided equally among them, (4) The Price or value of the Property shall be the Price or value existing at the time of Payment ANG Not the price Or value which Existed at the time of death of the husband Provided that if the legal heirs Of the deceased do Not give the Widow her Share Jin the above forms, She seal} become entitled to her due share in the Corpus of immovable Property, (3) A widow IS entitled to her share in the Corpus Of movable Property of her deceased husband Provided that the pro visions of SUB-Sections (2) and (3) half mutatis mutandis apply, (6) Fatah-e-Jafri recognizes right of a husband for get his Share from the Property eft by his deceased Wife, either

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): widow IS entitled to her share in the Corpus Of movable Property of her deceased husband Provided that the pro visions of SUB-Sections (2) and (3) half mutatis mutandis apply, (6) Fatah-e-Jafri recognizes right of a husband for get his Share from the Property eft by his deceased Wife, either Movable or immovable, as. WY follows: (a) One-half Share, of there is no Child left behind, and (5) one-fourth Share of the Property if their js Child left being, (7) In case of dispute, the Parties or an Y Of the Parties may have recourse to a Court of Competent Jurisdiction Or by ¢Approaching the Mujtahid-e- id o =m < alt 5¢ 2g) 3s ¢F= Q9 >°O68 classes 2 F 8 e 3 sassy S8R85 58 — ©. — 2 § F GE 7 2 2 8 y Vegas BS eve ohs o a © at FS. O © O WS SRO OG EO =, £& N 3 Boas 225 e8 5 BS Q. 2) = < me — AME 29 2” 422 93 4 ‘Z =3 o z) a 86}. 2@ 207 “2s o2→ 8 GE F go 2 8 g 8 ~83a88 Se =s ass 7 Pe 6B co 6 GW o a 3B 8oa 83 S328 a) =) RS OO Q © O, Q= GS =I a 99 o. o 3 a. Of n= =. ass. N33 — a San O OO 3 D gas PO § § BG 5 OF UL 9583 SPS 25 5 8 TLA. we ~— ans _— ; BA Q. Ss w.™= - § eg F 8 g S 9 o. ES, 558 =" SAE 8e8 7 all O Q $9 = RO) MH — in see Spy Says EEE EE AS! c a 3g 5 5. 2.6 NO LB sos 3 5s OUOE OO 8 3S she so O38 So r OO O ~€5 o 2 kg <— 8 © £8 SAE 2 e8S98e oO x AO S > AA 8 =. S. BG oz "Best"ES 7 an : 2) © “”, OD =) OO e) =o 57> VO ~=Ss S38 p OG B GS FF 3B FO 6 ¢$5 BES see Sots. UB S BW w kg £7 FS FF S3q8 S733 5 2 OE ® © RM OO. 225 OS Baxter !. BF £ —& Ss ®& co F 6 2 o. sae588 ASB=es3 3 Q HY @) 4) a 4) of o — —OMS P So - a o OO “ O Soph Ss @ a 2 S a _ OO. ™ S. To 0 —- “Rh s OO o) =. <. =) is pa) =O Ss £& § OO 35 UC _ g eg 2 B SF o £ F 3 A Se x) I'm OO SY OG o G & PO: £€ 8 BY ££ F 2B FY A BG FS o OO =) =" S a. co) SG =y =) re) © c WD OO 5 SF OO OS TF 5 a2 © x US

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): o £ F 3 A Se x) I'm OO SY OG o G & PO: £€ 8 BY ££ F 2B FY A BG FS o OO =) =" S a. co) SG =y =) re) © c WD OO 5 SF OO OS TF 5 a2 © x US m The o 99 a 5 GQ O c+ a. a) TU. © ES 0a OO of S> RM 8 a Q o 3 S Fm BB is @ a” Fe) =. $ i) — O. a ° § 8 ¢ 2B QF EF m® & 5 Ss FF FF B O ANE) D eye) in =) 6 Q (a ° G KE) RS] SS 5 t+ PTY Rey 5 ©) rat) OF. OO in eye ® S Ga =s Q — =3 e+ O 5 is CS BS O 2 2 Ss 5 5 FG 2 ¢ GS §$ B f B B ew 8 FES, F 8 OK BE SE B ” on a O 3 TS Ga EE) pe Kr o g Q Pa Ss) 5 § £ BS © F &§& SF SF S WY F&F FM RR F&F - ns © Orr 86S a2 OO 5 OD O = o- a BW — SY — — a o¢ & 5 a = OE GG OE o EF 3x ESE 8 § DS FS & £5£ 6 8 & 7 2 B&B |» 2 & FB 59 Ff O @ — ¢ s SF ff B&B § NE) t o 8B > S €8© 2 o« § &§ 6 § 8S F&F FT » F* B 5b BY F <“ BS G6 Ss ES FG SS &€ F 8g Q tase © =) for) S) =} VA) =e Ss ¢ £ B 2 8S $ B&B o F B § Ff FM a) O OE) ct =} co) HOA OO © he Q, Z TS a. a) is MH e) Q © — G S 2 8 ¢ 7 FB € FF F&F § g Bs 5. UA Ss = me CT ES “n OO FS a ho > _ OO o © a. 9 =: a OO RR S> 8B : 5 8B O =e OO OT =I OO. © OO Io OS a @) OO EE F Se &® €8 see Se § FG B re) : o FSF =p 3p SO ¢ 8S WU F&F F £2 ap LB SB FM Ff GG B 5 @ ) O a — RO a) a OO for) a =) 7 5g o S O 3 8 TM OO 6S 5s » F&F SO O r= “MEZRQ ct a. OD o @ © s FF n- RIS Fe +t OO 93 - QQ = © BS SD o g Sell SS =] © 3 ~” o 2 5. aw OO GA SF Fa TW SQ Ss OO 8 § AO OF 8 = S Ea “ © SZ WY XS & ° S) NM ss 5

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): RIS Fe +t OO 93 - QQ = © BS SD o g Sell SS =] © 3 ~” o 2 5. aw OO GA SF Fa TW SQ Ss OO 8 § AO OF 8 = S Ea “ © SZ WY XS & ° S) NM ss 5 GA 5 F OO Q in - SB, ® TRUK 5 GA ct, o To. ‘EO NBA Q QD “< CAA So 5 S © ” o i) Q. O pes ct, © A a2 '° ct © ms ° © EO) 2 S OoSsSREsPe8S 3 2 FF & >» of 2 °F =n 5 FF ¢ a ES z*" GS Q = ¢F FS » BS QQ i 9 Seems EO €$ €2 $2 6 F 5 OO GS boxes © —- OS SG 8 g m OOO of o & Losses — — © <9 a S a © TO “= eh 2. =a — SS u8 § ew 2 Be g 2 5 8 BS Issue BF SE EB e. €23 GE OU 2 eyes - |6hUkOD Ss BB ¢ a 6 a 3 5 Tapes —~ 6 & 5 8 § =&¢ BS 8&8 O 2. BP Grass Q. Ss S & F SE o ss 4S 8 Sauk NM 6B OE a in. WD OO a 8 ©. So WO a. et eg me \e) p9 a} —- C8 9 7 68,CUB as; 5 5 F M 5 She FP 8 5 2 © O a4 O en c o) SY >OO™ — re) — Q PD MH 2) — 5 is Sos s a =} > oO o~ =) OO on} AR Yee © o a =) = for} © EG “> So GS 8 go » 8S o 2 6 “” ct - ™~ as, OO SS ~” EO. I'm =) ET) = PS AO) SY o ~ a © 2 a 3 5 S RS OO. as) AS mm © 2 © 5 © to — i OT an 2 — EB g¢ § 5 Fe BSH g<KS Fee § FB Ss E 6 S £ =» BP ¢€5 SC YM 5 6 ¢ °° FM RO z © as, 3 7) GA a OE. OS EU “ my OD S + on OO O. Q me Q “ 2B EP £ Ff “© 3 5 5 8 F FS $ B BB -* Ea ff SF € 6& SF GE GS £8 ¢g 2 <¢ GG GS @ GA a?) =a OO — ” 3 A 8 - RB ES © Be 5 2? e eg F&F go B 3 — 3B 6 @ SF e BF @® NM OZ 9. 6+ + § ° — are) s) MT o a) Wei 7 g9 OF a on S ° OF O ee <n: RM of FF» SS FM GT OC O < UI Ea a. o. - in a OO » 5B §$§ § £ 5g €5$ F BS. B 5B

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): 6+ + § ° — are) s) MT o a) Wei 7 g9 OF a on S ° OF O ee <n: RM of FF» SS FM GT OC O < UI Ea a. o. - in a OO » 5B §$§ § £ 5g €5$ F BS. B 5B a E> St A. © o) Ss =" S a 99 a O 6 S o. MH S eye © Rey) $9 is =3 =] Ry OS 5 Rey reins EO in + eye} e) Vs) O OS on A Rey) AO} =) GA — — MH OC SF © 2 5 OO A © Re ff F&F SO =) — CS GG a 5 6 - a BP ¢ <2 $8 § © & @® 8 F * 2B g F&F FB 8 3 *® § 2 8 = 8 42 & @¢ § S FG S =a OD GE: > ct _ — =r 5 f o OO © RF OC OO 7 SO FS 5s 8 ¢- §$ =» & “ GG <s § EF 8B 5 9 in 7. 28 3 in 6 5 =I 2 OU ss 8 A. see SO ¢ B F&F ow» GG 38 o OG 2 EF FR SF 8 OF © © > @ 5 SY) a EE c for) in e) 5 at s OO. OO 2 o. Rey) OT Rey) in BS on) OO =A SL =" $9 Q (OE) © - Q cc BB § © § F § Fe FF € F &§ &€& 2–8 ¢ FF w 5 ¢ § & 8 FF BF F 8 6 B pe) — com OO OS fan is — © A. AO, 5 a am OL O 7 o GO go ” 5 © MA GC mm -& CS is. a 2 B B&B & ol6lUCOlmlC@“EN§$EMC KE SSS Bc EL 3 »o & a OSG!) (CD 3 OO. SS EE) =" © =) —t o. =) O =) OT re EU 5 © @ S =— OO © S. © © c. GA =} o AO) oo ES Of S = pad) Jo} in GA AU OO ct =} OO a ram AOE a F&F. o £8 B GF on her 2) a+ ran) 4) 5 ap © — Ss € €£€ WW» § § & & B & f 8 2 2 Q @ =F o 2% S go Ff CF o BF FF e Sg 2S Se OE § F Be € EB eg MT 5 Rh OG a 3–26 O EO) a) — fore) Po OG 99 © =) RM: o AO) w A. VA @ o- =) 5 in © OF _ © EO) SG i" Q < Rey AO) =e z. IA “< 7 — > Q. a. © an OO a z i a - q EU co c 5 Rey) =" ©) Y am OO S I eh OE) C > SF 6 TF OF RM “Ss OO 5 g so)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): SG i" Q < Rey AO) =e z. IA “< 7 — > Q. a. © an OO a z i a - q EU co c 5 Rey) =" ©) Y am OO S I eh OE) C > SF 6 TF OF RM “Ss OO 5 g so) =a 2 ” GE g a @ in S =y 6 8 @¢ 2 8 OO ff © 2 § § & ¢@ Q 6 © @ o S. FH =O OO 5 a7 ns @ — <«¢ CS BP FM F °e a - 6 2B & BS F of =) OO 2 Re € F © pp KE 7 © GB Ff EF SE o 5 o 2 MH 3 F 5 5 8 =) © RO 99 OO =s ray © © on =" JS a = ONT © OO 5 ) = OF. 99 A OO 8 OO S © a «< OO ~ 7 a. © {i> on SA ye be OS Ss OB So ® GA Se Sg 5 Y Io ie Ln OD S. Hb OO ; 6 ; he OO © MH Ea} 7 pad) an o) co eye ” ch 2 is 2) Sg, O. Z, “a re) (on) =5 or] é A NW} OO a OS WW a. ct 4 her) © pan ~)

Question: What is case 2005 CLC 973 about?
Answer: Case 2005 CLC 973 was decided by ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT on 2015-03-11. The case involved . ASHRAM BIBI (APPELLANT) VERSUS MUSA KHAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include BENAMI TRANSACTION. The case was heard by ATHAR MINALLAH AND AAMER FAROOQ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 CLC 973?
Answer: In case 2005 CLC 973, the court applied the following statutes: BENAMI TRANSACTION. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT and decided on 2015-03-11.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 CLC 973?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 CLC 973 were: HAFIZ ALI ASGHAR AND SAFEER KHADIM FOR APPELLANT. KASHIF MALIK FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: ATHAR MINALLAH AND AAMER FAROOQ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 CLC 973?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 CLC 973 were: . ASHRAM BIBI (APPELLANT) VERSUS MUSA KHAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 CLC 973.
Answer: AAMER FAROOQ, J.- This appeal is directed against judgment and decree dated 14-3- 1987 whereby the suit filed by MUSA Khan, predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.1 to 5, was decreed and* it was declared that he is the owner of plot bear mg No.770 measuring 166. Square Yard situated at Sector G-, Islamabad (the property). 2. The facts, in brief} are that the predecessor of respondents Nos: to 5 namely MUSA Khan filed a suit for declaration and injunction against the appellant with respect to the property on the basis that the property was purchased in the name of the appellant, however, the funds for it were provided by him and were deposited from England in a jointly operated account maintained with MCB Bank Limited, Islamabad. It was further alleged in the plaint that since the plaintiff WSS not in the Country, therefore, the property was purchased in the name of the appellant on the basis of male FIDE. It was further submitted that on 12-3-1982 a notice was published in the daily ‘Gang’ wherein it was categorically provided that the property is owned by him. The suit was contested by the appellant and in the written statement legal as well as factual objections were taken. It. was categorically denied that the property was purchased out of the money sent by MUSA Khan from U.K. or that their was any misrepresentation or male FIDE. The appellant in her defense specifically submitted that the possession of the property is with her, and she has leased out the same and is receiving the rent. Out of the pleadings of the parties, leaned Trial Court framed the following issues:. ISSUES. 1. Whether this court lacks jurisdiction to enter tam the suit? 2. Whether the plaintiff has locus standi to bring the action? OPD 3. Is the suit incompetent in its present form? 4. Is the suit bad for non-joinder and misnomer of necessary parties? OPD 5. Is the suit incorrectly valued for the purpose of court-fee and jurisdiction? OPD 6. Whether the plaintiff is the actual owner of the suit plot and defendant No. is a beamy? 7. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration and junction prayed for on the grounds detailed in the plaint? 8. Relief. 3. In support of his claim MUSA Khan adduced the following witnesses:- MUSA Khan PW-6 i. GUL Haman PW-1 i. Her Ahmed Khan PW-2 iv. Amber Afar, Manager MCB Bank, PW-3 v. Syed Muhammad Slain Naevi, Manager MCB Bank, PW-3 vi Lai Khan PW-4 vi. Muhammad Nadeem PW-5 it. Muhammad Roman PW-6. MST. Ashram Bibi appeared as DW-1. 4. The parties also led the documentary evidence Le. copy of passport of MST. Ashram Bibi Ex.P-1, copy of I.D. card of MST. Ashram Bibi Ex.P-2, copy of application for transfer of allotment of plot Ex.P-3, copy of application for allotment of plot Ex.P- 4, copy of bank draft Ex.P-3/A, receipt of MCB Bank regarding Bank draft Ex.P-5, copy of letter issued by USAF Co. Mark-A, copy of application form of MCB Bank Mark-B. The documentary evidence Jed by MST. Ashram Bibi was copy of completion certificate Ex.D-1, copy of letter for permission to occupy the building Ex. Di22, copy of family suit filed by defendant No.] Ex.D-3, copy of decree of family suit in favor of MST. Ashram Bibi Ex.D-4, copy of account opening form Mark- A, copy of application filed by MST. Ashram Bibi Mark-B. 5. The TNA Court vide judgment and decree dated 4-3-1987 decreed the suit in favor of MUSA Khan, hence the present appeal. 6. Learned counsel for the appellant inter alia submitted that in light of law laid down by the Hon'BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in case titled Muhammad Said ad Hussain v. Muhammad Anwar Hussain cited as 1991 SCMR 703 in order to prove became a party has to prove source of money from which the property was purchased, custody of title documents, possession of the property and motive in the Became transaction. It was further contended that the plain reading of the plaint shows that the plaintiff has not alleged the four ingredients of Became and also has failed to prove the same. Respondents Nos ;1 to-5 were ordered to be proceeded expert vide order dated 22-9-2014. 7. Learned counsel for respondent No,7 namely Capital Development Authority (CDA) supported the version of the appellant and submitted that as per record the appellant purchased the property in her name. 8. It is an established principle of law that any person claiming Became has to prove the four elements as in accordance with the decision of the Superior Courts of the Country which are as follows:- (1) Source of income. (ii) From whose custody the original title deed, and other documents came in evidence. (i!) Who is in possession of. suit property and (iv) Motive for Became transaction. The Hon'BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case titled Abdul Marked v. Amir Muhammad (2005 SCMR 577) approved the law laid down in the case titled Muhammad Sand Hussain v. Muhammad Anwar Hussain (1991 SCMR 703) supra and Jane Margret William v. Abdul Hamid Main (1994 CLC 1437) and highlighted the four considerations for deciding the question of Became character of transaction. These considerations are as follows:- (1) It is the duty of the party who raises such plea to prove such plea by adducing cogent, legal, relevant and unimpeachable evidence of definitiveness. The Court is not required to decide this plea on the basis of suspicions, however, strong they may be. (1) That Court is to examine as to who has supplied the funds for the purchase of property in dispute, it is proved that purchase money from some person other than the person in whose favor the sale is made, that circumstance, prima facie, would be strong evidence of the Became nature of the transaction. (i) The character of a transaction is to be ascertained by determine the intentions of the parties at the relevant time which are to be gathered from all the surrounding circumstances Le. the relationship of parties, the motives underlying the transactions and any other subsequent conduct, (1v) The possession of the property and custody of title deed. 9. The plaintiff in the suit did not allege all the four elements mentioned above, and the emphasis was only to the effect that money for the purchase of the property was provided by him and that since he was in U.K. therefore, the property was purchased by MST. Ashram Bibi (the appellant) in her name through misrepresentation and male FIDE. In so far as the question of custody of title documents and possession of the property was concerned, no submission was made in the plaint. Likewise, the evidence adduced by the plaintiff was to the effect that the money for the purchase of the property was provided by him and that MST. Ashram Bibi had no independent source of income. In the case titled Ghulam Mustafa v. MST. Asia Bibi and others (PLD 2010 SC 569) the Hon'BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan observed that a transaction cannot be dubbed as Became simply because one person happened to make payment for or on behalf of another. It was further observed that challenge to a transaction is not bona fide when husband and wife were amicably living, it was accepted valid but subsequently when relationship is strained title is claimed exclusively. Therefore, in the present case the plaintiff (predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.] to 5) has failed to* prove Beam. 10. In view of above, the instant appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment and decree dated 4-3-1987 is set aside, and the suit filed by predecessor-in-interest of respondents- No.1 to 5 is dismissed, with no order as to costs. KM/Z/43/Isl Appeal allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 CLC 973?
Answer: From case 2005 CLC 973 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2015-03-11): AAMER FAROOQ, J.- This appeal is directed against judgment and decree dated 14-3- 1987 whereby the suit filed by MUSA Khan, predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.1 to 5, was decreed and* it was declared that he is the owner of plot bear mg No.770 measuring 166. Square Yard situated at Sector G-, Islamabad (the property). 2. The facts, in brief} are that the predecessor of respondents Nos: to 5 namely MUSA Khan filed a suit for declaration and injunction against the appellant with respect to the property on the basis that the property was purchased in the name of the appellant, however, the funds for it were provided by him and were deposited from England in a jointly operated account maintained with MCB Bank Limited, Islamabad. It was further alleged in the plaint that since the plaintiff WSS not in the Country, therefore, the property was purchased in the name of the appellant on the basis of male FIDE. It was further submitted that on 12-3-1982 a notice was published in the daily ‘Gang’ wherein it was categorically provided that the property is owned by him. The suit was contested by the appellant and in the written statement legal as well as factual objections were taken. It. was categorically denied that the property was purchased out of the money sent by MUSA Khan from U.K. or that their was any misrepresentation or male FIDE. The appellant in her defense specifically submitted that the possession of the property is with her, and she has leased out the same and is receiving the rent. Out of the pleadings of the parties, leaned Trial Court framed the following issues:. ISSUES. 1. Whether this court lacks jurisdiction to enter tam the suit? 2. Whether the plaintiff has locus standi to bring the action? OPD 3. Is the suit incompetent in its present form? 4. Is the suit bad for non-joinder and misnomer of necessary parties? OPD 5. Is the suit incorrectly valued for the purpose of court-fee and jurisdiction? OPD 6. Whether the plaintiff is the actual owner of the suit plot and defendant No. is a beamy? 7. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration and junction prayed for on the grounds detailed in the plaint? 8. Relief. 3. In support of his claim MUSA Khan adduced the following witnesses:- MUSA Khan PW-6 i. GUL Haman PW-1 i. Her Ahmed Khan PW-2 iv. Amber Afar, Manager MCB Bank, PW-3 v. Syed Muhammad Slain Naevi, Manager MCB Bank, PW-3 vi Lai Khan PW-4 vi. Muhammad Nadeem PW-5 it. Muhammad Roman PW-6. MST. Ashram Bibi appeared as DW-1. 4. The parties also led the documentary evidence Le. copy of passport of MST. Ashram Bibi Ex.P-1, copy of I.D. card of MST. Ashram Bibi Ex.P-2, copy of application for transfer of allotment of plot Ex.P-3, copy of application for allotment of plot Ex.P- 4, copy of bank draft Ex.P-3/A, receipt of MCB Bank regarding Bank draft Ex.P-5, copy of letter issued by USAF Co. Mark-A, copy

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 CLC 973?
Answer: From case 2005 CLC 973 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2015-03-11): copy of I.D. card of MST. Ashram Bibi Ex.P-2, copy of application for transfer of allotment of plot Ex.P-3, copy of application for allotment of plot Ex.P- 4, copy of bank draft Ex.P-3/A, receipt of MCB Bank regarding Bank draft Ex.P-5, copy of letter issued by USAF Co. Mark-A, copy of application form of MCB Bank Mark-B. The documentary evidence Jed by MST. Ashram Bibi was copy of completion certificate Ex.D-1, copy of letter for permission to occupy the building Ex. Di22, copy of family suit filed by defendant No.] Ex.D-3, copy of decree of family suit in favor of MST. Ashram Bibi Ex.D-4, copy of account opening form Mark- A, copy of application filed by MST. Ashram Bibi Mark-B. 5. The TNA Court vide judgment and decree dated 4-3-1987 decreed the suit in favor of MUSA Khan, hence the present appeal. 6. Learned counsel for the appellant inter alia submitted that in light of law laid down by the Hon'BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in case titled Muhammad Said ad Hussain v. Muhammad Anwar Hussain cited as 1991 SCMR 703 in order to prove became a party has to prove source of money from which the property was purchased, custody of title documents, possession of the property and motive in the Became transaction. It was further contended that the plain reading of the plaint shows that the plaintiff has not alleged the four ingredients of Became and also has failed to prove the same. Respondents Nos ;1 to-5 were ordered to be proceeded expert vide order dated 22-9-2014. 7. Learned counsel for respondent No,7 namely Capital Development Authority (CDA) supported the version of the appellant and submitted that as per record the appellant purchased the property in her name. 8. It is an established principle of law that any person claiming Became has to prove the four elements as in accordance with the decision of the Superior Courts of the Country which are as follows:- (1) Source of income. (ii) From whose custody the original title deed, and other documents came in evidence. (i!) Who is in possession of. suit property and (iv) Motive for Became transaction. The Hon'BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case titled Abdul Marked v. Amir Muhammad (2005 SCMR 577) approved the law laid down in the case titled Muhammad Sand Hussain v. Muhammad Anwar Hussain (1991 SCMR 703) supra and Jane Margret William v. Abdul Hamid Main (1994 CLC 1437) and highlighted the four considerations for deciding the question of Became character of transaction. These considerations are as follows:- (1) It is the duty of the party who raises such plea to prove such plea by adducing cogent, legal, relevant and unimpeachable evidence of definitiveness. The Court is not required to decide this plea on the basis of suspicions, however, strong they may be. (1) That Court is to examine as to who has supplied the funds for the purchase of property in dispute, it is proved that purchase money from some person

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 CLC 973?
Answer: From case 2005 CLC 973 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2015-03-11): of definitiveness. The Court is not required to decide this plea on the basis of suspicions, however, strong they may be. (1) That Court is to examine as to who has supplied the funds for the purchase of property in dispute, it is proved that purchase money from some person other than the person in whose favor the sale is made, that circumstance, prima facie, would be strong evidence of the Became nature of the transaction. (i) The character of a transaction is to be ascertained by determine the intentions of the parties at the relevant time which are to be gathered from all the surrounding circumstances Le. the relationship of parties, the motives underlying the transactions and any other subsequent conduct, (1v) The possession of the property and custody of title deed. 9. The plaintiff in the suit did not allege all the four elements mentioned above, and the emphasis was only to the effect that money for the purchase of the property was provided by him and that since he was in U.K. therefore, the property was purchased by MST. Ashram Bibi (the appellant) in her name through misrepresentation and male FIDE. In so far as the question of custody of title documents and possession of the property was concerned, no submission was made in the plaint. Likewise, the evidence adduced by the plaintiff was to the effect that the money for the purchase of the property was provided by him and that MST. Ashram Bibi had no independent source of income. In the case titled Ghulam Mustafa v. MST. Asia Bibi and others (PLD 2010 SC 569) the Hon'BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan observed that a transaction cannot be dubbed as Became simply because one person happened to make payment for or on behalf of another. It was further observed that challenge to a transaction is not bona fide when husband and wife were amicably living, it was accepted valid but subsequently when relationship is strained title is claimed exclusively. Therefore, in the present case the plaintiff (predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.] to 5) has failed to* prove Beam. 10. In view of above, the instant appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment and decree dated 4-3-1987 is set aside, and the suit filed by predecessor-in-interest of respondents- No.1 to 5 is dismissed, with no order as to costs. KM/Z/43/Isl Appeal allowed.

Question: What is case 2005 CLC 689 about?
Answer: Case 2005 CLC 689 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] on 2014-10-15. The case involved ABDUL KARIM (PETITIONER) VERSUS SAIN MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S. SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S. 42. The case was heard by SARDAR ABDUL HAMEED KHAN, J.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 CLC 689?
Answer: In case 2005 CLC 689, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S. SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S. 42. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] and decided on 2014-10-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 CLC 689?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 CLC 689 were: MIR TANVIR HUSSAIN FOR PETITIONER. KH. SHAUKAT HUSSAIN GANAI FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR ABDUL HAMEED KHAN, J.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 CLC 689?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 CLC 689 were: ABDUL KARIM (PETITIONER) VERSUS SAIN MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)].

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 CLC 689.
Answer: SARDAR ABDUL HAMEED KHAN, J.- The above titled revision petition has been filed against the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Muzaffarabad dated 2-6- 2007, whereby judgment and decree passed by Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad dated 24-8-2005 was upheld. 2. The brief facts forming the background of the mutant appeal are that plastic/appellant, herein, brought a suit for restoration of possession under section 9 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 pertaining to land bearing survey No.871 (old) 1308 (present) Khelat No.29 measuring 16 Marley and survey No.916 (old) 1251 min (present) measuring 6 Marley situated in Sari Dara before Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad on 28-7-2004. After obtain mg written statement, frame issues, recording evidence and hearing, the abovementioned suit was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 24-8-005. Reeling aggrieved from the above judgment and decree the appellant/plaintiff filed ARI appeal before District Judge, Muzaffarabad, which was made over to Additional District Judge, Muzaffarabad for hearing and disposal under law. The learned Additional District Judge, Muzaffarabad after harem, concurred with the trial Court and dismissed the appeal filed by appellant/ plaintiff vide its judgment and decree dated 2-6-2007. Against the abovementioned judgment and decree the 2nd appeal was filed before this Court on 18-6- 2007. This Court vide its judgment dated 23-12-2011 also dismissed the appeal with costs. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied the appellant approached the Supreme Court on 21-2- 2012. The apex Court after hearing both the parties and perusal of the judgment of this Court accepted the appeal of the appellant/petitioner, converted the appeal filed before the High Court into revision petition, and remanded the case with the direction to decide the same while taking into consideration the provisions of section 115(2), C.P.C. within a period of 3 months vide order dated 16-1-2014, hence, fresh arguments heard in the above titled revision petition. 3. Mir Tanker Hussain the learned counsel for petitioner argued at length filed written arguments and posted out that the impugned judgment of both the Court below are self-contradictory and glare example of non-reading and misreading of documentary evidence, Ex.PA Mile-Haqiat, Agreement Ex. PD, Exes. PC, OF and other oral evidence of the witnesses, named There Din, M. Cacique, Initial Ahmed (Attorney of appellant). He further contended that Kara Dardani referred by the trial Court in impugned judgment is stranger to the record of the case. Learned counsel vehemently contended that both the Court below have misconstrued the sections 8 and 9 of Specific Relief Act. He lastly prayed that the instant appeal be treated as Revision petition and be accepted and referred the following case law:- (1) 2001 MLD 799, (2) 2004 SCMR 1777, (3) PLD 1972 SC 25, (4) 1985 CLC 2644, (5) PLD 1984 LHR. 287, (6) 1999 MLD 3384, (7) 2006 YLR 8517, (8) 2005 YLR 241. 4. While controverting the arguments advanced on behalf of counsel for petitioner and also filed written arguments Mr. Shankar Hussain Lanai, the learned counsel for respondents repudiated the stance, of the petitioner and contended that the appeal is incompetent whereas the scope of revision is limited and no illegality, irregularity or perversity is pointed out. Moreover, both the suits were dismissed by the Courts below, hence, the petitioner has no case. The learned counsel, defended the impugned judgment on all counts and prayed for rejection of revision petition with exemplary costs. 5. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record of the case in the light of direction of apex Court and propose to dispose of the revision petition, keeping in - view the scope of Revision 3s laid down in section 115 of C.P.C. 6. To resolve the controversy before us, it will be useful to reproduce section 115 of the C.P.C. and sections 9 and 42 of Specific Relief Act, respectively which reads as under:- "115 Revision.- The High Court may call for the record of any case which has been decided by any Court subordinate to such ' High Court and in which no appeal lies therein, and if such subordinate Courts appear- (a) To have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in TT by law, or (b) To have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or (c) To have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. (d) The High Court may make such order in the case as it think fit.J Provided that, where a person makes an application under this subsection he shall, in support of such application, furnish copies of the pleadings, documents and order of the subordinate Court, and the High Court shall, except for reasons to be recorded, dispose of such application without calling for the record of the subordinate Court: Provided further that such application shall be made within empty days of the decision of the subordinate Court [which shall provide a copy of such decision within three days thereof and the High Court shall dispose of such application within six months]." The District Court may exercise the powers conferred on the High Court by subsection (1) in respect of any case decided by a Court subordinate to such District Court MN which no appeal lies and the amount or value of the subject-matter whereof does not exceed the limits of the appellate jurisdiction of the District Court." (3) If any application under subsection (1) in respect of a case within the competence of the District Court has been made either to the High Court or the District Court, no further such application shall be made to either of them. (4) No proceedings in revision shall be enter tamed by the High Court against an order made under subsection (2) by the District Court.| Sections 9 and 42 of Specific Relief Act are also reproduced as under:- 9. Suit by person dispossessed of immovable property.- If any person is dispossessed without his consent of immovable property otherwise than in due course of law, he or any person claim mg through him may, by suit recover possession thereof, notwithstanding any other title that may be set up in such suit. Nothing in this section shall bar any person from suing to establish his title to such property and to recover possession thereof. No suit under this section shall be brought against [the Central Government or any Provincial Government], No appeal shall lie from any order or decree passed in any suit instituted under this section, nor shall any review of any such order or decree be allowed." "42. Discretion of Court as to declaration of status or night. - Any person entitled to any legal character or to right as to any property, may institute a suit against any person denying, or interested to deny, his title to such character or right and the Court may in its discretion make therein a declaration that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief: Bar to such declaration.- Provided that no Court shall make any such declaration where the plaintiff BMG able to seek further relief that mere declaration of title omits to do so.” Explanation:- A trustee of property TS a "person interested to deny,r a title adverse to the title of someone who is not in existence, and for whom, if in existence, he would be trustee. Illustration:- (a to h) xxxxxxxxxxx 7. In light of the direction of the apex Court and the principle laid down in case titled Noor Hussain v, Ghulam and 14 others [1985 CLC 1925] relied upon by the apex Court by ignoring the judgment and decree passed by the learned Additional District Judge Muzaffarabad. I have gone through the impugned judgment and decree recorded by the learned Senior Civil Judge Muzaffarabad on 24-8-2005 and perused the record. 8. A perusal of the original suit reveals that bone of contention between the parties was gift deed registered dated 5-11-1980 which allegedly has been executed in excess of the share of the donor as well as without possession too. It was also the stand of the plaintiff that he has been dispossessed from the land comprising Kara No. 1308 measure 16 Marley on 5-5-2004 during pendency of the suit by the defendants. The version of the defendants/respondents is that the possession of the land was with them prior to institution of the suit and before issuance of the stay order by the Court. 9. While going through the evidence of the appellant advanced before the Trial Court, it is noted that Initial Ahmed son of Abdul Karim, attorney of the plaintiff got his statement recorded on 18-7-2005 wherein he deposed that the defendants initially breached the conditions of-status duo order on 29-2-2004 by interfering in the possession of the plaintiff and subsequently snatched the possession of the land from the plaintiff on 5-5-2004. It is pertinent to mention that this portion of the statement of Initial Ahmed is not supported by any other evidence either documentary or oral. The trial Court has dismissed the suit for want of proof as well as on the post of limitation and cause of action. A careful perusal of the record reveals that the plaintiff failed to prove that his possession of Kara No. 1308 measuring 16 Marley has been snatched by the defendants on 29-2-2004 or 5-5-2004. Moreover, the parties are cosharer and the record of the case is not in line with the claim of the plaintiff petitioner. 10. It is evident from the record that the plaintiff initially filed a declaratory suit and prayed for cancellation of gift-deed registered on 5-11-1980 under section 42 of the Specific Relief Act. Possession of a part of the suit was allegedly snatched during pendency of the suit. The proper course for the plaintiff was to seek amendment in the suit filed under section 42 of the Specific Relief Act and seek possession of the land allegedly to have been snatched forcibly during pendency of the suit. 11. The very purpose of Specific Relief Act is that any person entitled to a legal, right or character may institute a suit against any person denying such right or character and the Court may in its discretion make a declaration that he is so entitled, provided that no declaration may be given where a further or consequential relief derived from the declaration which could have been claimed by way of relief before the same Court and in the same suit, has not been claimed. The purpose of this jurisdiction vested in the Civil Courts is plainly to prevent future litigation and to remove existing sources of controversy. 12. The scheme of law laid down MN sections 8, 9 and 42 of Specific Relief Act is clear that under section 8, the suit for possession of property has to be instituted under the provision of C.P.C. and suit for declaration of a right and even with any consequential relief under section 42 of Specific Relief Act, 1877, whereas under section 9 of ibid Act a suit for restoration of possession of some property, wherefrom, one is disposed of the subject property within six months of such specific dispossession irrespective of any right to title etc., which TS special remedy to redress the persons dispossessed without any legal right and in unlawful manner, which is on total different footings. 13. In the light of ibid scheme of law, TT leaves no room to conclude that when the petitioner firstly opted to file a declaratory suit for cancellation of a gift deed and during the pendency of is he was deprived of the possession of the suit land, then he was at liberty to pray for the recovery of possession of the part of land as consequential relief by way of amendment in the suit, filed under section 42 of Specific Relief Act. Hence, the suit under section 9 of Specific Relief Act has been dismissed by the trial Court in right direction, 14. So far as the question of limitation is concerned, the plaintiff was bound to institute the suit for restoration of possession of the land allegedly to have been snatched illegally within a period of 6 months but the plaintiff has failed to prove his dispossession from the specific date mentioned in the plaint and in the statement of attorney of plaintiff by even an iota of evidence, whereas the entries of revenue record pertaining to the suit land do not support the stance of the appellant, hence, the Trial Court resolved this point too in a legal fashion. 15. The case-law referred by the learned cotinsel for the parties need not be discussed in light of the circumstances of the case. 16. In light of the above discussion, it can safely be concluded that no illegality, irregularity or perversity has been found in the impugned decree and judgment of learned Senior Civil Judge Muzaffarabad dated 24-8-2005. It TS further held that the trial Court has exercised jurisdiction vested in it by law in a legal manner which warrants no interference by this Court. Hence, I am of the considered view that the learned Senior Civil Judge Muzaffarabad has rightly, dismissed the suit for want of proof, Beng beyond imitation and for cause of action, therefore, the judgment and decree recorded by the learned Senior Civil Judge is kept intact. Resultantly, the instant revision petition stands dismissed for having no substance in it. No order as to costs. AG/4/HC(AJ&K) Revision dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 2005 CLC 689 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2014-10-15): SARDAR ABDUL HAMEED KHAN, J.- The above titled revision petition has been filed against the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Muzaffarabad dated 2-6- 2007, whereby judgment and decree passed by Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad dated 24-8-2005 was upheld. 2. The brief facts forming the background of the mutant appeal are that plastic/appellant, herein, brought a suit for restoration of possession under section 9 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 pertaining to land bearing survey No.871 (old) 1308 (present) Khelat No.29 measuring 16 Marley and survey No.916 (old) 1251 min (present) measuring 6 Marley situated in Sari Dara before Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad on 28-7-2004. After obtain mg written statement, frame issues, recording evidence and hearing, the abovementioned suit was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 24-8-005. Reeling aggrieved from the above judgment and decree the appellant/plaintiff filed ARI appeal before District Judge, Muzaffarabad, which was made over to Additional District Judge, Muzaffarabad for hearing and disposal under law. The learned Additional District Judge, Muzaffarabad after harem, concurred with the trial Court and dismissed the appeal filed by appellant/ plaintiff vide its judgment and decree dated 2-6-2007. Against the abovementioned judgment and decree the 2nd appeal was filed before this Court on 18-6- 2007. This Court vide its judgment dated 23-12-2011 also dismissed the appeal with costs. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied the appellant approached the Supreme Court on 21-2- 2012. The apex Court after hearing both the parties and perusal of the judgment of this Court accepted the appeal of the appellant/petitioner, converted the appeal filed before the High Court into revision petition, and remanded the case with the direction to decide the same while taking into consideration the provisions of section 115(2), C.P.C. within a period of 3 months vide order dated 16-1-2014, hence, fresh arguments heard in the above titled revision petition. 3. Mir Tanker Hussain the learned counsel for petitioner argued at length filed written arguments and posted out that the impugned judgment of both the Court below are self-contradictory and glare example of non-reading and misreading of documentary evidence, Ex.PA Mile-Haqiat, Agreement Ex. PD, Exes. PC, OF and other oral evidence of the witnesses, named There Din, M. Cacique, Initial Ahmed (Attorney of appellant). He further contended that Kara Dardani referred by the trial Court in impugned judgment is stranger to the record of the case. Learned counsel vehemently contended that both the Court below have misconstrued the sections 8 and 9 of Specific Relief Act. He lastly prayed that the instant appeal be treated as Revision petition and be accepted and referred the following case law:- (1) 2001 MLD 799, (2) 2004 SCMR 1777, (3) PLD 1972 SC 25, (4) 1985 CLC 2644, (5) PLD 1984 LHR. 287, (6) 1999 MLD 3384, (7) 2006 YLR 8517, (8) 2005 YLR 241. 4. While controverting the arguments advanced on behalf of counsel for petitioner and also filed written arguments Mr. Shankar Hussain Lanai, the learned counsel for respondents repudiated the stance, of the petitioner and contended

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 2005 CLC 689 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2014-10-15): PLD 1984 LHR. 287, (6) 1999 MLD 3384, (7) 2006 YLR 8517, (8) 2005 YLR 241. 4. While controverting the arguments advanced on behalf of counsel for petitioner and also filed written arguments Mr. Shankar Hussain Lanai, the learned counsel for respondents repudiated the stance, of the petitioner and contended that the appeal is incompetent whereas the scope of revision is limited and no illegality, irregularity or perversity is pointed out. Moreover, both the suits were dismissed by the Courts below, hence, the petitioner has no case. The learned counsel, defended the impugned judgment on all counts and prayed for rejection of revision petition with exemplary costs. 5. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record of the case in the light of direction of apex Court and propose to dispose of the revision petition, keeping in - view the scope of Revision 3s laid down in section 115 of C.P.C. 6. To resolve the controversy before us, it will be useful to reproduce section 115 of the C.P.C. and sections 9 and 42 of Specific Relief Act, respectively which reads as under:- "115 Revision.- The High Court may call for the record of any case which has been decided by any Court subordinate to such ' High Court and in which no appeal lies therein, and if such subordinate Courts appear- (a) To have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in TT by law, or (b) To have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or (c) To have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. (d) The High Court may make such order in the case as it think fit.J Provided that, where a person makes an application under this subsection he shall, in support of such application, furnish copies of the pleadings, documents and order of the subordinate Court, and the High Court shall, except for reasons to be recorded, dispose of such application without calling for the record of the subordinate Court: Provided further that such application shall be made within empty days of the decision of the subordinate Court [which shall provide a copy of such decision within three days thereof and the High Court shall dispose of such application within six months]." The District Court may exercise the powers conferred on the High Court by subsection (1) in respect of any case decided by a Court subordinate to such District Court MN which no appeal lies and the amount or value of the subject-matter whereof does not exceed the limits of the appellate jurisdiction of the District Court." (3) If any application under subsection (1) in respect of a case within the competence of the District Court has been made either to the High Court or the District Court, no further such application shall be made to either of them. (4) No proceedings in revision shall be enter tamed by the High Court against an order made under subsection (2) by the District Court.|

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 2005 CLC 689 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2014-10-15): the District Court has been made either to the High Court or the District Court, no further such application shall be made to either of them. (4) No proceedings in revision shall be enter tamed by the High Court against an order made under subsection (2) by the District Court.| Sections 9 and 42 of Specific Relief Act are also reproduced as under:- 9. Suit by person dispossessed of immovable property.- If any person is dispossessed without his consent of immovable property otherwise than in due course of law, he or any person claim mg through him may, by suit recover possession thereof, notwithstanding any other title that may be set up in such suit. Nothing in this section shall bar any person from suing to establish his title to such property and to recover possession thereof. No suit under this section shall be brought against [the Central Government or any Provincial Government], No appeal shall lie from any order or decree passed in any suit instituted under this section, nor shall any review of any such order or decree be allowed." "42. Discretion of Court as to declaration of status or night. - Any person entitled to any legal character or to right as to any property, may institute a suit against any person denying, or interested to deny, his title to such character or right and the Court may in its discretion make therein a declaration that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief: Bar to such declaration.- Provided that no Court shall make any such declaration where the plaintiff BMG able to seek further relief that mere declaration of title omits to do so.” Explanation:- A trustee of property TS a "person interested to deny,r a title adverse to the title of someone who is not in existence, and for whom, if in existence, he would be trustee. Illustration:- (a to h) xxxxxxxxxxx 7. In light of the direction of the apex Court and the principle laid down in case titled Noor Hussain v, Ghulam and 14 others [1985 CLC 1925] relied upon by the apex Court by ignoring the judgment and decree passed by the learned Additional District Judge Muzaffarabad. I have gone through the impugned judgment and decree recorded by the learned Senior Civil Judge Muzaffarabad on 24-8-2005 and perused the record. 8. A perusal of the original suit reveals that bone of contention between the parties was gift deed registered dated 5-11-1980 which allegedly has been executed in excess of the share of the donor as well as without possession too. It was also the stand of the plaintiff that he has been dispossessed from the land comprising Kara No. 1308 measure 16 Marley on 5-5-2004 during pendency of the suit by the defendants. The version of the defendants/respondents is that the possession of the land was with them prior to institution of the suit and before issuance of the stay order by the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 2005 CLC 689 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2014-10-15): from the land comprising Kara No. 1308 measure 16 Marley on 5-5-2004 during pendency of the suit by the defendants. The version of the defendants/respondents is that the possession of the land was with them prior to institution of the suit and before issuance of the stay order by the Court. 9. While going through the evidence of the appellant advanced before the Trial Court, it is noted that Initial Ahmed son of Abdul Karim, attorney of the plaintiff got his statement recorded on 18-7-2005 wherein he deposed that the defendants initially breached the conditions of-status duo order on 29-2-2004 by interfering in the possession of the plaintiff and subsequently snatched the possession of the land from the plaintiff on 5-5-2004. It is pertinent to mention that this portion of the statement of Initial Ahmed is not supported by any other evidence either documentary or oral. The trial Court has dismissed the suit for want of proof as well as on the post of limitation and cause of action. A careful perusal of the record reveals that the plaintiff failed to prove that his possession of Kara No. 1308 measuring 16 Marley has been snatched by the defendants on 29-2-2004 or 5-5-2004. Moreover, the parties are cosharer and the record of the case is not in line with the claim of the plaintiff petitioner. 10. It is evident from the record that the plaintiff initially filed a declaratory suit and prayed for cancellation of gift-deed registered on 5-11-1980 under section 42 of the Specific Relief Act. Possession of a part of the suit was allegedly snatched during pendency of the suit. The proper course for the plaintiff was to seek amendment in the suit filed under section 42 of the Specific Relief Act and seek possession of the land allegedly to have been snatched forcibly during pendency of the suit. 11. The very purpose of Specific Relief Act is that any person entitled to a legal, right or character may institute a suit against any person denying such right or character and the Court may in its discretion make a declaration that he is so entitled, provided that no declaration may be given where a further or consequential relief derived from the declaration which could have been claimed by way of relief before the same Court and in the same suit, has not been claimed. The purpose of this jurisdiction vested in the Civil Courts is plainly to prevent future litigation and to remove existing sources of controversy. 12. The scheme of law laid down MN sections 8, 9 and 42 of Specific Relief Act is clear that under section 8, the suit for possession of property has to be instituted under the provision of C.P.C. and suit for declaration of a right and even with any consequential relief under section 42 of Specific Relief Act, 1877, whereas under section 9 of ibid Act a suit for restoration of possession of some property, wherefrom, one is disposed of the subject

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 2005 CLC 689 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2014-10-15): instituted under the provision of C.P.C. and suit for declaration of a right and even with any consequential relief under section 42 of Specific Relief Act, 1877, whereas under section 9 of ibid Act a suit for restoration of possession of some property, wherefrom, one is disposed of the subject property within six months of such specific dispossession irrespective of any right to title etc., which TS special remedy to redress the persons dispossessed without any legal right and in unlawful manner, which is on total different footings. 13. In the light of ibid scheme of law, TT leaves no room to conclude that when the petitioner firstly opted to file a declaratory suit for cancellation of a gift deed and during the pendency of is he was deprived of the possession of the suit land, then he was at liberty to pray for the recovery of possession of the part of land as consequential relief by way of amendment in the suit, filed under section 42 of Specific Relief Act. Hence, the suit under section 9 of Specific Relief Act has been dismissed by the trial Court in right direction, 14. So far as the question of limitation is concerned, the plaintiff was bound to institute the suit for restoration of possession of the land allegedly to have been snatched illegally within a period of 6 months but the plaintiff has failed to prove his dispossession from the specific date mentioned in the plaint and in the statement of attorney of plaintiff by even an iota of evidence, whereas the entries of revenue record pertaining to the suit land do not support the stance of the appellant, hence, the Trial Court resolved this point too in a legal fashion. 15. The case-law referred by the learned cotinsel for the parties need not be discussed in light of the circumstances of the case. 16. In light of the above discussion, it can safely be concluded that no illegality, irregularity or perversity has been found in the impugned decree and judgment of learned Senior Civil Judge Muzaffarabad dated 24-8-2005. It TS further held that the trial Court has exercised jurisdiction vested in it by law in a legal manner which warrants no interference by this Court. Hence, I am of the considered view that the learned Senior Civil Judge Muzaffarabad has rightly, dismissed the suit for want of proof, Beng beyond imitation and for cause of action, therefore, the judgment and decree recorded by the learned Senior Civil Judge is kept intact. Resultantly, the instant revision petition stands dismissed for having no substance in it. No order as to costs. AG/4/HC(AJ&K) Revision dismissed.

Question: What is case 2005 SCMR 1368 about?
Answer: Case 2005 SCMR 1368 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 2003-05-14. The case involved MST. BANDI (PETITIONER) VERSUS PROVINCE OF PUNJAB AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include ISLAMIC LAW CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 115 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3). The case was heard by TANVIR AHMED KHAN AND KHALIL-UR-REHMAN RAMDAY.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 SCMR 1368?
Answer: In case 2005 SCMR 1368, the court applied the following statutes: ISLAMIC LAW CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 115 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 2003-05-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 SCMR 1368?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 SCMR 1368 were: SYED KALEEM AHMAD KHURSHID, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND MUHAMMAD RAM ZAN CHAUDHRY ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR PETITIONER. MIAN SAEED-UR-REHMAN FARRUKH, ADVOCATE SUPREME. COURT WITH CH. MEHDI KHAN MEHTAB, ADVOCATE-ON- RECORD FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: TANVIR AHMED KHAN AND KHALIL-UR-REHMAN RAMDAY.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 SCMR 1368?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 SCMR 1368 were: MST. BANDI (PETITIONER) VERSUS PROVINCE OF PUNJAB AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 SCMR 1368.
Answer: KHALIL-UR-REHMAN RAMDAY, J.- This petition. is directed against a judgment, dated 16-1-2002 passed by the Lahore High Court in Civil Revision No. 170 of 1995 whereby the concurrent judgments and decrees of the learned trial and the learned Appellate Court were set aside and the respondent’s suit was decreed. 2. MST. Band petitioner is a real sister of Sushi Khan respondent. Their father Mehta Khan was allotted some land in the year 1947 in Thesis Departure of District Kara. He died in the year 1956 leaving behind the petitioner, the respondent and one other daughter, namely, MST. Allah Band It was the case of Sushi Khan respondent that he and his sister executed a power of attorney in the name of the husband of their sister MST. Allah Band}, namely, Mustafa for the purpose of securing the transfer and the title of the above-mentioned land allotted to their father. He had added that subsequently, he came to know that instead of getting a special power of attorney from him, the said Mustafa had in fact maneuvered a general power of attorney and on coming to know of this fact he cancelled the said power of attorney. Sushi Khan respondent had, further alleged through the suit filed by him that about a year prior to the film of the said suit the said Mustafa died thereafter it transpired that he had, exercising the power allegedly given to him by Sushi Khan respondent through the above-mentioned power of attorney, gifted his share in his father’s land to his sister MST. Band petitioner through a Mutation bearing No. 10 dated 11-4-1960 on the strength fan oral gift. Through a suit filed by Sushi Khan respondent he had claimed that he had never given any such power to the said Mustafa nor had he ever gifted his land in question to his sister MST. Band and that it was a fraud played by the said Mustafa in collusion with MST. Band as a result whereof he had illegally been deprived of his land. Through his judgment dated 5-5-1992, the learned trial Judge dismissed the suit filed by Sushi Khan respondent and similar was the fate of the appeal filed by him which was dismissed on 19-12-1994 by a learned Additional District Judge at Kara. He then approached the Lahore High Court through Civil Revision No. 170 of 1995 which was allowed as a result whereof the judgments and decrees passed by the learned trial Judge as affirmed by the learned Appellate Court were set aside and the respondents’ suit was decreed. Hence this petition by MST. Band 3. It had come in evidence that Sushi Khan respondent was an illiterate person who was working as a Chowder and that he was the father of five children. It had also come on WW. record that MST. Band was issueless, and it was the case of Sushi Khan respondent that there was no reason ANH no question of the respondent having gifted his entire land to MST. Band or to have consented to the making of such a gift by Mustafa. The learned Judge MN Chambers had also found that the father of the parties, namely Mehta Khan had an evacuee clam and after his death Mustafa was authorized to get the land transferred against the said claim and further that there was no occasion for Sushi Khan to have authorized the said Mustafa to gift away the said land to MST. Band in the year 1957 when it was not even known whether the suit-land would in fact be transferred in the name of Mehta Khan which would then devolve on Sushi Khan. The learned Single Judge, relying upon MST. Human Begum’s case 1994 SCMR 818 had also found and rightly so that in case of a gift made by an attorney it must be shown that the power of attorney had specifically authorized the said attorney to make a gift of/ the lard in favor of the specified person which was not the situation in the present case. The Honorable High Court had further noticed that MST. Band never appeared as her own witness, and it was a son of the said alleged attorney, namely, Mustafa, who had entered the witness-box on her behalf as D.W.4. This witness, namely, Meh boob was only about years at the time of the making of the alleged gift in the year 1960 and would, therefore, not have any personal knowledge of the fac tum of making of the gift in question. He was the one who admitted being cultivating the suit-land which belonged to MST. Band who, as has been mentioned above, was issueless. This is a further fact indicating that Mustafa attorney would have made this gift for his benefit as, MST. Band was issueless and as he and his said son would be real beneficiaries of this alleged gift. It had also been noticed by the learned Judge in Chambers that both the learned subordinate Courts had ignored the fact that MST. Band had never pleaded that TT was Sushi Khan who had made the gift in question in her favor and her case was that it was Mustafa who had gifted the said land as attorney of Sushi Khan. 4. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, we find that no exception could be taken to the conclusions reached by the Honorable High Court and the reasons which had weighed with it in reaching the said conclusions. It is true that the High Court had disturbed the concurrent findings of the two Courts below, but it could not be shown that such a decision on the part of the High Court was not warranted by the evidence and the material available on record. WW. 5. In this view of the matter, this petition is dismissed. Leave

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 SCMR 1368?
Answer: From case 2005 SCMR 1368 (SUPREME COURT, 2003-05-14): KHALIL-UR-REHMAN RAMDAY, J.- This petition. is directed against a judgment, dated 16-1-2002 passed by the Lahore High Court in Civil Revision No. 170 of 1995 whereby the concurrent judgments and decrees of the learned trial and the learned Appellate Court were set aside and the respondent’s suit was decreed. 2. MST. Band petitioner is a real sister of Sushi Khan respondent. Their father Mehta Khan was allotted some land in the year 1947 in Thesis Departure of District Kara. He died in the year 1956 leaving behind the petitioner, the respondent and one other daughter, namely, MST. Allah Band It was the case of Sushi Khan respondent that he and his sister executed a power of attorney in the name of the husband of their sister MST. Allah Band}, namely, Mustafa for the purpose of securing the transfer and the title of the above-mentioned land allotted to their father. He had added that subsequently, he came to know that instead of getting a special power of attorney from him, the said Mustafa had in fact maneuvered a general power of attorney and on coming to know of this fact he cancelled the said power of attorney. Sushi Khan respondent had, further alleged through the suit filed by him that about a year prior to the film of the said suit the said Mustafa died thereafter it transpired that he had, exercising the power allegedly given to him by Sushi Khan respondent through the above-mentioned power of attorney, gifted his share in his father’s land to his sister MST. Band petitioner through a Mutation bearing No. 10 dated 11-4-1960 on the strength fan oral gift. Through a suit filed by Sushi Khan respondent he had claimed that he had never given any such power to the said Mustafa nor had he ever gifted his land in question to his sister MST. Band and that it was a fraud played by the said Mustafa in collusion with MST. Band as a result whereof he had illegally been deprived of his land. Through his judgment dated 5-5-1992, the learned trial Judge dismissed the suit filed by Sushi Khan respondent and similar was the fate of the appeal filed by him which was dismissed on 19-12-1994 by a learned Additional District Judge at Kara. He then approached the Lahore High Court through Civil Revision No. 170 of 1995 which was allowed as a result whereof the judgments and decrees passed by the learned trial Judge as affirmed by the learned Appellate Court were set aside and the respondents’ suit was decreed. Hence this petition by MST. Band 3. It had come in evidence that Sushi Khan respondent was an illiterate person who was working as a Chowder and that he was the father of five children. It had also come on WW. record that MST. Band was issueless, and it was the case of Sushi Khan respondent that there was no reason ANH no question of the respondent having gifted his entire land to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 SCMR 1368?
Answer: From case 2005 SCMR 1368 (SUPREME COURT, 2003-05-14): as a Chowder and that he was the father of five children. It had also come on WW. record that MST. Band was issueless, and it was the case of Sushi Khan respondent that there was no reason ANH no question of the respondent having gifted his entire land to MST. Band or to have consented to the making of such a gift by Mustafa. The learned Judge MN Chambers had also found that the father of the parties, namely Mehta Khan had an evacuee clam and after his death Mustafa was authorized to get the land transferred against the said claim and further that there was no occasion for Sushi Khan to have authorized the said Mustafa to gift away the said land to MST. Band in the year 1957 when it was not even known whether the suit-land would in fact be transferred in the name of Mehta Khan which would then devolve on Sushi Khan. The learned Single Judge, relying upon MST. Human Begum’s case 1994 SCMR 818 had also found and rightly so that in case of a gift made by an attorney it must be shown that the power of attorney had specifically authorized the said attorney to make a gift of/ the lard in favor of the specified person which was not the situation in the present case. The Honorable High Court had further noticed that MST. Band never appeared as her own witness, and it was a son of the said alleged attorney, namely, Mustafa, who had entered the witness-box on her behalf as D.W.4. This witness, namely, Meh boob was only about years at the time of the making of the alleged gift in the year 1960 and would, therefore, not have any personal knowledge of the fac tum of making of the gift in question. He was the one who admitted being cultivating the suit-land which belonged to MST. Band who, as has been mentioned above, was issueless. This is a further fact indicating that Mustafa attorney would have made this gift for his benefit as, MST. Band was issueless and as he and his said son would be real beneficiaries of this alleged gift. It had also been noticed by the learned Judge in Chambers that both the learned subordinate Courts had ignored the fact that MST. Band had never pleaded that TT was Sushi Khan who had made the gift in question in her favor and her case was that it was Mustafa who had gifted the said land as attorney of Sushi Khan. 4. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, we find that no exception could be taken to the conclusions reached by the Honorable High Court and the reasons which had weighed with it in reaching the said conclusions. It is true that the High Court had disturbed the concurrent findings of the two Courts below, but it could not be shown that such a decision on the part of the High

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 SCMR 1368?
Answer: From case 2005 SCMR 1368 (SUPREME COURT, 2003-05-14): the Honorable High Court and the reasons which had weighed with it in reaching the said conclusions. It is true that the High Court had disturbed the concurrent findings of the two Courts below, but it could not be shown that such a decision on the part of the High Court was not warranted by the evidence and the material available on record. WW. 5. In this view of the matter, this petition is dismissed. Leave

Question: What is case 2005 YLR 872 about?
Answer: Case 2005 YLR 872 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2005-01-12. The case involved CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - SS.4(L) AND 17 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by SYED ZAHID HUSSAIN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 YLR 872?
Answer: In case 2005 YLR 872, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - SS.4(L) AND 17 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2005-01-12.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 YLR 872?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 YLR 872 were: MIAN MUHAMMAD QAMAR-UZ-ZAMAN AND DR. A. BASIT FOR PETITIONERS. NEMO FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.CH. BASHIR AHMAD FOR RESPONDENTNO.2.. The judges presiding were: SYED ZAHID HUSSAIN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 YLR 872?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 YLR 872 were: CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 YLR 872.
Answer: LR/html_TXT/Y The Chairman Evacuee Trust Property Board and the Deputy Administrator Evacuee Trust Property Board, have assailed order dated 1-10-2001 passed by the Secretary to the Government of Pakistan Ministry of Minorities, Culture, Sports, Tourism and Youth Affairs, Islamabad whereby revision filed by Talk Hussain, respondent No.2, was accepted by him. 2. On 9-6-2001, the land in dispute measuring 76 Canals, 2 Marla's situated in Maura Radar Thesis and District Lahore was put to auction in which three persons including Tali Hussain respondent participated. The highest bid was given by Tali Hussain, which was Rs.41,000 per Canal. It was accepted by the Auction Committee subject.to approval by the competent authority. The order of the competent authority was conveyed through letter dated 11-7-2001 addressed to the Administrator (E.Z) Evacuee Trust Property Board Lahore that: - “The Competent Authority has been pleased to order for re-auction of E.T. Land, measuring 76- Canals 2 Marla's, situated in Monza Radar, Thesis Can't. District Lahore, through open auction after wide publicity through newspaper, beat of drum, loudspeaker and local Chowder in the village. The reserved price will be brought by the Board’s Representative, at the time of auction." This order was assailed by Tali Hussain respondent before the Federal Government through the revision petition filed by him which petition was accepted by respondent No.1. Assailing this order, it is contended by the learned counsel that though bid of respondent No.2 was highest, but the same was subject to approval by the competent authority in view of the conditions of auction which approval was declined by the competent authority. It is contended that a valuable property had been disposed of. for an inadequate price, therefore, the competent authority was justified in becoming the approval. According to him the Federal Government while deciding the revision petition has not kept in view this important aspect of inadequacy of price. It is contended that the Chairman of the Board being trustee could pass such an order, which could not have been interfered by the Federal Government. He has cited Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs/Minority Affairs, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad v. Mufti Iftikhar-up-Din and another 2000 SCMR 1; Pertain Oliver and others v. St. Gabriel School through Principal and others PLD 1999 SC 26; Mira Din and 56 WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y others v. Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore and others PLD 2004 SC 430 and a judgment of the Honorable Supreme Court dated 9-3-2004, in C. Ps. Nos.658, 659, 661, 662 and 1125-L of 2003, whereby the judgment of this Court in Writ Petition No.501 of 2002, was maintained. The learned counsel for respondent No.2 on the other hand has objected to the very maintainability of the petition for the reason that the petitioners being statutory functionaries subordinate to the Federal Government under the laws i.e. Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975), cannot maintain petition to assail the order passed by the Federal Government. It is contended that respondent No.2 had given the highest bid over and above the reserved price in open auction, which has rightly been accepted by the Federal Government, the petition, therefore, is label to be dismissed. Reference has been made by him to Ch. Nasser Ahmad and others v. Government of Pakistan through Jolt Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities and 7 others 1993 SCMR 1570. 3. The respective contentions have been considered in the light of the material on the record. There is no denial of the fact that an open auction was held pursuant to a public notice issued in the Press. Three persons had come forward to take part in the auction, wherein Tali Hussain respondent gave the highest bid. The same was accepted by the Auction Committed comprising Director, Legal, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore, Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore, Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board Lahore and a Magistrate 1st Class Lahore. It was, of course, subject to the final approval by the competent authority. No order, however, has been brought on record to show as to what prevailed with the competent authority to decline the highest bid of the said respondent. The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, states that it was inadequacy of the price which persuaded the competent authority to withhold the approval. He has made an attempt to show that the price in the vicinity and adjoining villages was much higher. Than the price for which the land in dispute was being transferred to respondent No. 2. His reliance upon the judgment in Writ Petition No.501 of 2002 to show that property could have fetched much higher price if proper auction could have taken place, does not advance the case of the petitioners mas much as in the precedent cited by him the order passed by the Federal Government annulling sale and ordering its re-auction had been maintained by this Court. The said judgment was upheld by the Honorable WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Supreme Court of Pakistan in C.P. No.658 of 2003 by declining leave to appeal. The perusal of the judgment of this Court and also of the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan, shows the statutory position of the Federal Government in such a matter. According to the provisions of section 4(1) of the Act, the general supervision and control of all evacuee trust property vests in the Board which, however, is subject to any direction given by the Federal Government. The perusal of various clauses of subsection 2, thereof also recognizes the supervisory authority and position of the Federal Government. Against the orders of the Board a revisional jurisdiction has been conferred upon the Federal Government under section 17 of the Act which jurisdiction can be exercised by the Federal Government even so moth by calling for record of any case or proceeding. All this shows the ascendancy of the statutory position of the Federal Government under the Act. It also recognizes the decision-making authority of the Federal Government in the statutory hierarchy as envisaged by law Le. Act XIII of 1975. No doubt that the trust properties if are to be disposed of reasonable and good price of the same should be the prime object of the Board. Suffice it to observe that one of the well-recognized modes of disposal of properties is the open public auction, which mode was adopted in this case and respondent No.2 was the highest bidder their. It may be observed that while deciding revision petition filed by respondent No.2, respondent No.1 came to the conclusion that:-- “the land in dispute was put to open auction for sale on 9-6-2001 under the supervision of the Auction Committee comprising Director (Legal), Administrator, ETP, Lahore, Assistant Administrator, (R) ETP, Lahore and Muhammad Shahid, Magistrate, 1st Class, Lahore. The reserved bid was Rs.31,000 per Canal. The petitioner offered the highest bid of Rs.41,000 per Canal which was approved by the Auction Committee and the petitioner also deposited Rs.8 lac of the auction price. The case was referred to the Chairman for final approval, who set aside the auction proceedings without giving any reason. The Assistant Administrator also could not post out any illegality or impropriety in the auction proceedings dated B 9-6-2001.” The proceedings and the auction was upheld by respondent No.l The order shows due application of mind to the facts and circumstances of the case and there is no illegality or jurisdictional error their so as to warrant interference by this Court. It is a moot post whether the petitioners being subordinate functionaries could assail the order passed by the Federal Government, however, the learned counsel for the respondent has invoked certain observations appearing in Ch. Nasser Ahmad and others v. Government of Pakistan through Joint Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities and 7 others 1993 SCMR 1570 m support of his WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y contention that petition at the instance of the petitioners who are subordinate functionaries of the Federal Government in the hierarchy, is not attainable. Undoubtedly, even an obiter dicta of the august Court is entitled to a greatest respect. 4. It is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioners that a policy decision has been taken by the Board for stopping the sale of the trust properties/land and instructions to that effect have been issued to all Administrators Evacuee Trust Properties vide letter dated 18-10- 2004. It needs to be commented only this much that in the present case the Federal Government has passed the order, whereby auction in favor of respondent No. has been ordered to be upheld. Any such decision taken by the Board after the decision of the Federal Government cannot successfully be pressed into service to nullify the sale in favor of respondent No. 2. As sequel to the above, I am of the view that no illegality or jurisdictional error has been committed by the Federal Government, while passing the impugned order. The petition is therefore, without any merit, it is dismissed accordingly with no order W846 Cast tabase.com LRV/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 872?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 872 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2005-01-12): LR/html_TXT/Y The Chairman Evacuee Trust Property Board and the Deputy Administrator Evacuee Trust Property Board, have assailed order dated 1-10-2001 passed by the Secretary to the Government of Pakistan Ministry of Minorities, Culture, Sports, Tourism and Youth Affairs, Islamabad whereby revision filed by Talk Hussain, respondent No.2, was accepted by him. 2. On 9-6-2001, the land in dispute measuring 76 Canals, 2 Marla's situated in Maura Radar Thesis and District Lahore was put to auction in which three persons including Tali Hussain respondent participated. The highest bid was given by Tali Hussain, which was Rs.41,000 per Canal. It was accepted by the Auction Committee subject.to approval by the competent authority. The order of the competent authority was conveyed through letter dated 11-7-2001 addressed to the Administrator (E.Z) Evacuee Trust Property Board Lahore that: - “The Competent Authority has been pleased to order for re-auction of E.T. Land, measuring 76- Canals 2 Marla's, situated in Monza Radar, Thesis Can't. District Lahore, through open auction after wide publicity through newspaper, beat of drum, loudspeaker and local Chowder in the village. The reserved price will be brought by the Board’s Representative, at the time of auction." This order was assailed by Tali Hussain respondent before the Federal Government through the revision petition filed by him which petition was accepted by respondent No.1. Assailing this order, it is contended by the learned counsel that though bid of respondent No.2 was highest, but the same was subject to approval by the competent authority in view of the conditions of auction which approval was declined by the competent authority. It is contended that a valuable property had been disposed of. for an inadequate price, therefore, the competent authority was justified in becoming the approval. According to him the Federal Government while deciding the revision petition has not kept in view this important aspect of inadequacy of price. It is contended that the Chairman of the Board being trustee could pass such an order, which could not have been interfered by the Federal Government. He has cited Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs/Minority Affairs, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad v. Mufti Iftikhar-up-Din and another 2000 SCMR 1; Pertain Oliver and others v. St. Gabriel School through Principal and others PLD 1999 SC 26; Mira Din and 56 WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y others v. Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore and others PLD 2004 SC 430 and a judgment of the Honorable Supreme Court dated 9-3-2004, in C. Ps. Nos.658, 659, 661, 662 and 1125-L of 2003, whereby the judgment of this Court in Writ Petition No.501 of 2002, was maintained. The learned counsel for respondent No.2 on the other hand has objected to the very maintainability of the petition for the reason that the petitioners being statutory functionaries subordinate to the Federal Government under the laws i.e. Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975), cannot maintain petition to assail the order passed by the Federal Government. It is contended that respondent No.2 had given

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 872?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 872 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2005-01-12): the petition for the reason that the petitioners being statutory functionaries subordinate to the Federal Government under the laws i.e. Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975), cannot maintain petition to assail the order passed by the Federal Government. It is contended that respondent No.2 had given the highest bid over and above the reserved price in open auction, which has rightly been accepted by the Federal Government, the petition, therefore, is label to be dismissed. Reference has been made by him to Ch. Nasser Ahmad and others v. Government of Pakistan through Jolt Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities and 7 others 1993 SCMR 1570. 3. The respective contentions have been considered in the light of the material on the record. There is no denial of the fact that an open auction was held pursuant to a public notice issued in the Press. Three persons had come forward to take part in the auction, wherein Tali Hussain respondent gave the highest bid. The same was accepted by the Auction Committed comprising Director, Legal, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore, Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore, Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board Lahore and a Magistrate 1st Class Lahore. It was, of course, subject to the final approval by the competent authority. No order, however, has been brought on record to show as to what prevailed with the competent authority to decline the highest bid of the said respondent. The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, states that it was inadequacy of the price which persuaded the competent authority to withhold the approval. He has made an attempt to show that the price in the vicinity and adjoining villages was much higher. Than the price for which the land in dispute was being transferred to respondent No. 2. His reliance upon the judgment in Writ Petition No.501 of 2002 to show that property could have fetched much higher price if proper auction could have taken place, does not advance the case of the petitioners mas much as in the precedent cited by him the order passed by the Federal Government annulling sale and ordering its re-auction had been maintained by this Court. The said judgment was upheld by the Honorable WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Supreme Court of Pakistan in C.P. No.658 of 2003 by declining leave to appeal. The perusal of the judgment of this Court and also of the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan, shows the statutory position of the Federal Government in such a matter. According to the provisions of section 4(1) of the Act, the general supervision and control of all evacuee trust property vests in the Board which, however, is subject to any direction given by the Federal Government. The perusal of various clauses of subsection 2, thereof also recognizes the supervisory authority and position of the Federal Government. Against the orders of the Board a revisional jurisdiction has been conferred upon the Federal Government under section 17 of the Act which jurisdiction can

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 872?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 872 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2005-01-12): given by the Federal Government. The perusal of various clauses of subsection 2, thereof also recognizes the supervisory authority and position of the Federal Government. Against the orders of the Board a revisional jurisdiction has been conferred upon the Federal Government under section 17 of the Act which jurisdiction can be exercised by the Federal Government even so moth by calling for record of any case or proceeding. All this shows the ascendancy of the statutory position of the Federal Government under the Act. It also recognizes the decision-making authority of the Federal Government in the statutory hierarchy as envisaged by law Le. Act XIII of 1975. No doubt that the trust properties if are to be disposed of reasonable and good price of the same should be the prime object of the Board. Suffice it to observe that one of the well-recognized modes of disposal of properties is the open public auction, which mode was adopted in this case and respondent No.2 was the highest bidder their. It may be observed that while deciding revision petition filed by respondent No.2, respondent No.1 came to the conclusion that:-- “the land in dispute was put to open auction for sale on 9-6-2001 under the supervision of the Auction Committee comprising Director (Legal), Administrator, ETP, Lahore, Assistant Administrator, (R) ETP, Lahore and Muhammad Shahid, Magistrate, 1st Class, Lahore. The reserved bid was Rs.31,000 per Canal. The petitioner offered the highest bid of Rs.41,000 per Canal which was approved by the Auction Committee and the petitioner also deposited Rs.8 lac of the auction price. The case was referred to the Chairman for final approval, who set aside the auction proceedings without giving any reason. The Assistant Administrator also could not post out any illegality or impropriety in the auction proceedings dated B 9-6-2001.” The proceedings and the auction was upheld by respondent No.l The order shows due application of mind to the facts and circumstances of the case and there is no illegality or jurisdictional error their so as to warrant interference by this Court. It is a moot post whether the petitioners being subordinate functionaries could assail the order passed by the Federal Government, however, the learned counsel for the respondent has invoked certain observations appearing in Ch. Nasser Ahmad and others v. Government of Pakistan through Joint Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities and 7 others 1993 SCMR 1570 m support of his WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y contention that petition at the instance of the petitioners who are subordinate functionaries of the Federal Government in the hierarchy, is not attainable. Undoubtedly, even an obiter dicta of the august Court is entitled to a greatest respect. 4. It is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioners that a policy decision has been taken by the Board for stopping the sale of the trust properties/land and instructions to that effect have been issued to all Administrators Evacuee Trust Properties vide letter dated 18-10- 2004. It needs to be commented only this much

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 872?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 872 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2005-01-12): learned counsel for the petitioners that a policy decision has been taken by the Board for stopping the sale of the trust properties/land and instructions to that effect have been issued to all Administrators Evacuee Trust Properties vide letter dated 18-10- 2004. It needs to be commented only this much that in the present case the Federal Government has passed the order, whereby auction in favor of respondent No. has been ordered to be upheld. Any such decision taken by the Board after the decision of the Federal Government cannot successfully be pressed into service to nullify the sale in favor of respondent No. 2. As sequel to the above, I am of the view that no illegality or jurisdictional error has been committed by the Federal Government, while passing the impugned order. The petition is therefore, without any merit, it is dismissed accordingly with no order W846 Cast tabase.com LRV/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2005 YLR 419 about?
Answer: Case 2005 YLR 419 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K) on 2005-12-13. The case involved MUHAMMAD FAYYAZ (APPELLANT) VERSUS BARKAT HUSSAIN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) - SS. 39 AND 42 QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) - ARTICLE 114 WEST PAKISTAN LAND REVENUE ACT (XVII OF 1967) - SS.53 AND 172 ISLAMIC LAW. The case was heard by GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: In case 2005 YLR 419, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) - SS. 39 AND 42 QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) - ARTICLE 114 WEST PAKISTAN LAND REVENUE ACT (XVII OF 1967) - SS.53 AND 172 ISLAMIC LAW. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K) and decided on 2005-12-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 YLR 419 were: MUHAMMAD AZAM KHAN FOR APPELLANT. ALI ZAMAN RAJA FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 YLR 419 were: MUHAMMAD FAYYAZ (APPELLANT) VERSUS BARKAT HUSSAIN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 YLR 419.
Answer: GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL, j.-This appeal is filed against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Dual, passed on 22-7-2005 whereby the judgment and LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y decree of the Civil Judge Dual, dated 11-12-2004 has been reversed. The precise facts forming the background of the case are that Bark at Hussain, respondent here, filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge Dual for declaration and cancellation of Mutation No. 110 and also challenged the entries of the Record of Rights. The dispute between the parties is with regard to the legacy of Bag Ali resident of Village Malt Thesis Dual. The identify Bark at Ali, is son of Bag Ali whereas Muhammad Ayaz, defendant/ appellant Hera, is his grandson. Bag Ali had two sons and two daughters namely Bark at Hussain, Muhammad Arched, Anna Bi and Panic Bi Muhammad \Rashid died in his life before 1987. The mutation of his estate was attested on 23-6-1987 MN presence of Bark at Hussain, plaintiff respondent who stated before the Revenue Officer that appellant herein, Muhammad Ayaz, is his nephew and he wan s to give him full share of his father who admittedly died in life of Bag Ali, his father. In this perspective of the matter, Citation No. 110 was attested in favor of defendant/ appellant herein. The legality and correctness of mutation was challenged by Bark at Hussain, respondent, through a suit in the Court of Civil Judge, Dual on 17-8-2002, alleging therein that Mutation No. 110 had been sanctioned in violation cf Sharia and is collusive, hence, is expensive, against the rights of the plaintiff. It was further alleged by him that entries in the Record of Rights on the basis of the said mutation were equally without lawful authority and collusive. The defendant/appellant resisted the suit a ID pleaded that the plaintiff has no cause of action nor the suit m the present form is attainable. The defendant also raised ail objection that the suit is not maintainable on the ground of estoppel as the plaintiff has himself consented before the Re\ venue Officer for attestation of mutation under challenge. It was further alleged that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction in the matter as the mutation was only challengeable before the Revenue Officer. The trial Court framed issues on 26-2-5003 in light of the respective' pleadings of the parties. The parties lead evidence in support of their claim. The learned trial Court vide its judgment, dated 11-12-2004, dismissed the suit for want of proof. Feel mg aggrieved by the said judgment, Bark at Hussain filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Dual which was accepted on 22-7-2005, hence, this second appeal. Arguing on behalf of the appellant, Vardar Muhammad Adam Khan, the learned Advocate contended that the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Dual is erroneous, capricious and badly suffers from misreading and non-reading of record. The WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y learned Advocate argued that the suit was vague for having been filed without description of the property therefore, no effective decree can be granted rather it was enjoyed upon the first appellate Court to dismiss the suit. The learned Advocate further argued that Mutation No. 110 could not be challenged through a declaratory suit in Civil Court nor the correction of Record of Rights can be sought from the Civil Court in view of clear ouster of jurisdiction visualized by section 172 of the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967. Moreover, the Officers who have prepared the Record of Rights under challenge and attested the Mutation No. 110 have not been arrayed as a party, thus, the suit cannot proceed in absence of a necessary party. The learned Advocate strenuously argued that the suit was liable to be dismissed on the ground of estoppel. It was contended that the learned Additional District Judge failed to appreciate the relevant provisions, of QAnon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 in its true-perspective which resulted in erroneous decision. The learned Advocate submitted that the judgment has been given in violation of Order XLI, rule 31 of the Code of Civil Procedure, hence, is nullity in the eye of law and is label to be declared as such. It was lastly argued by the learned Advocate that there is no statutory law on the basis of which a predeceased son is deprived of from the estate of his grandfather nor the same is against the statutory backing, or is violative of the injunctions of Qur’an and Sunnah as has been observed by the learned first Appellate Court. In support of his submissions the learned Advocate placed reliance on the following precedents:. « (1) 1992 SCMR 214; (i) 2003 YLR 1788 and (i) 2005 SCR 53 Mr. Ah Haman Raja, the learned counsel for the other side, controverted the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant, and supported the impugned judgment. The learned counsel argued that a suit or appeal can be disposed of at a primary issue without adverting to the other merits of the case if the Court is of the opinion that after the decision of the preliminary issues further decision on the other issues would be academic. The learned counsel further submitted that the impugned judgment is in accordance with the Injunctions of Qur’an and Sunnah, therefore, cannot be assailed on any ground raised by the learned Advocate for the appellant. I have taken into consideration the respective arguments of the learned Advocates representing the parties and perused the record with my utmost care. So far as the first contention of Vardar Muhammad Adam Khan, the learned Advocate for the appellant, that the suit is vague as no Kara number is mentioned in the plaint, is concerned that is without substance. A perusal of the plaint as a whole reveals that the plaintiff has challenged Mutation No. 110 along with the entries incorporated in favor of the appellant/defendant LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y on the basis of the said mutation which is sufficient description of the property. Under rule 3 of Order Oil of C.P.C. it is provided that where the subject of the suit is movable property, the plant shall contain a description of the property sufficient to identify it, and, in case such a property can be identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement of survey, the plant shall specify such boundaries or numbers. As stated above, the suit is for declaration and cancellation of entries of the Record of Rights pertaining to years 1989–90 and 1997-98 which contains sufficient description for the identity of the property. The authority relied upon by the learned Advocate in this regard has no relevancy as the facts of the case were totally distinguished from the case in hand. Be that as it may it was imperative for the defendant to raise this objection in written statement so that the other party may be in a position to amend the suit. The contention of the learned Advocate that the suit for cancellation of the mutation as well as correctness of Record of Rights was not main tamable in view of section 172 of the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967 is also devoid of any force. The dispute in the present case is not only with regard to the correction of the entries of the Record of Rights, but the question of title is also claimed and for such claims section 53 of the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967 itself creates an exception for filing suits in Civil Courts. Suffice it to refer Km. Muhammad Akbar's case (2000 SCR 211), in which the similar contention of the appellant therein was lied by the apex Court in light of the >wing observation, ". Section 53 of the Revenue Act gives right to a person consider mg himself an aggrieved by an entry in the Record of Rights or any periodical record, to institute a civil suit for the reparation of his grievance under the provisions of sectio1 42 of the Specific Relief Act the joint reading of section 53 and section 172(2)(vi) of the Eve the Act makes it amply clear that Che suit filed by the plaintiff-respondents is triable by the Civil Court, except to issue direction to the Revenue authorities to correct the entries in the Revenue Record. If one of the reliefs sought by the respondents cannot be given to them due to lack of jurisdiction, it Carnot be said that jurisdiction of the Civil Court is also barred so far as other reliefs are concerned. Only the relief regarding the correction of the entries m the Revenue Record is barred under section 172(2)(vi) of the Revenue Act and not the other reliefs indicated above. For the like of convenience, section 53 of the Revenue Act is reproduced below:-- (53) If any person considers himself aggrieved by an entry in a Record of Rights or in a periodical record as to any right of which he is in possession, he may institute a suit for a declaration of his right under Chapter VI of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (Act I of 1877)." The bare reading of WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the above-mentioned provision leaves no doubt about the fact that the suit for establishing the title to the land falls within the jurisdiction of the civil Court and the bar contained in section 172(2)(vi), referred to above, would not debar the respondents to get appropriate relief." The contention of the learned Advocate that officers who have prepared the record and sanctioned the mutation were necessary party and in their absence the suit is not maintainable, is also not tangible. The dispute was between he parties, therefore, the Revenue Officers were not necessary party. The authorities referred to and relied upon by the learned Advocate for the appellant have no relevancy as in all those cases the writs were refused under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Inter Constitution Act, 1974 on the ground that the authority whose order is under challenge is a necessary party. So far the petition under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974 is concerned, I have no quarrel with the proposition laid down I'm the cited cases because the same was the requirement of the relevant rules. G The contention of the learned Advocate that the suit was liable to be dismissed on the ground of estoppel, has a force. The rule of estoppel contained in Article 114 of the QAnon- e-Shahadat Order, H 1984 postulates that when one person has by his declaration, act or omission intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such a belief} neither he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceedings between himself and such a person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing. Judging the present controversy in light of the rules and guidelines laid down by the superior Courts, the rule of estoppel by conduct is fully attracted in the present case. The precise case of the defendant/ appellant was that it was the plaintiff’ respondent who himself appeared before the Revenue Officer and made a statement that he wants to abandon his right in favor of his nephew, appellant harm, thus the abandonment can be regarded as compromise between the parties which was given due effect by recording the mutation in presence of Ghulam Hussain and Raja Muhammad Asyut Khan witnesses. Bark at Hussain, also put his thumb-impression on the Mutation Register. Mutation, Exh.DE, available at page 57 of the file reveals that the plaintiff, Bark at Hussain abandoned his right partly in favor of his nephew and this fact is mentioned in the order of the Revenue Officer. This mutation was sanctioned in 1989 in presence of Ch. Ghulam Hussain and Raja Muhammad Asyut Khan. At that time the age of Muhammad Ayaz was hardly 5 to 6 LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y years and question of connivance or conspiracy on his part with the revenue staff hardly arises. Bark at Hussain, when appeared as a witness admitted the aforesaid position. It is also an admitted position that mutation was sanctioned mm his presence, but he has filed the suit after a period of more than 20 years. His statement coupled with his conduct 1s sufficient to prove waiver/ abandonment on his part. There are a number of authorities in support of the proposition and some of which are referred to herein below:-- (i) "Muhammad Nawab v. Muhammad Khan" (1989 CLC 2140); (1) "MST. Mumbai Begun and others v. Abdul Rasheed and others" (1988 CLC 2023); (i) "Ghulam Raoul v. Muhammad Cacique" (1990 MLD 112); (av) "Mir Arab GUL v. Noor Nawab Khan" (1990 MLD 2111). I would also like to refer two judgments from the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Jurisdiction the. "Mustafa Khan and 3 others v. Muhammad Khan and another" (PLD 1978 SC (AJK) 75) and "Malaya Khan v. Mango Khan" (PLD 1976 Azad J&K 17). In the later case Mr. Justice Km. Muhammad Yusuf Sarah, C J (as his Lordship then was) scholarly dealt with the rule of estoppel and the facts of the case were almost similar. Though for the reason recorded in the judgment his Lordship has maintained the conclusions reached at by the subordinate Courts against the proposition involved in the present case but has laid down very exhaustive and comprehensive principle for applicability of the rule of estoppel. It was further held that the plaintiff therein was note stopped from ascertaining his right. The view had been formed in the circumstances of that case. I Before parting with the case it may be observed that the inheritance under the Islamic Law does not depend on the attestation of a mutation in the Revenue Record rather it opens on the death of an individual as has been opined in Ghulam Ali's case (PLD 1990 SC 1). The relevant observation is recorded at page 12 of the report which is to the following effect:- K "The main ports of the controversy in this behalf get resolved on the touchstone of Islamic law of inheritance. As soon as an owner dies, succession to his property opens. There is no State intervention or clergy's intervention needed for the passing of the title immediately, to the heirs. Thus it is obvious that a Muslin's estates legally and juridically WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y vests immediately on his death in his or her heirs and their rights respectively come into separate existence forthwith. The theory of representation of the estate by an intermediary is unknown to Islamic law of inherit MCE as compared to other systems. Thus there being no vesting of the estate of the deceased for an interregnum in any one like an executor or administrator, it devolves on the heirs automatically and immediately in definite shares and fraction. If is so nitwit standing whether they (the heirs) like it, want it, abhor it, or shun TT. It is the public policy of Islam law. It is only when the proper ty has thus vested in the her rafter the succession opens, that he or SHT can alienate it lawfully. There is enough comment and case-law on this point which stands accepted." Thus, it is crystal clear that Bark at Hussain has b;come owner of the estate of Bag Ali at his death to the extent of his legal share which has been abandoned by him. This r’HT was not subject to the corporation of mutation, therefore, the challenge of mutation was not necessary, nor it was directly involved in the case. The plaintiff who has abandoned his right by his conduct cannot be allowed to blow both hot and cold in the same breath and rule of estoppel is meant for the same purpose. After considering the vascular as well as record of the case, am of the opinion that the plaintiff is stopped by his conduct as he has abandoned his right in favor of the defendant/appellant herein, and this abandonment is a compromise which in fact has acted and incorporated by the Revenue Officer. The abandonment has been proved by the cogent evidence and negation of the same by the respondent/ plaintiff after a pretty long period stopped him from altering his possession on the principle of acquiescence and waiver especially when the impugned mutation is proved to have been sanctioned on respondent's behest. A reference can be made to a case titled Messes Farms, Islamabad v. National Development Finance Corporation (PLD H.B.T./2/AJ&K. M 1996 LAH.99), The last contention of the learned Advocate for the appellant that mutation under challenge is not against any Our’panic verse/Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) or any statutory law, therefore, the judgment of the first appellate Court is not legal. This contention has been examined by a Full Bench of Federal Sharia Court in a case of Allah Radha v. Federation of Pakistan (PLJ 2000 FSC 36) but the judgment has been suspended by the LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Supreme Court of Pakistan, therefore, it appears appropriate to leave this question open for decision. The upshot of the above discussion is that the appeal is accepted and the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court, dated 22-7-2005 is hereby vacated, resultantly the judgment N and decree of the Civil Judge, Dual recorded on 11-12-2004 is hereby restored. Ap peal acc épée d LR’/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 419 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2005-12-13): GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL, j.-This appeal is filed against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Dual, passed on 22-7-2005 whereby the judgment and LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y decree of the Civil Judge Dual, dated 11-12-2004 has been reversed. The precise facts forming the background of the case are that Bark at Hussain, respondent here, filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge Dual for declaration and cancellation of Mutation No. 110 and also challenged the entries of the Record of Rights. The dispute between the parties is with regard to the legacy of Bag Ali resident of Village Malt Thesis Dual. The identify Bark at Ali, is son of Bag Ali whereas Muhammad Ayaz, defendant/ appellant Hera, is his grandson. Bag Ali had two sons and two daughters namely Bark at Hussain, Muhammad Arched, Anna Bi and Panic Bi Muhammad \Rashid died in his life before 1987. The mutation of his estate was attested on 23-6-1987 MN presence of Bark at Hussain, plaintiff respondent who stated before the Revenue Officer that appellant herein, Muhammad Ayaz, is his nephew and he wan s to give him full share of his father who admittedly died in life of Bag Ali, his father. In this perspective of the matter, Citation No. 110 was attested in favor of defendant/ appellant herein. The legality and correctness of mutation was challenged by Bark at Hussain, respondent, through a suit in the Court of Civil Judge, Dual on 17-8-2002, alleging therein that Mutation No. 110 had been sanctioned in violation cf Sharia and is collusive, hence, is expensive, against the rights of the plaintiff. It was further alleged by him that entries in the Record of Rights on the basis of the said mutation were equally without lawful authority and collusive. The defendant/appellant resisted the suit a ID pleaded that the plaintiff has no cause of action nor the suit m the present form is attainable. The defendant also raised ail objection that the suit is not maintainable on the ground of estoppel as the plaintiff has himself consented before the Re\ venue Officer for attestation of mutation under challenge. It was further alleged that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction in the matter as the mutation was only challengeable before the Revenue Officer. The trial Court framed issues on 26-2-5003 in light of the respective' pleadings of the parties. The parties lead evidence in support of their claim. The learned trial Court vide its judgment, dated 11-12-2004, dismissed the suit for want of proof. Feel mg aggrieved by the said judgment, Bark at Hussain filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Dual which was accepted on 22-7-2005, hence, this second appeal. Arguing on behalf of the appellant, Vardar Muhammad Adam Khan, the learned Advocate contended that the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Dual is erroneous, capricious and badly suffers from misreading and non-reading of record. The WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y learned Advocate argued that the suit was vague for having been filed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 419 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2005-12-13): of the appellant, Vardar Muhammad Adam Khan, the learned Advocate contended that the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Dual is erroneous, capricious and badly suffers from misreading and non-reading of record. The WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y learned Advocate argued that the suit was vague for having been filed without description of the property therefore, no effective decree can be granted rather it was enjoyed upon the first appellate Court to dismiss the suit. The learned Advocate further argued that Mutation No. 110 could not be challenged through a declaratory suit in Civil Court nor the correction of Record of Rights can be sought from the Civil Court in view of clear ouster of jurisdiction visualized by section 172 of the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967. Moreover, the Officers who have prepared the Record of Rights under challenge and attested the Mutation No. 110 have not been arrayed as a party, thus, the suit cannot proceed in absence of a necessary party. The learned Advocate strenuously argued that the suit was liable to be dismissed on the ground of estoppel. It was contended that the learned Additional District Judge failed to appreciate the relevant provisions, of QAnon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 in its true-perspective which resulted in erroneous decision. The learned Advocate submitted that the judgment has been given in violation of Order XLI, rule 31 of the Code of Civil Procedure, hence, is nullity in the eye of law and is label to be declared as such. It was lastly argued by the learned Advocate that there is no statutory law on the basis of which a predeceased son is deprived of from the estate of his grandfather nor the same is against the statutory backing, or is violative of the injunctions of Qur’an and Sunnah as has been observed by the learned first Appellate Court. In support of his submissions the learned Advocate placed reliance on the following precedents:. « (1) 1992 SCMR 214; (i) 2003 YLR 1788 and (i) 2005 SCR 53 Mr. Ah Haman Raja, the learned counsel for the other side, controverted the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant, and supported the impugned judgment. The learned counsel argued that a suit or appeal can be disposed of at a primary issue without adverting to the other merits of the case if the Court is of the opinion that after the decision of the preliminary issues further decision on the other issues would be academic. The learned counsel further submitted that the impugned judgment is in accordance with the Injunctions of Qur’an and Sunnah, therefore, cannot be assailed on any ground raised by the learned Advocate for the appellant. I have taken into consideration the respective arguments of the learned Advocates representing the parties and perused the record with my utmost care. So far as the first contention of Vardar Muhammad Adam Khan, the learned Advocate for the appellant, that the suit is vague as no Kara number is mentioned in the plaint, is concerned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 419 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2005-12-13): respective arguments of the learned Advocates representing the parties and perused the record with my utmost care. So far as the first contention of Vardar Muhammad Adam Khan, the learned Advocate for the appellant, that the suit is vague as no Kara number is mentioned in the plaint, is concerned that is without substance. A perusal of the plaint as a whole reveals that the plaintiff has challenged Mutation No. 110 along with the entries incorporated in favor of the appellant/defendant LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y on the basis of the said mutation which is sufficient description of the property. Under rule 3 of Order Oil of C.P.C. it is provided that where the subject of the suit is movable property, the plant shall contain a description of the property sufficient to identify it, and, in case such a property can be identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement of survey, the plant shall specify such boundaries or numbers. As stated above, the suit is for declaration and cancellation of entries of the Record of Rights pertaining to years 1989–90 and 1997-98 which contains sufficient description for the identity of the property. The authority relied upon by the learned Advocate in this regard has no relevancy as the facts of the case were totally distinguished from the case in hand. Be that as it may it was imperative for the defendant to raise this objection in written statement so that the other party may be in a position to amend the suit. The contention of the learned Advocate that the suit for cancellation of the mutation as well as correctness of Record of Rights was not main tamable in view of section 172 of the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967 is also devoid of any force. The dispute in the present case is not only with regard to the correction of the entries of the Record of Rights, but the question of title is also claimed and for such claims section 53 of the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967 itself creates an exception for filing suits in Civil Courts. Suffice it to refer Km. Muhammad Akbar's case (2000 SCR 211), in which the similar contention of the appellant therein was lied by the apex Court in light of the >wing observation, ". Section 53 of the Revenue Act gives right to a person consider mg himself an aggrieved by an entry in the Record of Rights or any periodical record, to institute a civil suit for the reparation of his grievance under the provisions of sectio1 42 of the Specific Relief Act the joint reading of section 53 and section 172(2)(vi) of the Eve the Act makes it amply clear that Che suit filed by the plaintiff-respondents is triable by the Civil Court, except to issue direction to the Revenue authorities to correct the entries in the Revenue Record. If one of the reliefs sought by the respondents cannot be given to them due to lack of jurisdiction,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 419 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2005-12-13): amply clear that Che suit filed by the plaintiff-respondents is triable by the Civil Court, except to issue direction to the Revenue authorities to correct the entries in the Revenue Record. If one of the reliefs sought by the respondents cannot be given to them due to lack of jurisdiction, it Carnot be said that jurisdiction of the Civil Court is also barred so far as other reliefs are concerned. Only the relief regarding the correction of the entries m the Revenue Record is barred under section 172(2)(vi) of the Revenue Act and not the other reliefs indicated above. For the like of convenience, section 53 of the Revenue Act is reproduced below:-- (53) If any person considers himself aggrieved by an entry in a Record of Rights or in a periodical record as to any right of which he is in possession, he may institute a suit for a declaration of his right under Chapter VI of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (Act I of 1877)." The bare reading of WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the above-mentioned provision leaves no doubt about the fact that the suit for establishing the title to the land falls within the jurisdiction of the civil Court and the bar contained in section 172(2)(vi), referred to above, would not debar the respondents to get appropriate relief." The contention of the learned Advocate that officers who have prepared the record and sanctioned the mutation were necessary party and in their absence the suit is not maintainable, is also not tangible. The dispute was between he parties, therefore, the Revenue Officers were not necessary party. The authorities referred to and relied upon by the learned Advocate for the appellant have no relevancy as in all those cases the writs were refused under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Inter Constitution Act, 1974 on the ground that the authority whose order is under challenge is a necessary party. So far the petition under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974 is concerned, I have no quarrel with the proposition laid down I'm the cited cases because the same was the requirement of the relevant rules. G The contention of the learned Advocate that the suit was liable to be dismissed on the ground of estoppel, has a force. The rule of estoppel contained in Article 114 of the QAnon- e-Shahadat Order, H 1984 postulates that when one person has by his declaration, act or omission intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such a belief} neither he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceedings between himself and such a person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing. Judging the present controversy in light of the rules and guidelines laid down by the superior Courts, the rule of estoppel by conduct is fully attracted in the present case. The precise case of the defendant/ appellant was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 419 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2005-12-13): a person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing. Judging the present controversy in light of the rules and guidelines laid down by the superior Courts, the rule of estoppel by conduct is fully attracted in the present case. The precise case of the defendant/ appellant was that it was the plaintiff’ respondent who himself appeared before the Revenue Officer and made a statement that he wants to abandon his right in favor of his nephew, appellant harm, thus the abandonment can be regarded as compromise between the parties which was given due effect by recording the mutation in presence of Ghulam Hussain and Raja Muhammad Asyut Khan witnesses. Bark at Hussain, also put his thumb-impression on the Mutation Register. Mutation, Exh.DE, available at page 57 of the file reveals that the plaintiff, Bark at Hussain abandoned his right partly in favor of his nephew and this fact is mentioned in the order of the Revenue Officer. This mutation was sanctioned in 1989 in presence of Ch. Ghulam Hussain and Raja Muhammad Asyut Khan. At that time the age of Muhammad Ayaz was hardly 5 to 6 LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y years and question of connivance or conspiracy on his part with the revenue staff hardly arises. Bark at Hussain, when appeared as a witness admitted the aforesaid position. It is also an admitted position that mutation was sanctioned mm his presence, but he has filed the suit after a period of more than 20 years. His statement coupled with his conduct 1s sufficient to prove waiver/ abandonment on his part. There are a number of authorities in support of the proposition and some of which are referred to herein below:-- (i) "Muhammad Nawab v. Muhammad Khan" (1989 CLC 2140); (1) "MST. Mumbai Begun and others v. Abdul Rasheed and others" (1988 CLC 2023); (i) "Ghulam Raoul v. Muhammad Cacique" (1990 MLD 112); (av) "Mir Arab GUL v. Noor Nawab Khan" (1990 MLD 2111). I would also like to refer two judgments from the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Jurisdiction the. "Mustafa Khan and 3 others v. Muhammad Khan and another" (PLD 1978 SC (AJK) 75) and "Malaya Khan v. Mango Khan" (PLD 1976 Azad J&K 17). In the later case Mr. Justice Km. Muhammad Yusuf Sarah, C J (as his Lordship then was) scholarly dealt with the rule of estoppel and the facts of the case were almost similar. Though for the reason recorded in the judgment his Lordship has maintained the conclusions reached at by the subordinate Courts against the proposition involved in the present case but has laid down very exhaustive and comprehensive principle for applicability of the rule of estoppel. It was further held that the plaintiff therein was note stopped from ascertaining his right. The view had been formed in the circumstances of that case. I Before parting with the case it may be observed that the inheritance under the Islamic Law does not depend on the attestation of a mutation in the Revenue Record

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 419 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2005-12-13): plaintiff therein was note stopped from ascertaining his right. The view had been formed in the circumstances of that case. I Before parting with the case it may be observed that the inheritance under the Islamic Law does not depend on the attestation of a mutation in the Revenue Record rather it opens on the death of an individual as has been opined in Ghulam Ali's case (PLD 1990 SC 1). The relevant observation is recorded at page 12 of the report which is to the following effect:- K "The main ports of the controversy in this behalf get resolved on the touchstone of Islamic law of inheritance. As soon as an owner dies, succession to his property opens. There is no State intervention or clergy's intervention needed for the passing of the title immediately, to the heirs. Thus it is obvious that a Muslin's estates legally and juridically WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y vests immediately on his death in his or her heirs and their rights respectively come into separate existence forthwith. The theory of representation of the estate by an intermediary is unknown to Islamic law of inherit MCE as compared to other systems. Thus there being no vesting of the estate of the deceased for an interregnum in any one like an executor or administrator, it devolves on the heirs automatically and immediately in definite shares and fraction. If is so nitwit standing whether they (the heirs) like it, want it, abhor it, or shun TT. It is the public policy of Islam law. It is only when the proper ty has thus vested in the her rafter the succession opens, that he or SHT can alienate it lawfully. There is enough comment and case-law on this point which stands accepted." Thus, it is crystal clear that Bark at Hussain has b;come owner of the estate of Bag Ali at his death to the extent of his legal share which has been abandoned by him. This r’HT was not subject to the corporation of mutation, therefore, the challenge of mutation was not necessary, nor it was directly involved in the case. The plaintiff who has abandoned his right by his conduct cannot be allowed to blow both hot and cold in the same breath and rule of estoppel is meant for the same purpose. After considering the vascular as well as record of the case, am of the opinion that the plaintiff is stopped by his conduct as he has abandoned his right in favor of the defendant/appellant herein, and this abandonment is a compromise which in fact has acted and incorporated by the Revenue Officer. The abandonment has been proved by the cogent evidence and negation of the same by the respondent/ plaintiff after a pretty long period stopped him from altering his possession on the principle of acquiescence and waiver especially when the impugned mutation is proved to have been sanctioned on respondent's behest. A reference can be made to a case titled Messes Farms, Islamabad v.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 419?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 419 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2005-12-13): same by the respondent/ plaintiff after a pretty long period stopped him from altering his possession on the principle of acquiescence and waiver especially when the impugned mutation is proved to have been sanctioned on respondent's behest. A reference can be made to a case titled Messes Farms, Islamabad v. National Development Finance Corporation (PLD H.B.T./2/AJ&K. M 1996 LAH.99), The last contention of the learned Advocate for the appellant that mutation under challenge is not against any Our’panic verse/Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) or any statutory law, therefore, the judgment of the first appellate Court is not legal. This contention has been examined by a Full Bench of Federal Sharia Court in a case of Allah Radha v. Federation of Pakistan (PLJ 2000 FSC 36) but the judgment has been suspended by the LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Supreme Court of Pakistan, therefore, it appears appropriate to leave this question open for decision. The upshot of the above discussion is that the appeal is accepted and the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court, dated 22-7-2005 is hereby vacated, resultantly the judgment N and decree of the Civil Judge, Dual recorded on 11-12-2004 is hereby restored. Ap peal acc épée d LR’/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2005 YLR 2589 about?
Answer: Case 2005 YLR 2589 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2003-04-21. The case involved MAQBOOL AHMAD—PETITIONER VERSUS EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD MUZAMMAL KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 YLR 2589?
Answer: In case 2005 YLR 2589, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2003-04-21.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 YLR 2589?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 YLR 2589 were: AZIZ-UR-REHMAN FOR PETITIONER.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD MUZAMMAL KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 YLR 2589?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 YLR 2589 were: MAQBOOL AHMAD—PETITIONER VERSUS EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 YLR 2589.
Answer: The petitioner without disclosing his right, title or entitlement with regard to his possession over the Evacuee Trust Land measuring 68 Canals and 16 Marla's MN village Nagpur Thesis and District Gujranwala, claimed that respondent No.2 vide letter No.460 dated 18-2- 1998 required him to participate in the auction of Cease of the land for the period of Sharif WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2005_2589. HTML 1998 to Rabbi 2001 but before his reaching in the office of respondent No.2 on the day of auction Le. 13-3-1998, he was informed that auction has already been granted to respondents Nos.4 and 5. Aggrieved of auction of lease he filed Writ Petition No. 5508 of 1998 which was disposed by this Court on 27-3-1998 with a direction that the petitioner may move an application before respondent No.1 which shall be decided after hearing the petitioner. 2. The petitioner claims that his sister MST. Hainan Bibi moved an application to respondent No.l], which was fixed on 7-7-1998 but in their absence respondents Nos.4 and 5 took over the possession of house of the petitioner land in dispute, resulting registration of a criminal case vide F.I.R. No.430 of 1998. Thereafter respondent No.] instead of deciding the application of the petitioner’s sister again issued a proclamation for open auction of the land on 3-10-1998 and in spite of hue and cry of the petitioner direction by the Chief Munster’s Secretariat, Deputy Commissioner, and Assistant Commissioner, Radar, the auction was fakery confirmed again in favor of the respondents Nos.4 and 5. 3. It is contended that the petitioner is tiller/cultivator of the land and is entitled to continue with its possession but its fake lease, contrary to directions by this Court, is unauthorized. It is further contended that land in question cannot be treated as evacuee trust property, after the target date given by repealing settlement laws i.e. 1-1-1975. It is also submitted that respondent No.l] can only dispose of property by sale through auction which is an uneconomic unit and is not attached to any religious or charitable institution but since the property in dispute does not fall within this category, could not have been auctioned, thus, the same in favor of the respondents Nos.4 and 5 may be declared as void. 4. Heard. Record perused. Undeniably the petitioner is not a leaseholder of the land vesting in respondent No.1] which in the Revenue Record, is shown as owned by “Dharma Sheila Diagram’. It is also not disputed that respondent No.] had been leasing out the land in question for a fixed period and in none of those, the petitioner ever participated. Respondents Nos.| and 3 have filed their parawise comments wherein, the petitioner has been termed as a trespasser. The respondents have claimed that as per policy of the “Evacuee Trust Board”, the land in question is leased out for three years in open auction which was held on 3- 3-1998 after due advertisement and was given to the highest bidder Le. respondents Nos. and 5. Respondents have also appended with their comments a WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y public notice published in the daily Urdu Newspaper Gang regarding auction of lease rights which shows that no illegality was committed by the respondents in leasing out their land to which the petitioner has no right, to object. This land still continues to be in the control of respondent No.1 by virtue of Evacuee Trust Property (Management of Disposal) Act, 1975, and it is incorrect to say that after repeal of Evacuee Law respondent No.1! cannot claim it as Evacuee Trust Property as a matter of fact settlement laws have no nexus with it. 5. For what has been discussed above, I am constrained to hold that the petitioner has no right with the land in question and thus, has no locus standi to captain the instant Constitutional petition thus the writ as prayed, cannot be issued. This petition has no merits in it and is accordingly dismissed with costs. M.L/M-306/L Petition dismissed. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 2589?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 2589 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2003-04-21): The petitioner without disclosing his right, title or entitlement with regard to his possession over the Evacuee Trust Land measuring 68 Canals and 16 Marla's MN village Nagpur Thesis and District Gujranwala, claimed that respondent No.2 vide letter No.460 dated 18-2- 1998 required him to participate in the auction of Cease of the land for the period of Sharif WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2005_2589. HTML 1998 to Rabbi 2001 but before his reaching in the office of respondent No.2 on the day of auction Le. 13-3-1998, he was informed that auction has already been granted to respondents Nos.4 and 5. Aggrieved of auction of lease he filed Writ Petition No. 5508 of 1998 which was disposed by this Court on 27-3-1998 with a direction that the petitioner may move an application before respondent No.1 which shall be decided after hearing the petitioner. 2. The petitioner claims that his sister MST. Hainan Bibi moved an application to respondent No.l], which was fixed on 7-7-1998 but in their absence respondents Nos.4 and 5 took over the possession of house of the petitioner land in dispute, resulting registration of a criminal case vide F.I.R. No.430 of 1998. Thereafter respondent No.] instead of deciding the application of the petitioner’s sister again issued a proclamation for open auction of the land on 3-10-1998 and in spite of hue and cry of the petitioner direction by the Chief Munster’s Secretariat, Deputy Commissioner, and Assistant Commissioner, Radar, the auction was fakery confirmed again in favor of the respondents Nos.4 and 5. 3. It is contended that the petitioner is tiller/cultivator of the land and is entitled to continue with its possession but its fake lease, contrary to directions by this Court, is unauthorized. It is further contended that land in question cannot be treated as evacuee trust property, after the target date given by repealing settlement laws i.e. 1-1-1975. It is also submitted that respondent No.l] can only dispose of property by sale through auction which is an uneconomic unit and is not attached to any religious or charitable institution but since the property in dispute does not fall within this category, could not have been auctioned, thus, the same in favor of the respondents Nos.4 and 5 may be declared as void. 4. Heard. Record perused. Undeniably the petitioner is not a leaseholder of the land vesting in respondent No.1] which in the Revenue Record, is shown as owned by “Dharma Sheila Diagram’. It is also not disputed that respondent No.] had been leasing out the land in question for a fixed period and in none of those, the petitioner ever participated. Respondents Nos.| and 3 have filed their parawise comments wherein, the petitioner has been termed as a trespasser. The respondents have claimed that as per policy of the “Evacuee Trust Board”, the land in question is leased out for three years in open auction which was held on 3- 3-1998 after due advertisement and was given to the highest bidder Le. respondents Nos. and 5.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 2589?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 2589 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2003-04-21): as a trespasser. The respondents have claimed that as per policy of the “Evacuee Trust Board”, the land in question is leased out for three years in open auction which was held on 3- 3-1998 after due advertisement and was given to the highest bidder Le. respondents Nos. and 5. Respondents have also appended with their comments a WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y public notice published in the daily Urdu Newspaper Gang regarding auction of lease rights which shows that no illegality was committed by the respondents in leasing out their land to which the petitioner has no right, to object. This land still continues to be in the control of respondent No.1 by virtue of Evacuee Trust Property (Management of Disposal) Act, 1975, and it is incorrect to say that after repeal of Evacuee Law respondent No.1! cannot claim it as Evacuee Trust Property as a matter of fact settlement laws have no nexus with it. 5. For what has been discussed above, I am constrained to hold that the petitioner has no right with the land in question and thus, has no locus standi to captain the instant Constitutional petition thus the writ as prayed, cannot be issued. This petition has no merits in it and is accordingly dismissed with costs. M.L/M-306/L Petition dismissed. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2005 YLR 431 about?
Answer: Case 2005 YLR 431 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2004-11-12. The case involved MUHAMMAD RAZZAQ AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABAD AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 18-B ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - 8.25 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VII OF 1974) - S. 42. The case was heard by SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILLANI AND CHAUDHARY MUHAMMAD TAJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 YLR 431?
Answer: In case 2005 YLR 431, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 18-B ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - 8.25 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VII OF 1974) - S. 42. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2004-11-12.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 YLR 431?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 YLR 431 were: MUHAMMAD YAQOOB KHAN MUGHAL, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANTS. IMDAD ALI MALIK, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILLANI AND CHAUDHARY MUHAMMAD TAJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 YLR 431?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 YLR 431 were: MUHAMMAD RAZZAQ AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABAD AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 YLR 431.
Answer: LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILLANI, J.-This appeal by leave of the Court is filed against the judgment passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court on 5-6-2002, whereby writ petition filed by Muhammad Saleem respondent No.2 in this appeal was accepted and allotment made in favor of the appellant, harm, was cancelled. 2. The conquered history of this case revolves around 17 Canals, 12 Marla's of land comprising Surveys Nos. and which is now renumbered in settlement as Kara numbers 4, 5 and 6 situated in village Gillan Thesis Gallantry District Student. Muhammad Din predecessor of Muhammad Razz, appellant, who claims to be in possession of the land applied for its allotment. His application was under process when Muhammad Saleem respondent No.2 obtained the land on lease from Custodian of Evacuee Property on 25-8- 1993. On the application of appellant, the lease order in favor of respondent No.2 was cancelled by the Custodian on 24-7-1994 and lease for 25 years was allowed in favor of the appellant subject to payment of Rs.7,000 per year, total amounting to Rs.77,500. He deposited Rs. 10,000 only and failed to deposit the rest of the amount within the stipulated period of two months on which the lease allowed in favor of appellant was cancelled and ordered in favor of respondent No.2 on 25-1-1997 and on his deposit of lease amount, the order of lease was issued in his favor on 27-1-1997. During this process, the appellant obtained the allotment order in respect of land from the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner Pooch on 28-6-1994. The learned Custodian taking so moth action vide file No.2994 cancelled the allotment vide his order dated 25-1- 1997 and ordered the lease of the disputed land in favor of Muhammad Saleem. The order of the Custodian dated 25-1-1997 was challenged before the High Court through a writ petition which was accepted on 14-10-2000 and case was remanded for fresh inquiry. On appeal to the Supreme Court the order of the High Court was set aside, and the case was remanded to the High Court for fresh decision in accordance with the direction of the Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 18- 5-2001. Another writ petition was filed by Muhammad Saleem in the meantime against the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order obtained by Muhammad Din on the ground that land stood leased to him. The learned Judge in the High Court passed the impugned judgment by consolidating both the petitions whereby he ordered the dismissal of the petition filed by Muhammad Din and allowed the continuation of lease in favor of Muhammad Saleem respondent. Hence this appeal. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 3. Mr. Muhammad Yahoo Khan Mughal, the learned counsel for the appellants, contended that the learned Judge in the High Court has erred in allow mg the lease in favor of Muhammad Saleem for the reason that if the allotment of the appellant was not found legal and proper the lease ordered in his favor should have been restored. He further contended that the appellant was refugee whose application for allotment was duly processed, and allotment order was properly made in his favor as against the respondent who is a local and owns more than three hundred Canals of land. He also contended that appellant had deposited a part of lease amount in the presence of which his lease could not be cancelled. His further argument was that the Custodian did not possess the powers to lease out the land under section 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 as the land was in possession of the appellant and the learned Custodian relied upon the laws which stood repealed. 4. Mr. Dad Ali Malik, the learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand contended that the Custodian is final authority to pass the appropriate order in respect of the evacuee property and adm mister the same in the manner he deems fit in the interest of the evacuee property. He further contended that the appellant played a fraud with the Rehabilitation authorities as well as with the Custodian in getting the lease and at the same time hiding the fact of allotment of the land in his favor. His contention TS that the conduct of the appellant does not warrant any indulgence in his favor. In support of his contentions he relied upon a case titled Azad Government and 3 others v. Abdul Shaffer Butt and 2 others 1999 PLC (C.S.) 1203. According to him as the land was on lease, therefore, it could not be allotted, and thus the allotment obtained was without lawful authority. He relied upon cases reported as Afar Iqbal v. Abdul Aziz and another 1998 CLC 286 and Government Boys High School and others v. Shah Muhammad and another 2002 SCR 329. 5. So far as the powers of the Custodian are concerned, he contended that the Custodian has overriding powers to regulate and administer the evacuee property under section 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, and he can pass any order under section 18-B of the same Act. He relied upon the cases reported as Muhammad Dm and another v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and another 2001 YLR 1527, Vardar Muhammad Han if Khan and another v. Raja Altar Hussain Khan Rathole and another 2003 YLR 2386 and Muhammad Iqbal and 3 others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and 17 others 1996 WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y SCR 359 in this behalf’ He also contended that Muhammad Din was issue less and present appellants have a remote relationship with the deceased and if at all this relationship is accepted, Muhammad Hussain appellant No.2 has three other brothers-who have not been arrayed on the death of Muhammad Dm, hence the appeal is liable to be dismissed. He placed reliance upon a case titled Syed Mis keen Shah v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others 2000 YLR 1088. 6. We have considered the arguments advanced at bar and gone through the record of the case besides the law cited at bar. 7. We would first like to attend the contention raised by the learned Advocate for the appellants that Custodian did not possess the powers to lease out the land to respondent as it was in possession of the appellants. We are afraid to accept this contention even for a moment in view of the provisions of sections 18-B and 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 and appellants conduct in obtaining lease from Custodian. Under section 18-B the Custodian has overriding powers to cancel any allotment on any of the grounds mentioned in the section and eject summarily any person found in unauthorized possession of the evacuee property or unsuitable to hold such property, under subsection (2) of section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. "Unsuitable" includes in itself unsuitable to retain allotment as well, as dispossession would follow after cancellation of allotment only, not in its presence. This jurisdiction can be exercised by the Custodian so moth or on any information or on the application of any person. We are fortified in holding this view in the light of case reported Muhammad Dm and another v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and another 2001 YLR 1527. 8. In case reported as Vardar Muhammad Han if Khan and another v. Raja Altar Hussain Khan Rathole and another 2003 YLR 2386 it was held that powers vested m the Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 18-B are overriding in nature and this provision fully empowers the Custodian to take so moth action. Similar is the spirit of law laid down in a case reported as Muhammad Iqbal and 3 others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and 17 others 1996 SCR 359. 9. The learned Custodian was justified m cancelling the allotment of the appellants in view of the conduct of the appellants in obtain the allotment of the land clandestinely. When the matter was pending before the Custodian for leasing out the land, the appellants did not WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y inform the Custodian of their application for allotment of the land. The appellants got the lease order passed in favor of respondent No.2 cancelled from the Custodian on 24-7- 1994, and they were given the first option to have the land on lease for 25 years for an amount of Rs.77,500, but they failed to deposit the entire amount with the stipulated period, instead, obtained the allotment without disclosing this fact to the Custodian. The appellant played hide and seek with the Custodian and Rehabilitation Authorities. He does not appear to have informed any of the two authorities about the allotment or lease as the case may be. There is nothing on record to believe that their application for allotment was already pending or that they brought it to the notice of Custodian, if it was pending. This conduct of the appellant disentitles him to the allotment or lease of the land. The conduct of a party seeking legal remedy is the first consideration. One who does not come with clean hands to the Court or hides the facts, he cannot be said to be a fair claimant. 10. The land in dispute stood already leased out in favor of respondent on 25-8-1993, hence it was not available for allotment and the allotment made in favor of appellants on 28-6-1994 was without lawful authority. It was held in a case titled Afar Iqbal v. Abdul Aziz and another 1998 CLC 286, that when the allotment of land exists in the name of person, the same does not remain available for allotment. The position of the land under allotment can be said to be analogous to lease. The difference only is that allotment is made by the Rehabilitation Authority while lease is allowed by the Custodian. When the Evacuee Property is regulated by any of the above modes, it does not remain available for any further disposal without cancellation of the earlier. Similar is the spirit of law as laid down in a case reported as Government Boys High School and others v. Shah Muhammad and another 2002 SCR 329. 11. The order of Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner was without lawful authority, hence it cannot be made basis for protection of the allotment by the appellants. The protection would be available to allotment made according to law not to that which was violative of law and obtained through clandestine means. The Rehabilitation Act clearly stipulates that only that land can be allotted which is available for allotment. As the mode of possession of land in dispute was regulated by way of lease by the Custodian, the land was under the administration and control of Custodian, hence it was not available for allotment. B 12. In view of above, the learned Judge in the High Court was right in dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant. The learned Advocate for respondents has nightly placed WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y reliance upon the case reported as Azad Govcitwnent and 3 others v. Abdul Shaffer Butt and 2 others 1999 PLC (C.S.) 1203, in which it was held that protection would be available to allotments made according to law existing at the relevant time and if an allotment was not made according to law, it cannot be protected and a person who basis his claim on a void order is not entitled to any relief in exercise of writ jurisdiction. 13. Under section 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, the Custodian of Evacuee Property has unlimited powers of securing administering, preserving and managing any evacuee property, and he is authorized to take such measures as he considers necessary or expedient for this purpose and for achieving any such purpose, he is authorized to do all acts as are necessary or incidental thereto. The Custodian in his wisdom deemed it proper to lease out the land in favor of appellants but on their failure to deposit the lease amount, he was justified in cancelling the same and ordering it in favor of respondents. Once the administration of an evacuee property is assumed by the Custodian, and he passes any order regulating the property deeming it as evacuee, it is not open to any Authority to pass any order in relation to that property unless a declaration or permission as the case may be is sought from the Custodian. Thus it is wrong to suggest that Custodian does not have the power to lease out the land under section 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. Administration, preservation and management of an evacuee property includes every action which ensures the protection of the evacuee property including the lease, transfer, grant or any other mode of dispensation not inconsistent with the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. 14. The contention of the learned Advocate for the appellants that if allotment of appellants was not found valid, the LE?SC should have been restored in their favor is equally devoid of any force for the reason that appellants failed to comply with the order of the Custodian allowing the lease. They did not deposit the lease amount in time while respondent did so. In the circumstances of the case the learned Custodian was right in allowing the lease in favor of the respondent and the High Court was equally justified in dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellants. In view of above, finding no illegality in the judgment passed by the High Court, the appeal is dismissed with costs. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y H.B.T./133/SC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed. LR/html_TXT/Y 77

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 431?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 431 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-11-12): LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILLANI, J.-This appeal by leave of the Court is filed against the judgment passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court on 5-6-2002, whereby writ petition filed by Muhammad Saleem respondent No.2 in this appeal was accepted and allotment made in favor of the appellant, harm, was cancelled. 2. The conquered history of this case revolves around 17 Canals, 12 Marla's of land comprising Surveys Nos. and which is now renumbered in settlement as Kara numbers 4, 5 and 6 situated in village Gillan Thesis Gallantry District Student. Muhammad Din predecessor of Muhammad Razz, appellant, who claims to be in possession of the land applied for its allotment. His application was under process when Muhammad Saleem respondent No.2 obtained the land on lease from Custodian of Evacuee Property on 25-8- 1993. On the application of appellant, the lease order in favor of respondent No.2 was cancelled by the Custodian on 24-7-1994 and lease for 25 years was allowed in favor of the appellant subject to payment of Rs.7,000 per year, total amounting to Rs.77,500. He deposited Rs. 10,000 only and failed to deposit the rest of the amount within the stipulated period of two months on which the lease allowed in favor of appellant was cancelled and ordered in favor of respondent No.2 on 25-1-1997 and on his deposit of lease amount, the order of lease was issued in his favor on 27-1-1997. During this process, the appellant obtained the allotment order in respect of land from the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner Pooch on 28-6-1994. The learned Custodian taking so moth action vide file No.2994 cancelled the allotment vide his order dated 25-1- 1997 and ordered the lease of the disputed land in favor of Muhammad Saleem. The order of the Custodian dated 25-1-1997 was challenged before the High Court through a writ petition which was accepted on 14-10-2000 and case was remanded for fresh inquiry. On appeal to the Supreme Court the order of the High Court was set aside, and the case was remanded to the High Court for fresh decision in accordance with the direction of the Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 18- 5-2001. Another writ petition was filed by Muhammad Saleem in the meantime against the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order obtained by Muhammad Din on the ground that land stood leased to him. The learned Judge in the High Court passed the impugned judgment by consolidating both the petitions whereby he ordered the dismissal of the petition filed by Muhammad Din and allowed the continuation of lease in favor of Muhammad Saleem respondent. Hence this appeal. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 3. Mr. Muhammad Yahoo Khan Mughal, the learned counsel for the appellants, contended that the learned Judge in the High Court has erred in allow mg the lease in favor of Muhammad Saleem for the reason that if the allotment of the appellant was not found legal and proper the lease ordered in his favor should have been restored. He

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 431?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 431 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-11-12): the appellants, contended that the learned Judge in the High Court has erred in allow mg the lease in favor of Muhammad Saleem for the reason that if the allotment of the appellant was not found legal and proper the lease ordered in his favor should have been restored. He further contended that the appellant was refugee whose application for allotment was duly processed, and allotment order was properly made in his favor as against the respondent who is a local and owns more than three hundred Canals of land. He also contended that appellant had deposited a part of lease amount in the presence of which his lease could not be cancelled. His further argument was that the Custodian did not possess the powers to lease out the land under section 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 as the land was in possession of the appellant and the learned Custodian relied upon the laws which stood repealed. 4. Mr. Dad Ali Malik, the learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand contended that the Custodian is final authority to pass the appropriate order in respect of the evacuee property and adm mister the same in the manner he deems fit in the interest of the evacuee property. He further contended that the appellant played a fraud with the Rehabilitation authorities as well as with the Custodian in getting the lease and at the same time hiding the fact of allotment of the land in his favor. His contention TS that the conduct of the appellant does not warrant any indulgence in his favor. In support of his contentions he relied upon a case titled Azad Government and 3 others v. Abdul Shaffer Butt and 2 others 1999 PLC (C.S.) 1203. According to him as the land was on lease, therefore, it could not be allotted, and thus the allotment obtained was without lawful authority. He relied upon cases reported as Afar Iqbal v. Abdul Aziz and another 1998 CLC 286 and Government Boys High School and others v. Shah Muhammad and another 2002 SCR 329. 5. So far as the powers of the Custodian are concerned, he contended that the Custodian has overriding powers to regulate and administer the evacuee property under section 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, and he can pass any order under section 18-B of the same Act. He relied upon the cases reported as Muhammad Dm and another v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and another 2001 YLR 1527, Vardar Muhammad Han if Khan and another v. Raja Altar Hussain Khan Rathole and another 2003 YLR 2386 and Muhammad Iqbal and 3 others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and 17 others 1996 WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y SCR 359 in this behalf’ He also contended that Muhammad Din was issue less and present appellants have a remote relationship with the deceased and if at all this relationship is accepted, Muhammad Hussain appellant No.2 has three other brothers-who have not been

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 431?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 431 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-11-12): and 17 others 1996 WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y SCR 359 in this behalf’ He also contended that Muhammad Din was issue less and present appellants have a remote relationship with the deceased and if at all this relationship is accepted, Muhammad Hussain appellant No.2 has three other brothers-who have not been arrayed on the death of Muhammad Dm, hence the appeal is liable to be dismissed. He placed reliance upon a case titled Syed Mis keen Shah v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others 2000 YLR 1088. 6. We have considered the arguments advanced at bar and gone through the record of the case besides the law cited at bar. 7. We would first like to attend the contention raised by the learned Advocate for the appellants that Custodian did not possess the powers to lease out the land to respondent as it was in possession of the appellants. We are afraid to accept this contention even for a moment in view of the provisions of sections 18-B and 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 and appellants conduct in obtaining lease from Custodian. Under section 18-B the Custodian has overriding powers to cancel any allotment on any of the grounds mentioned in the section and eject summarily any person found in unauthorized possession of the evacuee property or unsuitable to hold such property, under subsection (2) of section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. "Unsuitable" includes in itself unsuitable to retain allotment as well, as dispossession would follow after cancellation of allotment only, not in its presence. This jurisdiction can be exercised by the Custodian so moth or on any information or on the application of any person. We are fortified in holding this view in the light of case reported Muhammad Dm and another v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and another 2001 YLR 1527. 8. In case reported as Vardar Muhammad Han if Khan and another v. Raja Altar Hussain Khan Rathole and another 2003 YLR 2386 it was held that powers vested m the Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 18-B are overriding in nature and this provision fully empowers the Custodian to take so moth action. Similar is the spirit of law laid down in a case reported as Muhammad Iqbal and 3 others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and 17 others 1996 SCR 359. 9. The learned Custodian was justified m cancelling the allotment of the appellants in view of the conduct of the appellants in obtain the allotment of the land clandestinely. When the matter was pending before the Custodian for leasing out the land, the appellants did not WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y inform the Custodian of their application for allotment of the land. The appellants got the lease order passed in favor of respondent No.2 cancelled from the Custodian on 24-7- 1994, and they were given the first option to have the land on lease for 25 years for an amount of Rs.77,500, but they failed to deposit the entire amount

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 431?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 431 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-11-12): the land. The appellants got the lease order passed in favor of respondent No.2 cancelled from the Custodian on 24-7- 1994, and they were given the first option to have the land on lease for 25 years for an amount of Rs.77,500, but they failed to deposit the entire amount with the stipulated period, instead, obtained the allotment without disclosing this fact to the Custodian. The appellant played hide and seek with the Custodian and Rehabilitation Authorities. He does not appear to have informed any of the two authorities about the allotment or lease as the case may be. There is nothing on record to believe that their application for allotment was already pending or that they brought it to the notice of Custodian, if it was pending. This conduct of the appellant disentitles him to the allotment or lease of the land. The conduct of a party seeking legal remedy is the first consideration. One who does not come with clean hands to the Court or hides the facts, he cannot be said to be a fair claimant. 10. The land in dispute stood already leased out in favor of respondent on 25-8-1993, hence it was not available for allotment and the allotment made in favor of appellants on 28-6-1994 was without lawful authority. It was held in a case titled Afar Iqbal v. Abdul Aziz and another 1998 CLC 286, that when the allotment of land exists in the name of person, the same does not remain available for allotment. The position of the land under allotment can be said to be analogous to lease. The difference only is that allotment is made by the Rehabilitation Authority while lease is allowed by the Custodian. When the Evacuee Property is regulated by any of the above modes, it does not remain available for any further disposal without cancellation of the earlier. Similar is the spirit of law as laid down in a case reported as Government Boys High School and others v. Shah Muhammad and another 2002 SCR 329. 11. The order of Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner was without lawful authority, hence it cannot be made basis for protection of the allotment by the appellants. The protection would be available to allotment made according to law not to that which was violative of law and obtained through clandestine means. The Rehabilitation Act clearly stipulates that only that land can be allotted which is available for allotment. As the mode of possession of land in dispute was regulated by way of lease by the Custodian, the land was under the administration and control of Custodian, hence it was not available for allotment. B 12. In view of above, the learned Judge in the High Court was right in dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant. The learned Advocate for respondents has nightly placed WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y reliance upon the case reported as Azad Govcitwnent and 3 others v. Abdul Shaffer Butt and 2 others 1999 PLC (C.S.) 1203, in which

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 431?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 431 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2004-11-12): in the High Court was right in dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant. The learned Advocate for respondents has nightly placed WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y reliance upon the case reported as Azad Govcitwnent and 3 others v. Abdul Shaffer Butt and 2 others 1999 PLC (C.S.) 1203, in which it was held that protection would be available to allotments made according to law existing at the relevant time and if an allotment was not made according to law, it cannot be protected and a person who basis his claim on a void order is not entitled to any relief in exercise of writ jurisdiction. 13. Under section 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, the Custodian of Evacuee Property has unlimited powers of securing administering, preserving and managing any evacuee property, and he is authorized to take such measures as he considers necessary or expedient for this purpose and for achieving any such purpose, he is authorized to do all acts as are necessary or incidental thereto. The Custodian in his wisdom deemed it proper to lease out the land in favor of appellants but on their failure to deposit the lease amount, he was justified in cancelling the same and ordering it in favor of respondents. Once the administration of an evacuee property is assumed by the Custodian, and he passes any order regulating the property deeming it as evacuee, it is not open to any Authority to pass any order in relation to that property unless a declaration or permission as the case may be is sought from the Custodian. Thus it is wrong to suggest that Custodian does not have the power to lease out the land under section 25 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. Administration, preservation and management of an evacuee property includes every action which ensures the protection of the evacuee property including the lease, transfer, grant or any other mode of dispensation not inconsistent with the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. 14. The contention of the learned Advocate for the appellants that if allotment of appellants was not found valid, the LE?SC should have been restored in their favor is equally devoid of any force for the reason that appellants failed to comply with the order of the Custodian allowing the lease. They did not deposit the lease amount in time while respondent did so. In the circumstances of the case the learned Custodian was right in allowing the lease in favor of the respondent and the High Court was equally justified in dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellants. In view of above, finding no illegality in the judgment passed by the High Court, the appeal is dismissed with costs. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y H.B.T./133/SC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed. LR/html_TXT/Y 77

Question: What is case 2005 YLR 1814 about?
Answer: Case 2005 YLR 1814 was decided by AZAD J&K HIGH COURT on 2005-05-11. The case involved FARMAN BI APPELLANT VERSUS SAIDAAND 31 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - SS. 8, 39 AND 42 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - ARTS.91, 95 AND 120. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: In case 2005 YLR 1814, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - SS. 8, 39 AND 42 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - ARTS.91, 95 AND 120. This case was heard in AZAD J&K HIGH COURT and decided on 2005-05-11.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 YLR 1814 were: MALIK MUHAMMAD YOUSAF FOR APPELLANT. SARDAR GHULAM M USTAFA FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 YLR 1814 were: FARMAN BI APPELLANT VERSUS SAIDAAND 31 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in AZAD J&K HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 YLR 1814.
Answer: The following facts culminated into above titled appeal. MST. Alma Bi and others brought a declaratory suit along with a prayer for joint possession regarding their share cut of Survey Nos.,,, WW. LR/html_TXT/Y, and total measure 204 Canals, 19 Marla's situate at village Narial Buchan Thesis Father Tlaxcala, District Both in the Court of Sub-Judge Father Tlaxcala against the defendant-respondents on 11-11-1996. The claim before Sub-Judge was that Noor Din deceased was owner of the said property. He had 2 wives. The plaintiffs and 3 sons (defendants Nos. to 3) were out of one wife whereas 2 sons defendant No. and another namely Walk (deceased) predecessor-in-interest of defendants Nos.4 to 9 were his legal heirs. Noor Din deceased was living with defendants Nos.| to 3 who collusively managed to execute, an Alabama (letter of disinheritance) dated 8-2-1956 in their favor thus, disinherited them unlawfully. The said document (Panama) BMG illegal and unlawful both in view of prevailing law and law of Sharia was ineffective and operative to their rights. The plaintiffs could not be deprived of their share in the suit land on account of such ab initio void document. The defendants also got sanctioned a Mutation bear mg No.924 in their favor and the Revenue department in light of the said mutation had also prepared a Revenue Record show mg the defendants as the owners of the suit land excluding the plaintiffs. Noor Din died in the year 1961 and the defendants exclusively are shown as legal heirs of the deceased. The defendants on the basis of mutation sanctioned in view of the said document further transferred the suit land through different gift-deeds in the year 1989 in favor of defendants Nos. 10 to 21. Therefore, according to the plaintiffs, the subsequent transaction being result of an ab initio void document were also ineffective and inoperative to the rights of plaintiffs. Revenue Record prepared on the basis of Panama and decree obtained from the civil Court without imp leading plaintiffs as party were also ineffective and inoperative to their rights. The plaintiffs BMG co-owners were entitled to a decree for joint possession. The entries in the Revenue Record showing them as Ghairmaroosi possessors over Survey Nos. 1434 and 1476 measuring 38 Canals, 3 Marla's were also against facts and needed correction by the Revenue department. The plaintiffs also pleaded ignorance about all these transactions and averred in clause 13 of their plait that they acquired knowledge about these fictitious transactions when they, demanded their share from the defendants 6 months back from the date of institution of the suit. As the defendants refused to hand over their ancestral property to them therefore, this categorical denial by the defendants caused them to take legal action by instituting the present suit. The defendants resisted the suit on different grounds like limitation, nonavailability of cause of action along with clause-wise denial of the averments made in the plait. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y The trial Court after due process of law, accepted the fact that the plaintiffs were in fact legal heirs of Noor Din deceased, and they were owners of the suit land to the extent of their shares per law of Inheritance however, their suit was declared as time-barred. The plaintiffs feeling aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the learned trial Judge filed an appeal before learned District Judge who also arrived at the same conclusion. The judgment and decree of learned District Judge therefore, is under assai lance before this Court through the present appeal. I have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties and gone through the record. Both the learned counsel for the respective parties confined their arguments to the post of limitation only. They were in agreement that the plaintiffs/appellants were entitled to their share in the suit land as legal heirs of Noor Din deceased. The learned counsel abstained themselves from debating the case on its merits thus, the controversy regarding limitation needs resolution. During pendency of proceedings one of the plaintiffs Alma Bi died, and her legal heirs were brought on record. Subsequently, one of the legal heirs of deceased Alma By, also died resultantly, her legal heirs were brought on record. However, after some time, all the plaintiffs withdrew themselves from the suit and MST. Harman Bi (present appellant) was left to contest her share in the estate left by her father. The appellant herein through her suit prays a decree for joint possession to the extent of her share in the joint estate left by her father. As consequential relief she seeks cancellation of Panama, mutation sanctioned in view of the said Panama, the entries in the Revenue Record, the gift-deeds executed in favor of different persons on 31-8-1989 and 28-12- 1989 and a decree, dated 23-12-1993. The Courts below are of the opinion that since the Panama was executed in the year, 1956 and Noor Din deceased (father of appellant) died in the year 1961, the appellant kept herself silent for a pretty long time therefore, her suit was hopelessly time-barred. The learned counsel for the appellant while assailing the judgment and decree of the Courts below argued that she pleaded lack of knowledge in her suit as it appeared from clause (13) of her plaint. The suit in view of Articles 91 and 120 of Limitation Act was within time thus, the Courts below while declaring the same as time-barred were erroneous under law. She has been deprived of her legitimate right on the basis of a document (Panama) which WW. LR/html_TXT/Y is ab initio void. According to the learned counsel, further edifice raised on the strength of such a document gave her fresh cause of action after every denial, and she could legally bring her suit when real threat was posed to her refusing her right to the suit land. She was ultimately denied her right in the year 1996 when she demanded to hand over the suit land therefore, her suit was quite in time in view of Articles 91, 95 and 120 of Limitation Acct. During course of arguments, he relied upon legal reports like PLD 1993 SC (AJ&K) 24, 1988 CLC 2195, 2000 YLR 621, 2001 YLR 928, 2004 YLR 242 and vehemently contended that both the judgments and decrees passed by the lower Courts deserved to be vacated because those were not in accordance with law. Conversely, the learned counsel for the respondents argued that suit by the appellant was hopelessly time-barred D because she despite knowledge slept-over for more than 40 year therefore, her suit was rightly disallowed on the score of limitation. According to him, limitation for cancellation of any instrument or a declaration about the validity of revenue entries or a Court decree was 3 and 6 years as provided under Articles 91, 95 and 120 of Limitation Act. It was further argued that even in case of void transaction she was required to get rid of the same within reasonable time. He, during his arguments relied upon case-law like 1995 SCR 204, 2001 MLD 212, 2003 YLR 1752 and contended that in view of the aforesaid legal authorities the suit by the appellant was rightly disallowed by the Courts below. The entire edifice raised by the respondents through their written statement is based on an Panama executed in their favor by Noor-Din deceased in the year 1956. This is a settlement to disinherit a legal heir of deceased not recognized by Transfer of Property Act and Registration Act enforced in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. A Muslim owner can validly transfer his property only through the modes recognized by law and not otherwise. This document therefore, is an ab initio void document and the findings of the Courts below are correct to this extent. The learned counsel for the parties also were in agreement that such a document did not create title of ownership in favor of respondents. The Courts below by having resort to different documents tendered into evidence like Ex.PA to Ex.PN concluded that the appellant was having knowledge 3 years prior to the institution of the suit therefore, her suit was time-barred, in view of Articles 91 and 120 of Limitation Act. The aforesaid documents were examined carefully. The document ranging from Exhs.PK to PN are certified copies of different FIBA-Ueeds issued to one Muhammad Shaft after the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y institution of the suit whereas list of the documents resorted to by the Court below ranging from Exes. PA to PJ are also certified copies found to have been issued to said Muhammad Shaft in the year, 1994. The present suit has been filed on 11-11-1996. The observation of the Courts below therefore, as erroneous even in the light of their documents. The Courts below declared the suit as time-barred in view of Articles 91 and 120 of the Limitation Act. Article 91 deals with the cancellation of an instrument and ITT provides limitation of 3 years for such purpose starting from the date of knowledge of facts entitling a person to sue to enforce his right. Similarly, Artie 120 of Limitation Act provides limitation of 6 year for those cases for which no specific provision is available in Limitation Act. There is yet another Article that deals with setting aside of a decree passed on the basis of fraud and TT also provides 3 years limitation from the date of knowledge of fraud. As stated earlier, the appellant is shown to have categorically pleaded knowledge in the year, 1996. There is no verbal evidence showing any knowledge by the appellant about all the transactions made in order to deprive her of her legitimate rights to the legacy left by her deceased father. The Courts below gathered their opinions from the aforesaid documents which are found to have been obtained by one Muhammad Shaft. It is not clear that what is the relation of said Muhammad Shaft with appellant Harman Bi. It is also not borne out by the record that such person ever intimated her about the transactions sought to be cancelled 3 years or even 6 years prior to institution of the present suit. In order to deprive a Muslim owner of his legitimate right to a joint estate left by father, it was enjoined upon the Courts below to satisfy themselves about the fact that she herself was having knowledge about the transactions depriving her of her right Le. her personal knowledge was required to be proved in such a race. The conclusion arrived at, by the Courts below is nothing but a result of surmises, conjectures, suppositions and presumptions. To deprive the appellant of his legitimate night, the Courts below were obliged to fully satisfy themselves about personal knowledge of the appellant but unfortunately, they failed to do so. Before arriving at a conclusion it is felt expedient to discuss the case law referred to by the learned counsel for the parties in order to support their respective contentions. In legal report like PLD 1993 SC (AJ&K) 24, the following observation has been made:-- “Inheritance. Property of deceased Muslim although devolved on his daughter, yet mutation was not attested in her favor because she had relinquished her share in favor of male heirs of deceased. Effect of such relinquishment. Plaintiff (female heir) seeking relief WW. LR/html_TXT/Y pertaining to entries in “Jacaranda’. Limitation. Estate left by a Muslim owner would devolve on heirs on his death; fact that such heirs did not wish to merit was of no consequence where plaintiff wanted to transfer her share to the male heirs, she could do so as permissible under law i.e. through a registered document. Mere oral statement before Collector by plaintiff that she did not want to get share out of the estate left by her father, would not extinguish her title in the land in question and vest the same in male heirs to her exclusion. Plaintiff BMG a co-sharer with male heirs (defendants), though not so recorded in the Revenue Record, she would be deemed to be in continuous possession of her share ' and any adverse entry in the Revenue Record would not oblige her to challenge the same within a period of six years of the entry, for cause of action in such cases would accrue only when real threat was posed to her title 1e. when defendants denied her title in unequivocal terms. Every fresh entry made in the Revenue Record to the detriment of plaintiff would give a new cause of action. Relief sought by plaintiff pertain to entries in Jacaranda 1981-82 would not be time-barred when suit was instituted on 4-8-1986 Le. within six years of entries in the said Jacaranda. Entries in Jacaranda 1981-82 BMG subsequent would be preferred to those made earlier. A/.ad Jammu and Kashmir Land Revenue Act, 1967, S.53. Limitation Act (IX of 1908), Art. 120.” “. S. 42. Entries in Revenue Record. Value of. Entries in Revenue Record whether of mutation or record-of rights, would not by themselves vest title m heirs; rather the same where evidence of title and if proved correct, in view of facts admitted or proved, title of an would not be adversely affected”. *. Decree for joint possession. Entitlement. Co-sharer m joint property would be entitled to a decree for joint possession in spite of the fact that such co-sharer had not been recorded as such in the Revenue Record, such entries being violative of the law and void”. In case titled “Mir Muhammad v. Muhammad Hashem and others” 1988 CLC 2195, the learned Judges observed as under:- “. Inheritance. Claim of one of the heirs in respect of property left by deceased was disputed by other heirs on the ground that deceased had settled question of inheritance during his lifetime. Such settlement is binding on heirs only if they agreed to the same after death of their predecessor as inheritance would open in favor of heirs only on death of predecessor”. In the case titled “Nawab Khan and others v. Reheat Bibi and others”, the following observation has been made:-- “. S.45. Mutation of inheritance. Validity. Plaintiffs were WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y excluded from mutation of inheritance and the same was attested only in the names of the defendants. Said mutation was assailed 33 years after its attestation. TNA Court dismissed the suit being time-barred, whereas the Lower Appellate Court, after holding the mutation as void and illegal, dismissed the appeal on the point of Imitation. Validity. After satisfying the shares of the defendants, the residue had to go to the plaintiffs. Revenue Officer, in circumstances, had no authority to exclude the plaintiffs from inheritance. Judgments and decrees of both the Courts below suffered from material irregularity for Courts below refused to exercise the jurisdiction vesting in them on a wrong decision of the question of law involved in the suit and as such the same were not sustainable.” Inheritance. Requirement of mutation. Necessity. When a Muslim owner dies, his estate passes on to the legal heirs in accordance with the Our’panic Injunctions. No. mutation or any other act of the State or individual is required for acquisition of the proprietary rights by inheritance.” Section 5. mutation. Suit against such mutation. Limitation. No limitation was prescribed for filing suit in respect of a void mutation. ” In legal report 2001 YLR 928 titled “Muhammad Bibi v. Muir Ahmed” the learned Judges observed as under. Ouster of co-sharer from the suit land. Failure to receive share in produce of such land. Effect. When succession opens, all the eligible heirs become co-sharers. Mere fact that one of the cosharers was not BMG paid any share in the produce from the land would not constitute ouster. ’ Section 45. co-sharer. Entry of mutation of land excluding the co- sharer. Validity. Limitation. Plaintiff was heir to the estate of the deceased owner. Defendants got the land mutated in their name excluding the partial. Civil suit filed by the plaintiff was dismissed as being time-barred. Lower Appellate Court maintained the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court. Contention of the plaintiff was that she being one of the co-sharers was entitled to inherit the suit-land. validity. Where the plaintiff was admitted to be an heir as pleaded by her mm the plaint the matter of limitation never, commenced against her. Disputed mutation was illegal and void and there was no question OT any limitation for challenging such mutation. Concurrent findings of fact by the Courts below were reversed by High Court in exercise of revisional jurisdiction as the suit was within time.” In case titled “Nawab Ali and others v. Muhammad Sharif and others” the following observation has been made: “. Gift. Estoppel. Suit for possession through inheritance. predecessor-in-interest of the parties was grandfather of the plaintiffs and father of the defendants. During the lifetime of the LR/html_TXT/Y predecessor-in-interest of the parties share of his property was transferred in favor of the plaintiffs by way of gift and a mutation to that effect was sanctioned. After the death of the predecessor-in-interest of the parties' mutation of inheritance was sanctioned in favor of the defendants excluding the plaintiffs. Trial Court dismissed the suit on the basis of estoppel and the appeal before the Lower Appellate Court also met the same fate. Validity. Where V/4th share of the property was transferred to the plaintiffs and the mutation was also sanctioned, such gift was valid and complete in all respect, as the same was not challenged by the defendant and the same attained finality. Plaintiffs could not be deprived of their legal shares, which they were entitled to merit from the estate left by their predecessor-in-interest. No estoppel against statute. Finding of both the Courts below on the issue of estoppel were not sustainable and the judgments and decrees passed by both the Courts below were set aside.” “. Gift. Validity. Depriving other heirs of their shares. Impious for a Muslim to deprive some or all of his children from property by alienating same in his lifetime, and it will be so m all good sense if done without just cause. Islamic law does not forbid such gift when made by a person not suffering from “Martial- Matt’. Gift may not become invalid only because it may, have the effect of depriving the others of their share. Inheritance. Limitation. No. Imitation in inheritance cases and person claiming inheritance cannot be non-suited merely on the post of limitation.” In all the precedent cases it is held that a Muslim cannot be deprived of his/her right simply because he/she relinquished the same or a private settlement disinherited higher for legacy of a deceased Muslim devolves upon legal heirs on his/her death irrespective of the fact that a mutation 1s sanctioned in his/her favor or not and he/she is recorded as owner in the Revenue Record or not. A Muslim owner is competent to alienate or transfer his/her property only through the modes recognized under law and not otherwise. Any adverse entry in the Revenue Record would not oblige higher to challenge the same within a period of 6 years of the entry, for cause of action in such cases would accrue only when real threat was posed to his/her title i.e. when defendant denied his/her title in unequivocal terms. Every fresh entry made in the Revenue Record to the detriment of plaintiff would give a new cause of action. This is the view expressed by our own Supreme Court Ina case titled “Boston and others v. MST. Attar Bibi and others” (PLD 1993 SC (AJ&K) 24) referred hereinbefore. Under the Constitution, it is law of the State. This view stands supported by different judgments from Pakistan jurisdiction also. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y The present case when tested on the touchstone of the above referred settled principle of law, it may safely be said that suit by the appellant is within time in view of Articles 91, 95 and 120. The plastic appellant, as stated earlier, is found to have pleaded to acquire knowledge in the year 1996, and she has also pleaded that 6 months prior to institution of the suit the defendants categorically denied her right which caused to bring the present suit, categorically denied her right. The defendants failed to rebut claim about knowledge put forwarded by the appellant in her plaint therefore, irresistible conclusion TS that she acquired knowledge of all that depriving her of her legitimate right in the year, 1996 when she knocked at the door of the Court. She is found to have been deprived of her right on the ground of illegal practice adopted by the defendants behind her back and without her knowledge. Comma to the law cited at bar by the learned counsel for the respondents, it may be observed that no doubt, Supreme Court of AJ&K has held that, even a void order or transactions is required to be challenged within reasonable time in order to get rid of TT nevertheless the fact remains that the learned Judges while pronouncing the judgments relied upon by the learned H counsel categorically observed that reasonable time from the date of knowledge. According to Hon’BLE Judges, if a void order adversely affecting the rights of a person is in his knowledge he is required to challenge the same within reasonable time from the date of knowledge or from the date of order if pronounced in his presence. Here in this case, as stated earlier, all the transactions are found to have been made behind the back of the appellant and without her knowledge. She, as Archer as possible, after acquiring knowledge knocked at the door of the Court through the present suit. Therefore, the case-law in view of the peculiar circumstance of the case in hand has no relevancy here. The result therefore, is that the appellant though she is not recorded as cosharer in the joint estate left by her father yet on his death the property under Muslim law has also devolved, upon her in view of Mohammedan Law. She thus, is declared as co- sharer in the joint estate left by her deceased father. She is entitled to a decree for joint possession however, her share in the property after its determination by the Revenue department shall be satisfied through regular partition in view of this decree for joint possession. The judgments and decrees passed by the Courts below are hereby set aside and the Panama executed in the year 1956 and all the transactions made thereafter are declared to be ineffective and inoperative to the rights of the appellant to the estate left by her father. National database.com WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): The following facts culminated into above titled appeal. MST. Alma Bi and others brought a declaratory suit along with a prayer for joint possession regarding their share cut of Survey Nos.,,, WW. LR/html_TXT/Y, and total measure 204 Canals, 19 Marla's situate at village Narial Buchan Thesis Father Tlaxcala, District Both in the Court of Sub-Judge Father Tlaxcala against the defendant-respondents on 11-11-1996. The claim before Sub-Judge was that Noor Din deceased was owner of the said property. He had 2 wives. The plaintiffs and 3 sons (defendants Nos. to 3) were out of one wife whereas 2 sons defendant No. and another namely Walk (deceased) predecessor-in-interest of defendants Nos.4 to 9 were his legal heirs. Noor Din deceased was living with defendants Nos.| to 3 who collusively managed to execute, an Alabama (letter of disinheritance) dated 8-2-1956 in their favor thus, disinherited them unlawfully. The said document (Panama) BMG illegal and unlawful both in view of prevailing law and law of Sharia was ineffective and operative to their rights. The plaintiffs could not be deprived of their share in the suit land on account of such ab initio void document. The defendants also got sanctioned a Mutation bear mg No.924 in their favor and the Revenue department in light of the said mutation had also prepared a Revenue Record show mg the defendants as the owners of the suit land excluding the plaintiffs. Noor Din died in the year 1961 and the defendants exclusively are shown as legal heirs of the deceased. The defendants on the basis of mutation sanctioned in view of the said document further transferred the suit land through different gift-deeds in the year 1989 in favor of defendants Nos. 10 to 21. Therefore, according to the plaintiffs, the subsequent transaction being result of an ab initio void document were also ineffective and inoperative to the rights of plaintiffs. Revenue Record prepared on the basis of Panama and decree obtained from the civil Court without imp leading plaintiffs as party were also ineffective and inoperative to their rights. The plaintiffs BMG co-owners were entitled to a decree for joint possession. The entries in the Revenue Record showing them as Ghairmaroosi possessors over Survey Nos. 1434 and 1476 measuring 38 Canals, 3 Marla's were also against facts and needed correction by the Revenue department. The plaintiffs also pleaded ignorance about all these transactions and averred in clause 13 of their plait that they acquired knowledge about these fictitious transactions when they, demanded their share from the defendants 6 months back from the date of institution of the suit. As the defendants refused to hand over their ancestral property to them therefore, this categorical denial by the defendants caused them to take legal action by instituting the present suit. The defendants resisted the suit on different grounds like limitation, nonavailability of cause of action along with clause-wise denial of the averments made in the plait. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y The trial Court after due process of law, accepted the fact that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): them to take legal action by instituting the present suit. The defendants resisted the suit on different grounds like limitation, nonavailability of cause of action along with clause-wise denial of the averments made in the plait. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y The trial Court after due process of law, accepted the fact that the plaintiffs were in fact legal heirs of Noor Din deceased, and they were owners of the suit land to the extent of their shares per law of Inheritance however, their suit was declared as time-barred. The plaintiffs feeling aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the learned trial Judge filed an appeal before learned District Judge who also arrived at the same conclusion. The judgment and decree of learned District Judge therefore, is under assai lance before this Court through the present appeal. I have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties and gone through the record. Both the learned counsel for the respective parties confined their arguments to the post of limitation only. They were in agreement that the plaintiffs/appellants were entitled to their share in the suit land as legal heirs of Noor Din deceased. The learned counsel abstained themselves from debating the case on its merits thus, the controversy regarding limitation needs resolution. During pendency of proceedings one of the plaintiffs Alma Bi died, and her legal heirs were brought on record. Subsequently, one of the legal heirs of deceased Alma By, also died resultantly, her legal heirs were brought on record. However, after some time, all the plaintiffs withdrew themselves from the suit and MST. Harman Bi (present appellant) was left to contest her share in the estate left by her father. The appellant herein through her suit prays a decree for joint possession to the extent of her share in the joint estate left by her father. As consequential relief she seeks cancellation of Panama, mutation sanctioned in view of the said Panama, the entries in the Revenue Record, the gift-deeds executed in favor of different persons on 31-8-1989 and 28-12- 1989 and a decree, dated 23-12-1993. The Courts below are of the opinion that since the Panama was executed in the year, 1956 and Noor Din deceased (father of appellant) died in the year 1961, the appellant kept herself silent for a pretty long time therefore, her suit was hopelessly time-barred. The learned counsel for the appellant while assailing the judgment and decree of the Courts below argued that she pleaded lack of knowledge in her suit as it appeared from clause (13) of her plaint. The suit in view of Articles 91 and 120 of Limitation Act was within time thus, the Courts below while declaring the same as time-barred were erroneous under law. She has been deprived of her legitimate right on the basis of a document (Panama) which WW. LR/html_TXT/Y is ab initio void. According to the learned counsel, further edifice raised on the strength of such a document gave her fresh cause of action after every denial, and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): erroneous under law. She has been deprived of her legitimate right on the basis of a document (Panama) which WW. LR/html_TXT/Y is ab initio void. According to the learned counsel, further edifice raised on the strength of such a document gave her fresh cause of action after every denial, and she could legally bring her suit when real threat was posed to her refusing her right to the suit land. She was ultimately denied her right in the year 1996 when she demanded to hand over the suit land therefore, her suit was quite in time in view of Articles 91, 95 and 120 of Limitation Acct. During course of arguments, he relied upon legal reports like PLD 1993 SC (AJ&K) 24, 1988 CLC 2195, 2000 YLR 621, 2001 YLR 928, 2004 YLR 242 and vehemently contended that both the judgments and decrees passed by the lower Courts deserved to be vacated because those were not in accordance with law. Conversely, the learned counsel for the respondents argued that suit by the appellant was hopelessly time-barred D because she despite knowledge slept-over for more than 40 year therefore, her suit was rightly disallowed on the score of limitation. According to him, limitation for cancellation of any instrument or a declaration about the validity of revenue entries or a Court decree was 3 and 6 years as provided under Articles 91, 95 and 120 of Limitation Act. It was further argued that even in case of void transaction she was required to get rid of the same within reasonable time. He, during his arguments relied upon case-law like 1995 SCR 204, 2001 MLD 212, 2003 YLR 1752 and contended that in view of the aforesaid legal authorities the suit by the appellant was rightly disallowed by the Courts below. The entire edifice raised by the respondents through their written statement is based on an Panama executed in their favor by Noor-Din deceased in the year 1956. This is a settlement to disinherit a legal heir of deceased not recognized by Transfer of Property Act and Registration Act enforced in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. A Muslim owner can validly transfer his property only through the modes recognized by law and not otherwise. This document therefore, is an ab initio void document and the findings of the Courts below are correct to this extent. The learned counsel for the parties also were in agreement that such a document did not create title of ownership in favor of respondents. The Courts below by having resort to different documents tendered into evidence like Ex.PA to Ex.PN concluded that the appellant was having knowledge 3 years prior to the institution of the suit therefore, her suit was time-barred, in view of Articles 91 and 120 of Limitation Act. The aforesaid documents were examined carefully. The document ranging from Exhs.PK to PN are certified copies of different FIBA-Ueeds issued to one Muhammad Shaft after the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y institution of the suit whereas list of the documents resorted

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): was time-barred, in view of Articles 91 and 120 of Limitation Act. The aforesaid documents were examined carefully. The document ranging from Exhs.PK to PN are certified copies of different FIBA-Ueeds issued to one Muhammad Shaft after the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y institution of the suit whereas list of the documents resorted to by the Court below ranging from Exes. PA to PJ are also certified copies found to have been issued to said Muhammad Shaft in the year, 1994. The present suit has been filed on 11-11-1996. The observation of the Courts below therefore, as erroneous even in the light of their documents. The Courts below declared the suit as time-barred in view of Articles 91 and 120 of the Limitation Act. Article 91 deals with the cancellation of an instrument and ITT provides limitation of 3 years for such purpose starting from the date of knowledge of facts entitling a person to sue to enforce his right. Similarly, Artie 120 of Limitation Act provides limitation of 6 year for those cases for which no specific provision is available in Limitation Act. There is yet another Article that deals with setting aside of a decree passed on the basis of fraud and TT also provides 3 years limitation from the date of knowledge of fraud. As stated earlier, the appellant is shown to have categorically pleaded knowledge in the year, 1996. There is no verbal evidence showing any knowledge by the appellant about all the transactions made in order to deprive her of her legitimate rights to the legacy left by her deceased father. The Courts below gathered their opinions from the aforesaid documents which are found to have been obtained by one Muhammad Shaft. It is not clear that what is the relation of said Muhammad Shaft with appellant Harman Bi. It is also not borne out by the record that such person ever intimated her about the transactions sought to be cancelled 3 years or even 6 years prior to institution of the present suit. In order to deprive a Muslim owner of his legitimate right to a joint estate left by father, it was enjoined upon the Courts below to satisfy themselves about the fact that she herself was having knowledge about the transactions depriving her of her right Le. her personal knowledge was required to be proved in such a race. The conclusion arrived at, by the Courts below is nothing but a result of surmises, conjectures, suppositions and presumptions. To deprive the appellant of his legitimate night, the Courts below were obliged to fully satisfy themselves about personal knowledge of the appellant but unfortunately, they failed to do so. Before arriving at a conclusion it is felt expedient to discuss the case law referred to by the learned counsel for the parties in order to support their respective contentions. In legal report like PLD 1993 SC (AJ&K) 24, the following observation has been made:-- “Inheritance. Property of deceased Muslim although devolved on his daughter, yet mutation

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): felt expedient to discuss the case law referred to by the learned counsel for the parties in order to support their respective contentions. In legal report like PLD 1993 SC (AJ&K) 24, the following observation has been made:-- “Inheritance. Property of deceased Muslim although devolved on his daughter, yet mutation was not attested in her favor because she had relinquished her share in favor of male heirs of deceased. Effect of such relinquishment. Plaintiff (female heir) seeking relief WW. LR/html_TXT/Y pertaining to entries in “Jacaranda’. Limitation. Estate left by a Muslim owner would devolve on heirs on his death; fact that such heirs did not wish to merit was of no consequence where plaintiff wanted to transfer her share to the male heirs, she could do so as permissible under law i.e. through a registered document. Mere oral statement before Collector by plaintiff that she did not want to get share out of the estate left by her father, would not extinguish her title in the land in question and vest the same in male heirs to her exclusion. Plaintiff BMG a co-sharer with male heirs (defendants), though not so recorded in the Revenue Record, she would be deemed to be in continuous possession of her share ' and any adverse entry in the Revenue Record would not oblige her to challenge the same within a period of six years of the entry, for cause of action in such cases would accrue only when real threat was posed to her title 1e. when defendants denied her title in unequivocal terms. Every fresh entry made in the Revenue Record to the detriment of plaintiff would give a new cause of action. Relief sought by plaintiff pertain to entries in Jacaranda 1981-82 would not be time-barred when suit was instituted on 4-8-1986 Le. within six years of entries in the said Jacaranda. Entries in Jacaranda 1981-82 BMG subsequent would be preferred to those made earlier. A/.ad Jammu and Kashmir Land Revenue Act, 1967, S.53. Limitation Act (IX of 1908), Art. 120.” “. S. 42. Entries in Revenue Record. Value of. Entries in Revenue Record whether of mutation or record-of rights, would not by themselves vest title m heirs; rather the same where evidence of title and if proved correct, in view of facts admitted or proved, title of an would not be adversely affected”. *. Decree for joint possession. Entitlement. Co-sharer m joint property would be entitled to a decree for joint possession in spite of the fact that such co-sharer had not been recorded as such in the Revenue Record, such entries being violative of the law and void”. In case titled “Mir Muhammad v. Muhammad Hashem and others” 1988 CLC 2195, the learned Judges observed as under:- “. Inheritance. Claim of one of the heirs in respect of property left by deceased was disputed by other heirs on the ground that deceased had settled question of inheritance during his lifetime. Such settlement is binding on heirs only if they agreed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): 2195, the learned Judges observed as under:- “. Inheritance. Claim of one of the heirs in respect of property left by deceased was disputed by other heirs on the ground that deceased had settled question of inheritance during his lifetime. Such settlement is binding on heirs only if they agreed to the same after death of their predecessor as inheritance would open in favor of heirs only on death of predecessor”. In the case titled “Nawab Khan and others v. Reheat Bibi and others”, the following observation has been made:-- “. S.45. Mutation of inheritance. Validity. Plaintiffs were WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y excluded from mutation of inheritance and the same was attested only in the names of the defendants. Said mutation was assailed 33 years after its attestation. TNA Court dismissed the suit being time-barred, whereas the Lower Appellate Court, after holding the mutation as void and illegal, dismissed the appeal on the point of Imitation. Validity. After satisfying the shares of the defendants, the residue had to go to the plaintiffs. Revenue Officer, in circumstances, had no authority to exclude the plaintiffs from inheritance. Judgments and decrees of both the Courts below suffered from material irregularity for Courts below refused to exercise the jurisdiction vesting in them on a wrong decision of the question of law involved in the suit and as such the same were not sustainable.” Inheritance. Requirement of mutation. Necessity. When a Muslim owner dies, his estate passes on to the legal heirs in accordance with the Our’panic Injunctions. No. mutation or any other act of the State or individual is required for acquisition of the proprietary rights by inheritance.” Section 5. mutation. Suit against such mutation. Limitation. No limitation was prescribed for filing suit in respect of a void mutation. ” In legal report 2001 YLR 928 titled “Muhammad Bibi v. Muir Ahmed” the learned Judges observed as under. Ouster of co-sharer from the suit land. Failure to receive share in produce of such land. Effect. When succession opens, all the eligible heirs become co-sharers. Mere fact that one of the cosharers was not BMG paid any share in the produce from the land would not constitute ouster. ’ Section 45. co-sharer. Entry of mutation of land excluding the co- sharer. Validity. Limitation. Plaintiff was heir to the estate of the deceased owner. Defendants got the land mutated in their name excluding the partial. Civil suit filed by the plaintiff was dismissed as being time-barred. Lower Appellate Court maintained the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court. Contention of the plaintiff was that she being one of the co-sharers was entitled to inherit the suit-land. validity. Where the plaintiff was admitted to be an heir as pleaded by her mm the plaint the matter of limitation never, commenced against her. Disputed mutation was illegal and void and there was no question OT any limitation for challenging such mutation. Concurrent findings of fact by the Courts below were reversed by High Court in exercise of revisional

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): as pleaded by her mm the plaint the matter of limitation never, commenced against her. Disputed mutation was illegal and void and there was no question OT any limitation for challenging such mutation. Concurrent findings of fact by the Courts below were reversed by High Court in exercise of revisional jurisdiction as the suit was within time.” In case titled “Nawab Ali and others v. Muhammad Sharif and others” the following observation has been made: “. Gift. Estoppel. Suit for possession through inheritance. predecessor-in-interest of the parties was grandfather of the plaintiffs and father of the defendants. During the lifetime of the LR/html_TXT/Y predecessor-in-interest of the parties share of his property was transferred in favor of the plaintiffs by way of gift and a mutation to that effect was sanctioned. After the death of the predecessor-in-interest of the parties' mutation of inheritance was sanctioned in favor of the defendants excluding the plaintiffs. Trial Court dismissed the suit on the basis of estoppel and the appeal before the Lower Appellate Court also met the same fate. Validity. Where V/4th share of the property was transferred to the plaintiffs and the mutation was also sanctioned, such gift was valid and complete in all respect, as the same was not challenged by the defendant and the same attained finality. Plaintiffs could not be deprived of their legal shares, which they were entitled to merit from the estate left by their predecessor-in-interest. No estoppel against statute. Finding of both the Courts below on the issue of estoppel were not sustainable and the judgments and decrees passed by both the Courts below were set aside.” “. Gift. Validity. Depriving other heirs of their shares. Impious for a Muslim to deprive some or all of his children from property by alienating same in his lifetime, and it will be so m all good sense if done without just cause. Islamic law does not forbid such gift when made by a person not suffering from “Martial- Matt’. Gift may not become invalid only because it may, have the effect of depriving the others of their share. Inheritance. Limitation. No. Imitation in inheritance cases and person claiming inheritance cannot be non-suited merely on the post of limitation.” In all the precedent cases it is held that a Muslim cannot be deprived of his/her right simply because he/she relinquished the same or a private settlement disinherited higher for legacy of a deceased Muslim devolves upon legal heirs on his/her death irrespective of the fact that a mutation 1s sanctioned in his/her favor or not and he/she is recorded as owner in the Revenue Record or not. A Muslim owner is competent to alienate or transfer his/her property only through the modes recognized under law and not otherwise. Any adverse entry in the Revenue Record would not oblige higher to challenge the same within a period of 6 years of the entry, for cause of action in such cases would accrue only when real threat was posed to his/her title

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): the modes recognized under law and not otherwise. Any adverse entry in the Revenue Record would not oblige higher to challenge the same within a period of 6 years of the entry, for cause of action in such cases would accrue only when real threat was posed to his/her title i.e. when defendant denied his/her title in unequivocal terms. Every fresh entry made in the Revenue Record to the detriment of plaintiff would give a new cause of action. This is the view expressed by our own Supreme Court Ina case titled “Boston and others v. MST. Attar Bibi and others” (PLD 1993 SC (AJ&K) 24) referred hereinbefore. Under the Constitution, it is law of the State. This view stands supported by different judgments from Pakistan jurisdiction also. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y The present case when tested on the touchstone of the above referred settled principle of law, it may safely be said that suit by the appellant is within time in view of Articles 91, 95 and 120. The plastic appellant, as stated earlier, is found to have pleaded to acquire knowledge in the year 1996, and she has also pleaded that 6 months prior to institution of the suit the defendants categorically denied her right which caused to bring the present suit, categorically denied her right. The defendants failed to rebut claim about knowledge put forwarded by the appellant in her plaint therefore, irresistible conclusion TS that she acquired knowledge of all that depriving her of her legitimate right in the year, 1996 when she knocked at the door of the Court. She is found to have been deprived of her right on the ground of illegal practice adopted by the defendants behind her back and without her knowledge. Comma to the law cited at bar by the learned counsel for the respondents, it may be observed that no doubt, Supreme Court of AJ&K has held that, even a void order or transactions is required to be challenged within reasonable time in order to get rid of TT nevertheless the fact remains that the learned Judges while pronouncing the judgments relied upon by the learned H counsel categorically observed that reasonable time from the date of knowledge. According to Hon’BLE Judges, if a void order adversely affecting the rights of a person is in his knowledge he is required to challenge the same within reasonable time from the date of knowledge or from the date of order if pronounced in his presence. Here in this case, as stated earlier, all the transactions are found to have been made behind the back of the appellant and without her knowledge. She, as Archer as possible, after acquiring knowledge knocked at the door of the Court through the present suit. Therefore, the case-law in view of the peculiar circumstance of the case in hand has no relevancy here. The result therefore, is that the appellant though she is not recorded as cosharer in the joint estate left by her father yet on his

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 YLR 1814?
Answer: From case 2005 YLR 1814 (AZAD J&K HIGH COURT, 2005-05-11): of the Court through the present suit. Therefore, the case-law in view of the peculiar circumstance of the case in hand has no relevancy here. The result therefore, is that the appellant though she is not recorded as cosharer in the joint estate left by her father yet on his death the property under Muslim law has also devolved, upon her in view of Mohammedan Law. She thus, is declared as co- sharer in the joint estate left by her deceased father. She is entitled to a decree for joint possession however, her share in the property after its determination by the Revenue department shall be satisfied through regular partition in view of this decree for joint possession. The judgments and decrees passed by the Courts below are hereby set aside and the Panama executed in the year 1956 and all the transactions made thereafter are declared to be ineffective and inoperative to the rights of the appellant to the estate left by her father. National database.com WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2005 PLD 15 about?
Answer: Case 2005 PLD 15 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2004-12-06. The case involved FAROOQ AHMED (PETITIONER) VERSUS FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN THROUGH SECRETARY LAW AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, ISLAMABAD (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include JUVENILE OFFENDER JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM ORDINANCE (XXII OF 2000) - PREAMBLE PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS.82, 83 AND 299(A) AND (1) CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - 8.399 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 199, 23, 25, 26 AND 12 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2005/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2005_15.html 1/45 28/10/2025, 00:24 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2005/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2005_15.htmi. The case was heard by KHAWAJA MUHAMMAD SHARIF MIAN MUHAMMAD NAJAM-UZ- ZAMAN AND ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: In case 2005 PLD 15, the court applied the following statutes: JUVENILE OFFENDER JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM ORDINANCE (XXII OF 2000) - PREAMBLE PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS.82, 83 AND 299(A) AND (1) CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - 8.399 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 199, 23, 25, 26 AND 12 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2005/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2005_15.html 1/45 28/10/2025, 00:24 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2005/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2005_15.htmi. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2004-12-06.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 PLD 15 were: MR. MUHAMMAD NAWAZ BHATTI, DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR THE FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN. MRS. YASMIN SEHGAL, ASSISTANT ADVOCATE-GENERAL FOR THE PROVINCE OF THE PUNJAB.MRS. ASMA JAHANGIR AND MR. MANZOOR AHMAD MALIK AS AMICI CURTAE.. The judges presiding were: KHAWAJA MUHAMMAD SHARIF MIAN MUHAMMAD NAJAM-UZ- ZAMAN AND ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 PLD 15 were: FAROOQ AHMED (PETITIONER) VERSUS FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN THROUGH SECRETARY LAW AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, ISLAMABAD (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 PLD 15.
Answer: ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA, J.-Sages down the ages have generally, perceived an accused person, before establishing of his guilt beyond reasonable doubt, as the darling of criminal court and if such an accused person happens to be a child then the romance about him usually receives a further sympathetic boost. The raison d'être for such sympathy may not, be difficult to discern as by and large a child is considered to be deserving of special treatment because of his innocence and lack of proper understanding of the nature or consequences of his conduct. However, a young person who has already lost. His childhood virtue, innocence and incorruptibility and who understands the nature or the normal consequences of his conduct, no matter what his age; may cease to qualify for such special handling as a child. It. is-the quandary posed by such a mature pubescent, or a ripe juvenile, who may be of relatively young age but has already attained sufficient. Maturity, of understanding, that is the subject of the present petition. It is madly in this, context that we have, been called: upon through this petition to examine, the virus, of the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 introduced in, our legal, system on July 1, 2000, through Federal Ordinance No. XXII of 2000. The petitioner bringing up this challenge, happens, to be the complainant of case of murder min which an accused person is claiming, to be a ‘child’, within the purview of the Juvenile. Justice System-Ordinance. 2000 and thus, entitled to concessionary, treatment in the matters of bail, trial and sentence, if any T 2. For facility of reference the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 may be reproduced here in its entirety (as published in PLD 2000 Central Statutes 385): “ORDINANCE XXII OF 2000 JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM ORDINANCE, 2000. An Ordinance to provide for protection of the rights of children involved in criminal litigation [Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, Part I, 1st July, 2000] No. F.2(1)/2000-Pub. dated 1.7.2000.-The following Ordinance made by the President is hereby published for general information:- Whereas it is expedient to provide for protection of children involved in criminal litigation, their rehabilitation in society, reorganization of Juvenile Courts and matters connected WW. therewith and incidental thereto; And whereas the National Assembly and the Senate stand suspended in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth day of October, 1999, and the Provisional Constitution Order No. of 1999; And whereas the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action; Now, therefore, in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth day of October, 1999 and the Provisional Constitution Order No. of 1999, as well as Order No. of 1999, and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance-- 1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000. (2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan. (3) It shall come into force at once. 2. Definitions.- In this Ordinance, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, (a) ‘Borstal institution’ means a place where child offenders may be detained and given education and training for their mental, moral and psychological development; (b) ‘child’ means a person who at the time of commission of an offense has not attained the age of eighteen years; (c) ‘Code’ means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898); (d) ‘guardian’ means a parent or a person who has actual care, of the child and includes such relative who is willing to bear the. responsibility of the child; (e) ‘Juvenile Court’ means a Court established under section 4; (f) ‘offense’ means an offense punishable under any law for the time being in force; and; (g) ‘Probation Officer’ means a person apported under the Probation of Offenders Ordinance, 1960 (XLV of 1960), or such person as the Provincial Government may appoint to perform the functions of Probation Officer under this Ordinance. 3. Legal assistance.- (1) Every child, who is accused of the commission of an offense or is a victim of an offense shall have the right of legal assistance at the expense of the State. (2) A legal practitioner appointed by the State for providing legal assistance to a child accused of the commission of an offense, or victim of an offense, shall have at least five years standing at the Bar. 4. Juvenile Courts. (1) The Provincial Government shall in consultation with the Chief Justice of High Court, by notification in the official. Gazette, establish one or more Juvenile Courts for any local area with TTS jurisdiction. (2) The High Court may. (a) confer powers of Juvenile Court on. (i) Court of Session; or (i) Judicial Magistrate of the First Class; and (b) apport, from amongst practicing Advocates having" at least seven years standing at the Bar, Presiding Officer of Juvenile Courts with powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class for the purposes of this Ordinance on such terms and conditions as the High Court may determine." (3) The Juvenile Court shall have the exclusive jurisdiction to try cases in which a child 1s accused of commission of an offense. (4) Subject to subsection on commencement of this Ordinance, all cases pending before trial Court in which a child is accused of an offense shall stand transferred to the Juvenile Court having jurisdiction. (5) The Juvenile Court shall not, merely by reason of a change MN its composition, or transfer of a case under subsection be bound to recall or rehear any witness who has given evidence and may act on the evidence already recorded. (6) On taking cognizance of an offense, the Juvenile Court shall decide the case within four months. 5. No joint trial of a child and adult person.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contamed in section 239 of the Code, or any other law for the time being in force, no child shall be charged with or tried for an offense together with an adult. (2) IFA child TS charged with commission of an offense for which under section 239 of the Code, or any other law for the time being in force such child could be tried together with an adult, the Court taking cognizance of the offense shall direct separate trial of the child by the Juvenile Court. 6. Procedure of Juvenile Courts.- (1) Juvenile Court shall, unless provided otherwise in this Ordinance, follow the procedure provided for in the Code. (2) A Juvenile Court shall not ordinarily take up any other case on a day when the case of child accused is fixed for evidence on such day. (3) No person shall be present at any sitting of Juvenile Court except (a) members and officers of the Juvenile Court; (b) parties to the case before the Juvenile Court and such other persons who are directly concerned with the proceedings including the police officers; (c) Such other persons as the Juvenile Court directs to be present; and (d) guardian of the child. (4) At any stage during the course of the trial of a case under this Ordinance, the juvenile Court may, in the interest of such child, decency or morality, direct any person to withdraw from Court for such period as the Court may direct. (5) Where at any stage during the course of the trial of case, the juvenile Court is satisfied that the attendance of the child is not essential for the purposes of the trial, the juvenile Court may dispense with the attendance and proceed with the trial of the case m absence of the child. (6) When child who has been brought before a juvenile Court and is found to be suffering from serious illness, whether physical or mental, and requires treatment, the Court shall send such child to a hospital or a medical institution where treatment shall be given to the child at the expense of the State. 7. Determination of age. IFA question arises whether a person before TT is a child for the purposes of this Ordinance, the juvenile Court shall record a finding after such inquiry which shall include a medical report for determination of the age of the child. 8. Prohibition to publish proceedings of cases- (1) Unless the juvenile Court specifically authorizes, the Court proceedings shall not be published in any newspaper, magazine or journal in any form which may disclose the name, address, school or any identification or particulars calculated to lead directly or indirectly to the identification of such child, nor shall any picture of the child be published. 9. Probation Officer- (1) The Probation Officer shall assist the juvenile Court by making a report, on the child’s character, educational, social and moral background. (2) Subject to subsection (3) the report of the Probation Officer submitted to the juvenile Court shall be treated as confidential. (3) The juvenile Court, if it so thinks, communicate the substance of the report to the child or his guardian and, where any one of them disputes the contents or views contained therein, the Juvenile Court may give such child or, as the case, may be, guardian an opportunity of producing such evidence as may be relevant to the matter stated, in the report. 10. Arrest and bail- (1) Where a child is arrested for commission of an offense, the officer in charge of the police station in which the child is detained shall, as soon as may be, inform (a) the guardian of the child, FHE can be found, of, such arrest and inform him of the time, date and name of the juvenile Court before which the child shall be produced; and, (b) the concerned Probation Officer to enable him to obtain such information about the child and other material circumstances which may be of assistance to the juvenile Court for making inquiry. (2) Where a child accused of a non-bailable offense is arrested, he shall; without any delay and in no case later than twenty-four hours from such arrest, be produced before the juvenile Court. (3) Without prejudice, to the provisions of the Code, a child accused of a bailable offense shall, if already not released under section 496 of Code, be released by the juvenile Court on bail, with or without surety, unless it appears that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the release of the child shall bring him into association with any criminal or expose the child to any danger, in which case, the child shall be placed under the custody of a Probation Officer or a suitable person or institution dealing with the welfare of the children if parent or guardian of the child is not present, but shall not under any circumstances be kept Ina police station or jail in such cases. (4) The juvenile Court shall, in a case where a child is not granted bail under subsection direct for tracing the guardian of such child and where the guardian of the child is traced out, the juvenile Court may immediately release the child on bail. (5) Where a child under the age of fifteen years is arrested or detained for an offense which is punishable with imprisonment of less than ten years, shall be treated as FHE was accused of commission of a bailable offense. (6) No child under the age of fifteen years shall be arrested under any of the laws dealing with preventive detention or under the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Code. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code and except where a juvenile Court is of the opinion that the delay in the trial of the accused has been occasioned by an act or omission of the accused or any other person acting on his behalf or in exercise of any right or privilege under any law for the time being in force, a child who, for commission of an offense, has been detained, shall be released on bail, (a) if} BMG accused of an offense punishable with death has been detained for such an offense for a continuous period exceeding one year and whose trial for such an offense has not concluded; (b) if BMG accused of any offense punishable for imprisonment for life has been detained for such an offense for a continuous period exceeding six months and whose TNA for such offense has not concluded; or (c) who, being accused of any offense not punishable with death, or imprisonment for life, has been defamed for such an offense for a continuous period exceeding four months and whose trial for such an offense has not concluded: Provided that where a child of the age of fifteen years or above is arrested the Court may refuse to grant bail if there are reasonable grounds to believe that such child is involved in an offense which in TTS opinion TS serious, famous, gruesome, brutal, sensational in character or shocking to public morality, or he is a previous convict of an offense punishable with death or imprisonment for life. 11. Release on probation Where on conclusion of an inquiry or trial, the juvenile Court finds that a child has, committed, an offense, then notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained m any law for the time being m force, the juvenile Court may, if it thinks fit. (a) Direct the child offender to be released on probation for good conduct and place such child under the care of guardian or any suitable person executing a bond with or without surety as the Court may require, for the good behavior and well-being of the child for any period not exceeding the period of imprisonment awarded to such child Provided that the child released on probation be produced before the juvenile Court periodically on such dates and time as it may direct. (b) make an order directing the child offender to be sent to a Borstal institution until he attars the age of eighteen years or for the period of imprisonment whichever is earlier. (c) reduce the period of imprisonment or probation in the case where the Court is satisfied that further imprisonment or probation shall be unnecessary. 12. Orders that shall not be passed with respect to a child. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being, in force no child shall be. (a) awarded punishment of death, or ordered to; labor during the time spent in any Borstal or such other institution; and. (b) handcuffed, put in fetters or given any corporal punishment at any time while in custody: Provided that where there is reasonable apprehension of the escape of the child from custody, he may be handcuffed. 13. Appeal, etc. (1) A child convicted on a trial by a juvenile Court, or any other person on his behalf, within thirty days from the date, of such order; prefer an appeal in accordance with the provisions of the Code (2) The Provincial Government or any person aggrieved by an order of acquittal passed by a juvenile Court, may, within thirty days, prefer an appeal against such order MN accordance with the provisions of section 417 of the Code. 14. Ordinance hot to derogate from other laws.- The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force. 15. Power to make rules. The Provincial. Government may, by notification the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance.” 3. Due to the importance of the matter and the far-reaching consequences of any conclusion that we may arrive at while deciding this petition we had issued notice to the learned Attorney-General for Pakistan and the learned Advocate-General, Punjab and had also requested Mr. Acid Hassan Into, Mrs. Asia Jahangir and Mr, Manor Ahmad Malik, Advocates to assist us as amici curiae. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, the learned Deputy Attorney-General appear mg for the Federation of Pakistan, the learned Assistant Advocate- General representing the Province of the Punjab and two of the learned amici curiae at some length and have gone through the material referred to by each of them. 4. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the matter of treatment of a child accused of committing a crime has already been adequately and satisfactorily taken care of by sections 82, 83 and 299 (a) (1) of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 as well as by section 399 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and that production of the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 (hereafter referred to as the impugned Ordinance) has created unnecessary confusion in this field. He has maintained that most of the provisions of the impugned Ordinance are unreasonable, absurd and downright impracticable. He has added that the matter of sentencing of a young offender always receives a careful and generally sympathetic consideration by our courts keeping in view the special features of a particular case and, thus, there was no occasion for the impugned Ordinance to categorically forbid passing of a sentence of death against an offender below the age of eighteen years. He has gone on to maintain that the provisions of Articles 25(3) and 26(2) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (hereafter. referred to as the Constitution) do not envisage extending protection to children in a manner that leaves others unprotected at the hands of such children. According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the protection afforded to young offenders through the impugned Ordinance against the sentence of death has encouraged the adults in our society to settle their murder, feuds by prompting their young ones to kill their enemies and to get away with lesser sentences. This abuse or misuse of the provisions of the impugned Ordinance, according to him, has promoted murders and has gone a long way in denying the victims their right to life guaranteed by Article 9 of the Constitution. It has also forcefully been maintained by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned Ordinance has encouraged and promoted corruption in the society Inasmuch as fake School] Leaving Certificates are being obtained, incorrect medical opinions about age are being procured, forgeries and interpolations are BMG committed in the Registers of Births maintained at the Union Councils and false Nikahnamas of parents of accused persons are BMG prepared with a view to show the age of an offender, to be less than, eighteen years at the time of occurrence so that a possible sentence of death may, be avoided against him in cases of terrorism, murder, gang-rape or trafficking in narcotics, etc. It has, thus, been canvassed by the learned counsel for the petitioner that a law which corrupts the society" at large in the name of protection to children is not worth renaming on the statute book. It has been added by him in this context that the impugned Ordinance had been introduced without prior public debate and in the absence of any discussion in the Parliament which was non-existent at that time. It has lastly been argued by him that the impugned Ordinance had been promulgated by an unrepresentative government under the pressure of the Western governments and donor agencies without appreciating that in view of the peculiar social, economic, climatic and dietary factors a child in our part of the world attains maturity of understanding relatively sooner than in-the West. Thus, according to him, the Western standards in this regard could not blindly or slavishly be applied in our country. He has referred to. the case of Emperor v. Paras Ram Due [AIR 1915 Allahabad 134] wherein it had been held that in our part of the world a boy aged less than fourteen years may have. Sufficient maturity of understanding, the case of Teal Singh and others. v. State of Punjab [1985 PSC 1407] wherein it had been observed that a thirteen years old witness may not necessarily be termed as a child witness and the case of Sheikh Hassan v. Bashir Ahmad and another [PLD 1966 (W.P.) Peshawar 97](FB) wherein it had been laid down that in a case of murder mere youth of ah offender may not by itself be a mitigating factor in the matter of sentence to be passed against him. With these submissions the learned counsel for the petitioner has prayed that the impugned Ordinance may be struck down by this Court on account of its unreasonableness as well as on account of its provisions being violative of the Fundamental Rights contained in Articles 9 and 25 of the Constitution. 5. At the time of admission of this petition to regular harem on 28.11.2002 we had issued a notice of this petition to the learned Attorney- General for Pakistan and on 18.12.2002 Mr. Bathroom Ali Khan, Attorney-General for Pakistan personally appeared before this Court in connection with this petition along with Mr. Muhammad Nawab Bhakti, Deputy Attorney-General for Pakistan. It, however, appears that thereafter Mr. Muhammad Nawab Bhakti, Deputy Attorney-General had been entrusted by the learned Attorney- General the task of representing not only the Federation of Pakistan but also the learned Attorney-General Mr. Muhammad Nawab Bhakti, Deputy Attorney- General has wholeheartedly supported the impugned Ordinance before us and has argued that by virtue of the provisions of Articles 25(3) and 26(2) of the Constitution laws can be enacted, and special provisions can be made for the protection of children and, therefore, despite a number of impracticalities in the impugned Ordinance the same may not be interfered with by this Court as the precedent law requires this Court to be extremely slow in strike down a law duly enacted or promulgated by the legislature. In this connection he has referred to the cases of Sh. Loquat Hussain and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Islamabad and others [PLD 1999 SC 504], Meir Cultivar Ali Baby and others v. Government of the Punjab and others [PLD 1997 SC 11], Messes Elah Cotton Mills Ltd. and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Islamabad and six others [PLD. 1997 SC 582], Mehran Ali and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others [PLD 1998 SC 1445] and Federation of Pakistan and another v. Malik Ghulam Mustafa Khan [PLD 1989 SC 26]. We have found the said precedent cases to be quite illuminating and instructive but, with profound respect, hardly relevant to the issues involved in the present petition. WW. 6. On 28.11.2002, at the time of admission of this petition to regular hearing, we had also issued a notice of this petition to the learned Advocate-General, Punjab but the learned Advocate-General has never appeared before this Court in connection with this petition and instead Mrs. Yasmin Segal, Assistant Advocate-General has been appearing for the Province of the Punjab. She has, while assisting this Court honestly and candidly, expressed reservations about the validity and propriety of the impugned Ordinance and has maintained that the law existing prior to introduction of the impugned Ordinance adequately catered for the interests of a young or minor accused person. In this connection she has referred to the provisions of sections 306 and 308 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 and to the case of Muhammad Axial alias Seems v. The State [1999 SCMR 2652]. In the said case it had been held that the question of maturity of a young offender is to be gone into by the court before proceeding to convict and sentence him She has gone on to maintain that the impugned Ordinance has created unnecessary confusion in our criminal justice system and also that the impugned Ordinance is replete with practical difficulties. 7. Mrs. Asia Jahangir, Advocate had appeared as an amicus curiae on a couple of dates of hearing and had partially addressed her arguments on one of such dates. Thereafter she never entered appearance in connection with this petition despite the fact that her name kept on appearing in the cause-list regularly: She had, as was expected of her as she is a renowned human rights activist, supported the impugned Ordinance and had explained the conceptual background in-which the said. Ordinance had been produced. According to her the impugned Ordinance is an outcome of a growing awareness in the world about the ‘rights’ of a child which awareness/.was. epitomized by the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1959) and then the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989). Pakistan TS said to have voted in favor of the Declaration of 1959 and the Convention of 1989 is stated to have been ratified by Pakistan. She had read out different parts of the said Declaration and Convention to show that the impugned Ordinance is completely in accord with that Declaration and Convention. According to Mrs. Jahangir Pakistan was under an international moral and legal obligation to legislate in that regard and, thus, the Federal Government was quite justified in promulgating the impugned Ordinance. She had, however, agreed that due to lack of any public or parliamentary, debate before enactment of the impugned Ordinance various factors highlighted by the learned counsel for the petitioner had renamed unattended to at WW. the time of promulgation of the said Ordinance. She. too had referred to Articles 25(3) and 26(2) of the Constitution which permit enactment of laws and making of special provisions for the protection of children. 8. Mr. Acid Hassan Into, Advocate appeared before this Court as an amicus curiae on a couple of dates of hearing, but he could, not get. an opportunity to address the Court on those dates; Thereafter he too did not show any interest in assisting this Court and failed to, appear before the Court i connection with this petition despite his name regularly appearing in the cause-list issued for each and every date of harem, We have, thus, been deprived of his assistance which, we are sure, would have been valuable. 9. Mr. Manor Ahmad Malik, Advocate appearing as an amicus curiae has addressed elaborate arguments before us and has seriously criticized the impugned Ordinance. He has submitted that the title of the impugned Ordinance contains the word ‘juvenile’ but the said word has not been defined in the Ordinance but instead a ‘child’ has been defined by section 2(b) of the said Ordinance to be “ a person who at the time of occurrence of an offense has not attained the age of eighteen years”. Malik has posted out that by virtue of section 29-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 a ‘juvenile’ already stood defined as a person “under the age of fifteen years” and section 29(l)(a) of the Punjab Youthful Offenders Ordinance, 1983 already defined a ‘child’ as a person who “has not attained the age of fifteen years” and, thus, the definition of a ‘child’ contamed in section 2(b) of the impugned Ordinance fixing the age as below eighteen years is in direct conflict with the above-mentioned existing laws. He has brought the entire Ordinance under scathing criticism but has taken particularly strong exception to the provisions of section 5 thereof which requires separate trial of a ‘child’ and section 12 thereof which contains a prohibition against the punishment of death for a ‘child’ offender. According to him in cases where a ‘child’ commits an offense jointly with an adult section 5 of the impugned Ordinance ensures duplicity of effort by the prosecution and also contains an inherent risk of conflicting judgments being rendered by a Juvenile Court and an ordinary court. Being a busy trial lawyer, and very able too, he has categorically stated on the basis of his personal experience that the spirit of the provisions of the said section is variably being ignored by the trial courts as the same Sessions Judges and Additional Sessions Judges are functioning both as the ordinary courts as well as the Juvenile Courts and more often than not a ‘child’ accused is tried by the same Judge who tries the adult accused and WW. the evidence recorded in the adult’s trial is usually transferred and adopted by such courts for the purposes of the child’s trial. He has also main tamed that because of the prohibition against the punishment of death for a ‘child’ contamed in section 12 of the impugned Ordinance more and more cases are now coming up for trial m which accused persons below the age of eighteen years are alleged to have committed serious offenses like murder and gang-rape or alleged to have indulged in terrorism or dealing in narcotics. He has further argued that the law existing prior to production of the impugned Ordinance took adequate care of a minor offender and that the impugned Ordinance is idealistic and divorced from the local ground realities. 10. After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, the learned law officers and the learned amici curiae at some length and after going through the material referred to by each of them we are constrained to observe at the outset that the impugned Ordinance has not appeared to us to be the finest example of legislative craftsmanship inasmuch as its language as well its contents have been found by us to be defective and unthoughtful in many ways. A defect in the form or language of a legislative instrument can be swallowed with a pinch of salt or overlooked with disappointment but a defect in its substance or content cannot remain without being followed by the requisite or necessary legal consequences. There is no denying the fact that on account of his tender age a child deserves special handling and treatment and even before the production, of the impugned Ordinance different laws in our country already provided for sympathetic and concessionary treatment of minor accused persons and offenders in the matters of capacity, to commit a crime, bail and custody as is evident from the provisions of sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code and sections 29-B, 497 and 399 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The concept of Borstal Institutions and Reformatory Schools for young prisoners already stood recognized and put into practice by various legislative enactments even prior to promulgation of the impugned Ordinance. Even in the matter of sentencing the courts have all along been particular in attending-to the factor regarding age of the offense before passing a sentence against him. All these measures had blended well with the remaining body of laws and the progress and direction of the law relating to children was by and large steady and positive. The injection of the impugned Ordinance into our legal system has, however, been found by us. to be rather abrupt and not very well thought of besides the dose BMG heavier than required at such a stage of development of our laws and social behavior. Apart from that we are constrained to observe that we have found the impugned Ordinance to be inconsistent with and violative of Articles 4, 9 and 25 of the Constitution besides being replete with incompatibilities with other laws, alarm impracticalities, some downright absurdities and a number of obscurities rendering the same unfit and unsafe for retention in our criminal justice system. Definition of a ‘child’, provisions relating to separate trial of a child, a part of the. provisions concerning bail during trial and abolition, of the sentence of death vis-à-vis a child are some of the areas which require special attention in this context. 11. The age fixed by the impugned Ordinance, for determine whether an accused person is a ‘child’ or not, has been found by us to have been fixed arbitrarily and randomly. Section 2(b) of the impugned Ordinance defines a ‘child’ as “a person who at the time of commission of ah offense has not at tamed-the age of eighteen years”. This definition of a ‘child’ makes no distinction between a male and a female and no other yardstick has been provided by this definition except age in terms of years. In England, according to section 50 of the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933 as amended by section 16 of the Children and Young Persons Act, 1963, there is a conclusive presumption that no child under the age of ten years can be guilty of any offense and an infant between the ages of ten and fourteen years is presumed to be doli incapax incapable of possessing the requisite mens rea for committing a crime. Thus, in England the age limit for a child stands fixed at fourteen years In India section 2(h) of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 provides that ‘ ‘juvenile’ means a boy who has not attained the age of sixteen years or a girl who has not at tamed the age of eighteen years”. This shows that in Pakistan, England and India different ages have been specified for declaring an accused person a ‘child’ or a ‘juvenile’ for the purposes of special treatment as such. In Pakistan itself different measures have been provided in this regard by different statutory provisions. Section 3 of the Majority Act, 1875 fixes the age of majority as eighteen years and in one particular situation twenty-one years. Section 82 of the Pakistan Penal Code provides that “Nothing is an offense which is done by a child under seven years of age” and section 83 of the same Code provides that “Nothing TS an offense which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding judging of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.” As already mentioned above the impugned Ordinance fixes the age of ‘child’ as less than eighteen years. As against that according to the definition of an ‘adult’ contained in section 2(a) of the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 ‘adult’ means a person who has at tamed, being a male, the age of eighteen years or, being a female, the age of sixteen years, or has attained puberty”. This definition of an ‘adult’ contamed in the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 not only recognizes the distinction between different ages at which males and females-attain adulthood, but it also recognizes that adulthood may be attained by both males and females even before the specified ages if it is established that they have attained puberty. Even section 2(a) of the Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 and Article 2(a) of the Prohibition (Enforcement of Had) Order, 1979 define an ‘adult’ as “a person who has attained the age of eighteen years or puberty”. In the case of Farrukh Vikram v. The State [PLD 1987 SC 5] the Hon’BLE Shan't Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan had decided that a female attains puberty when she starts menstruating and in the case of Abdul Jabbar v. The State [PLD 1991 SC 172] the same Court had laid down that a male attains puberty when he starts secreting semen. Section 29-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 refers to a ‘juvenile’ as a person “under the age of fifteen years” and according to section 29(I)(a) of the Punjab Youthful Offenders Ordinance, 1983 a ‘child’ is as a person who “has not attained the age of fifteen years” The law officers appearing before us on behalf of the Federation and the Province have failed to point out as to on what basis, material or criterion the impugned Ordinance has fixed the age of ‘child’ as less than eighteen years. They have also failed to refer to any peaceful or detailed study of our social patterns or criminal trends or any statistical data m that regard supporting such fixation of age of ‘child’ by the impugned Ordinance. All this shows that while fixing the age of a ‘child’ in the impugned Ordinance the criterion adopted was nothing but arbitrary and whimsical. Such an arbitrary or random exercise in legislation can hardly be accepted by a court of law as reasonable or based upon any intelligible differentia So as to save it from challenge based upon unreasonable classification and discrimination. 12. We have also found a lot of substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the stages and standards pertaining to at taming of maturity by young persons in different parts of the world are different and the stages and standards in that regard acceptable in one part of the world may not be strictly relevant to other parts of the world. Such attachment of maturity of understanding is dependent upon social, economic, climatic and dietary factors, and we have every reason to. Understand that a child in our part of the world starts understanding the nature and consequences of his conduct sooner than a child in the West. Growing up in proximity and interaction with adults due to social v and economic conditions, dog odd jobs and getting employed at a relatively young age due to WW. general poverty, hot climate and exotic and spicy food all contribute towards a speedy physical growth and an accelerated maturity of understanding of a child in our society. Criminal lability of a meant in the Indo-Pak subcontinent was commented upon by Piggott in the case of Emperor v. Paras ram Due [AIR 1915 Allahabad 134] mm the following words: ‘The presumption of English Law against the possibility of the commission of the offense of rape by a boy under the age of 14 years has no application in this-country. The law on the subject of infancy in connection with criminal ability is laid down in Ss. 82 and 83 of the Indian Penal Code and nowhere else.” It is relevant and significant to mention here that the British Parliament which had enacted sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code at that time the Indian Penal Code, 1860) had subsequently fixed a different yardstick MN terms of age regarding attachment of maturity of understanding of the nature and consequences of conduct in respect of young offenders in England. As already observed above, according to section 50 of the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933 as amended by section 16 of the Children and Young Persons Act- 1963 there is a conclusive presumption that no child under the age of ten years can be guilty of any offense and an infant between-the ages of ten and fourteen years was presumed to be doli incapax, but this presumption was rebuttable by evidence of “mischievous discretion” or guilty knowledge that he was doing something which was wrong, This aspect of the matter has been commented upon by Smith and Hogan (‘Criminal Law’, Tenth Edition, Butterworth's 2002) at pages 211 and 212 in the following words: “Infants or, i more modern terminology, minors, are persons-under eighteen years of age. As such, they are (with some exceptions) incapable of making contracts or wills, but the law imposes no such Mutations on their ability to commit crimes, for, as Kenny put it, ‘a child knows right from wrong long before he knows how to make a prudent speculation or a wise will’. Ten is a comparatively low age for the beginning of criminal responsibility; but as Ingle by Committee posted out: ‘In many countries the “age of criminal responsibility’ is used to signify the age at which a person becomes liable to the “ordinary” or “‘full’ penalties of the law. In this sense, the age of criminal responsibility in England is difficult to state: it 1s certainly much higher than eight.’ WW. At common law there was a rebuttable presumption that a child aged not less than 10 but under 14 years was doli incapax, incapable of committing crime. The presumption was rebutted only if the prosecution proved beyond reasonable doubt, not only that the child caused an actus reus with mens rea, but also that he knew that the particular act was not merely naughty or mischievous, but ‘seriously wrong’. If there was no evidence of such knowledge, other than that implicit in the act itself, the child had no case to answer. In C v. DPP ({1996] AC 1) the Divisional Court held that this ancient rule of the common law was outdated and no longer law; but the House of Lords ruled ([1995] 2 All ER 43) that it was not open to the courts so to hold. That decision was followed by a series of acquittals which caused disquiet. Parliament responded by ' abolishing the rebuttable presumption (Crime and Disorder Act,' 1998, section 34). This was probably intended to put children aged ten and above on an equal footing with adults, so far as lability to conviction is concerned.” Such different treatment of young delinquents MN different parts of the world by the same legislative source goes a long way in fortifying our observations made above that no universal yardstick can be fixed in that regard. Speedy attachment of maturity of understanding by children in rural areas of the Indo-Pak subcontinent was also commented upon by the Supreme Court of India in the case of Teal SMG and others v. State of Punjab [1985 PSC 1407] and while discussing the statement of a thirteen years old witness in a case of murder it had been observed as follows: “6. Hardin Singh is a Had of 13 years. In our country and particularly in the rural, areas it 1s difficult to think of lad of thirteen years as a child. A vast majority of boys round about that age go to the. Fields and do men’s work. They are certainly capable of understanding The significance of the oath and the necessity to speak the truth. The learned Sessions Judge who had the opportunity of seeing the witness Hardin Singh in the witness-box did not consider it necessary to treat him as a child witness. A perusal of his evidence also shows that he has certainly at tamed a measure of mature understanding. We do not think we can accept. Dr. Chi tale’s argument and on the basis that, Hardin Singh TS a child witness.” Even in England in the case of 2L. v. [(1960). 44 Cr. App. Rep* ] evidence that a boy, aged just under nine years, came from a respectable family, had been properly brought up WW. and was generally well-behaved was held sufficient to prove that he knew that house-breaking and theft were wrong. That case was, of course, decided when the maximum age of criminal responsibility was eight years. In the case of F. v. Pad wick [(1959) Crim. L. R. 43,9] the Divisional Court in, England went further by emphasizing the general desirability of admitting evidence of the child’s home background “and all his circumstances”, even at the risk of disclosing information highly prejudicial to, him, so as to assess his maturity of understanding. In England a boy under the age of 14 cannot be found guilty of committing rape or of assault with intent to commit rape or of offenses involving carnal knowledge. This rule primarily rests upon the principle of physical impossibility and, therefore, no evidence is admissible to. prove that the particular boy had attained puberty before the age of 14. The law in this regard is, however, different in Pakistan. It has already been observed by us above that according to the definition of an ‘adult’ contained in section 2(a) of the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 “ ‘adult’? means a person who has attained, being a male, the age of eighteen years, or, being a female, the age of sixteen years, or has attained puberty” and even section 2(a) of the Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 and Article 2(a) of the Prohibition (Enforcement of Had) Order, 1979 define an ‘adult’ as “a person who has attained the age of eighteen years or puberty’. As mentioned above, the Hon’BLE Sharia Appellate. Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan has already decided that a female attains puberty when she starts menstruating and that a male attains puberty when he starts secreting semen. This difference MN the laws of Pakistan and England in this regard may have a direct nexus with the-local social, economic, climatic and dietary factors and the same goes a long way in highlighting that questions of adulthood may receive different responses in different parts of the world. Even in the Indo-Pak subcontinent itself the standard of adulthood MN the context of juvenility has been fixed differently. We; have already noticed that according to section 2(b) of the impugned Ordinance a ‘child’ is “a person who at the time of commission of an offense has not attained the age of eighteen years” whereas in India section 2(h) of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 provides that “ ‘juvenile’ means a boy who has not attained the age of sixteen years or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years”. This again highlights the importance of undertaking an in-depth study of the local social and other conditions before promulgating a law like the impugned Ordinance but, alas, no such exercise is shown to have been undertaken in this WW. regard in our country before introduction of the impugned Ordinance. This has made the unreasonableness in this regard worst confounded. 13. The impugned Ordinance has also been found by us to be marred by various impracticalities of diverse nature. For instance subsection (3) of section of the impugned Ordinance provides that “The Juvenile Court shall have the exclusive jurisdiction to try cases in which a child-is accused of commission of an offense”. This shows that all offenses allegedly committed by a child are triable exclusively by a Juvenile Court. This provision TS, however, directly in conflict with many other laws which make certain specified offenses triable exclusively by Special Courts, 1e. Anti-Terrorism Courts, Narcotics Courts, Drug Courts, Banking Courts, etc. It is starting to notice that a Juvenile Court has been conferred the exclusive jurisdiction to try an offender whereas the Special Courts mentioned above have the exclusive jurisdiction to try the relevant offenses. An offender cannot be tried by a court having no jurisdiction to try the relevant offense and conversely an offense cannot be tried by a court having no jurisdiction over the offender! Section 14 of the impugned Ordinance providing that “The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force” has compounded the confusion in this regard as instead of resolving the conflict it has provided feed to the same. 14. Likewise, the provisions of section 5 of the impugned Ordinance present a nightmare of impracticality by mandating that “no child shall be charged with or tried for an offense together with an adult” and in a case involving adult as well as child accused persons separate trials are to be conducted of the adult accused by the ordinary court and of the child accused by the Juvenile Court. Such separate trials of different accused persons in the same case by different courts not only raise questions of undue inconvenience and hardship for the complaint party involving issues pertaining to equality before law and equal protection of law under Article 25 of the Constitution, but they also present a real prospect of conflicting judgments being rendered by different courts trying the same case. Interestingly section 5 of the impugned Ordinance excludes the application of section 239 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in this regard but at the same time section 14 of the impugned Ordinance provides that “The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in addition to, and riot in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force”. We may, therefore, not be unjustified in. observing that the impugned Ordinance has appeared to us to be unthoughtful and not a fine ' example of legal craftsmanship. It may not be out of place to mention here that in England section 6 of the Children and Young Persons Act. 1969 permits a joint trial of a juvenile and an adult where the offense charged is an indictable one. Even section 46 of the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933 recognized a few exceptions to the rule that the criminal jurisdiction over juvenile offenders was to be exercised by a juvenile court and not by any other court of summary jurisdiction. One of such exceptions enabling an adult court to hear the charge was where the juvenile was involved. With an adult in the same or allied offense. This was meant to avoid separate trials, and a possibility of conflicting judgments being handed down by different courts hearing the same case. In; India section 24.of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 requires that “no. juvenile shall be charged with or tried for any offense together With a person, who is not a juvenile”. Similar provisions were also incorporated, in the earlier statutes like the Children Act, 1960, the-"West Bengal Children Act, 1959, the Bombay Children Act, 1948 and the Madras Children Act, 1920." In the case of Robin Apart and, another v. State [1986 Coil.J. 381] the Calcutta High Court and in the case of State v. Basilar Ghhotelal and another [AIR 1957 Bombay 13] the Bombay High Court were. Of the view that a juvenile could be tried only by a Juvenile Court and hence, when the trials of an adult and a juvenile were separated by virtue of the Children Act, the trial of the adult was to proceed under the Code of Criminal Procedure while that of the child would be by the children’s court under the Children Act, However, in the case of Sessions Judge, Tirunelveli v. Perusal [1947 Cr.L.J. 261] a Full Bench of-.the. Madras, High Court, had rendered the same opinion as was. expressed in the Case of in re Keratin [(1972) Mad.L;W. (Cry), 1.95].by. Mahayana, J. in the following words: “Where a plurality of persons jointly take part MN an offense and some of them happen to be adult and others happen to be juveniles, it is eminently desirable and certainly permissible that the same forum tries all the. accused, adult and juveniles, not jointly but separately, try mg the adult accused in, accordance with the provisions of the Cr.P.C. and the juvenile accused in accordance with the provisions of the Madras Children Act and the WW. rules framed thereunder. Such a procedure Will, besides avoiding conflict of decisions in respect of the same occurrence; instill in the minds of the accused that even-handed justice is rendered to them, at least in, the matter of appreciation of evidence, without any discrimination being shown merely on the ground of age.” In her book titled ‘Treatise on The Juvenile Justice Act’ (published by The Indian Law Institute, New Delhi in 1993) Led Kumar has observed at page 189 that: “One finds that during the debates in Parliament on a similar provision in the Children Bill, 1953 and the Children Bill, 1959 the apprehension was raised that separation of trials of the juvenile and the adult accused of. The same offense will require duplication of work. It may result in different decision by the two forums.’ Also, findings of one court may prejudice that of the other. On the other hand, the provision was welcomed as separation of trial would mean that the child was not kept waiting while the case of the non-juvenile accused dragged on, in the criminal court. The provision was made to ensure protection of the interest of the child by the Juvenile Court rather than to consider the magistrate’s difficulties and other, things.” We may, however, observe here with respect that it is not just the difficulties of a Magistrate or the delay in the child’s trial which are of primary or paramount importance but what is at stake is the interests of justice m the larger context. After all such serious questions of Justice pertaining to adults cannot be lightly or conveniently sacrificed at the altar of interests of children or juveniles. Left to us, we would prefer the English approach in respect of joint or separate trials of adults and children. Rather than the Indian approach towards the issue. Such differences of approach and the merits or demerits of each such approach could have been thrashed and ironed out if a public or parliamentary debate had preceded the promulgation of the impugned Ordinance, but unfortunately that was not the case. Apart from that it has been agreed before us by all concerned that, as posted out by Mr. Malik, the spirit of the provisions of section 5 of the impugned Ordinance is variably being ignored by the trial Courts as the Same Sessions Judges and Additional Sessions Judges are functioning both as the ordinary courts as well as the Juvenile Courts and more often than not a ‘child’ accused is tried by the same Judge who tries the adult accused, and the evidence recorded in the adult’s trial is usually transferred and adopted by such courts for WW. the purposes of the child’s trial. Such a practice is highly objectionable besides being clearly illegal, and the same appears to us to be counterproductive to the interests of the child accused as he is not even present before the ordinary court at the time of recording of the evidence in the adult’s trial. It is better not to have a law rather than to have a law which is universally disregarded or flouted with impunity. 15. Section 6 of the impugned Ordinance is yet another example of impracticability. According to subsection (2) of section 6 of the impugned Ordinance “A Juvenile’Court shall not ordinarily take up any other case on a day when the case of a child accused is fixed, for evidence on such day”. The word “ordinarily” has not been explained by the impugned Ordinance nor any exception has been specified and, thus, a discretion has been conferred without spelling out or indicating the parameters of its exercise. It has,-therefore, not surprised us to learn that this, provision is BMG completely ignored by the Juvenile Courts while] conducting cases. Apart - from that the same Sessions Judges and Additional Sessions Judges are functioning both as the ordinary courts as well as the Juvenile Courts acid it is not practically possible for such courts to abs tam from taking up any other case on a day when the case of child accused is fixed for evidence on such day. Such a manner of protection for a child at the cost of complete paralysis or breakdown of the judicial system at the plenary level vis-à-vis the adult'citizenry, has appeared to us to be too big a price to be even seriously contemplated, considered or mulled over. 16. While adverting to section 7 of the impugned Ordinance we may unhesitatingly observe that this provision has created nothing but havoc in our criminal justice system in particular and in the society in general. According to section 7 “If-a question arises whether a person before it is a,child for the purposes of this Ordinance, the juvenile Court shall record a finding after such inquiry which shall include a medical report for determination of the age of the child’. We take judicial notice of the fact that because of this provision a large number of criminal cases witness a mini-trial regarding the age of an accused person before or during, and sometimes even at the fag end of, the ma'am trial of the accused person and during this exercise evidence, both oral, and documentary, is received. A decision of the trial Court in that regard is then assailed through a revision petition before this Court and, then the matter is taken to the Hon’BLE Supreme Court. Sometimes such issues are also raised for the first time in appeals before this Court and in appeals or petitions before the Hon’BLE Supreme Court without this matter having been agitated before the trial Court at all. A,a lot of time is consumed in this process and more often than not such an exercise is undertaken with intentions, and purposes which are other than bona fide. In the case of Allah v. Najeebullah and others PLD 2003. SC 656 the Hon’BLE Supreme Court, of. Pakistan had not only taken notice of but had also deprecated a growing trend that convicts already sentenced to death were trying to prove themselves to be children for the first time after the matters of their convictions and sentences had attained finality through the judgments rendered by the apex court itself According to its annual report published by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan on the State of Human Rights in 2003’ in July, 2003 over 300 cases were pending m the Province of the Punjab alone wherein the ages of convicts on death row were being contested and after exhausting all the judicial remedies against their conviction and sentence the convicts were trying to establish that they were less than eighteen years of age on the day of occurrence and, thus, they could not be sentenced to death. 17. With our experience in this sphere we are constrained to observe that the impugned Ordinance is encouraging and promoting corruption in the society at a scale which is riot only large but is also extremely alarming. Almost every day cases are coming up before us wherein fake School Leaving Certificates are obtained, incorrect medical opinions about age are procured, forgeries and interpolations are committed in the Registers of Births main tamed at Union Councils and false Nikahnamas of parents of accused persons are prepared with a view to show the age of an accused person to be less than eighteen years at the time of occurrence so that a possible sentence of death may be avoided against him in cases of terrorism, murder, gang-rape or trafficking in narcotics, etc. We are, therefore, inclined to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned Ordinance is promoting falsehood, lies, forgeries and corruption in the society at a large scale and a law which corrupts the society at large in the name of protection for children is not worth renamed on the statute book. Destruction of the moral fiber of the society as a whole is once again too big a price to be paid for protection of children. Such a protection of a child in one criminal case at the micro level is surely not protection at all in the larger context or in the real sense if the society which such child TS about to enter as an adult is allowed to be polluted and corrupted at the macro level. Even otherwise a law which contains such incentives for and has tendencies to corrupt the society in such a manner is counterproductive, paradoxical and at odds with the “protection of law” contemplated by the provisions of Articles and 25 of the Constitution. 18. Section 10 of the impugned Ordinance provides for bail for a child accused but subsection (3) of section 10 contemplates a situation where a child accused of even a bailable offense may not be released on bail. This is clearly a negation of the ‘right’ of bail in such cases provided for by section 496 of the Code-of Criminal Procedure. Such a denial of the right of bail by the impugned Ordinance is nothing but congruous and impracticable in the absence of an appropriate amendment of section 496 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Apart from that the concession of bail for a child accused contemplated by subsection (7) of section 10 of the impugned Ordinance has been whittled down by the proviso to that subsection with reference to the nature and gravity of the offense allegedly committed or previous conviction of the accused. If such considerations are acceptable or relevant for refusing even bail to a child accused then, there does not appear to be any justification for not allowing passage of the normal sentence against such accused person for such an offense committed by him. This inaptness in the impugned Ordinance exposes its lack of profundity and soundness: 19. All these infirmities in the impugned Ordinance have convinced us that the same is an impracticable piece of legislation which has been enacted without proper deliberation, thoughtfulness, care and attention to detail. In our considered view allowing such a law to continue’ to hold the field is risky and unsafe besides being perilous and hazardous to our criminal justice system. 20. By virtue of section 12 of the impugned Ordinance “Notwithstanding anything to thercontrary contained in any law for the time being in force no child shall be--(a) awarded punishment of death’. In England the Children Act, 1908 made an immunity from the sentence of death available to. An offender who is less than sixteen years of age and in India such an immunity is available under the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 to a boy less than sixteen years of age and a girl less than eighteen years of age. No reasonable or rational basis has been disclosed or made available before us to show as to why the age of eighteen years has been fixed, in that regard in Pakistan through the impugned Ordinance. Such an exercise of legislative authority is clearly unreasonable and discriminatory as the relevant classification is not based upon any intelligible differentia. 21. Apart, from an immunity from the sentence of death provided by section 12 of the impugned Ordinance the provisions of section 10 of the impugned Ordinance contemplate a WW. lenient and liberal approach towards bail for such accused persons and after their conviction section 11 of the said Ordinance provides for their release on probation. We have found a a lot of substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that such immunity from the sentence of death, lenience in the matter of bail after arrest and prospects of release on probation after conviction provided for in the impugned Ordinance contain incentives for and have the tendency of not only encouraging persons below the age of eighteen years to commit heinous crimes like murder, gang-rape, terrorism and trafficking in narcotics, etc. but the same may also embolden the older people in our society to prompt their young ones to commit such crimes with an understanding and assurance, that they would get away with lesser sentences apart from availing of concessions in the matters of bail and release on probation. It has, thus, not surprised us Jo learn, that incidents involving such; crimes have significantly increased after production of the impugned Ordinance and a substantial number of cases BMG tried at present by the Juvenile Courts evolve such famous offenses. According to its annual report published by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan on the ‘State of Human Rights in 2003’ over 12,000 children of less than 18 years of age were arrested in the Province of the Punjab from July 01, 2002, to March 01, 2003. The Amnesty. International had reported that in June, 2003 around 4,500 juveniles were in detention across Pakistan and in July, 2003 over 300 cases were pending in the Province of the Punjab alone wherein the ages of convicts on death row were being contested and after exhausting all the judicial remedies against their conviction and sentence the convicts were trying to establish that they were less than eighteen years of age on the day of occurrence and, thus, they could not be sentenced to death. The extent of involvement of young persons in cases evolving a sentence of death can well be gauged from the said report. The statistics published in the Daily Gang, Lahore on 15.11.2003 reveal the following picture as far as the Province of the Punjab is concerned: Juvenile prisoners in the Punjab jails: Penal provision (section) 302, PPC 324, PPC, PPC /, PPC, PPC, PEHO. OZEHO 12, OZEHO. total General statistics: WW. Offense murder attempted murder robbery/ dacoity trespass/theft/ handling stolen property kidnapping/ abduction narcotics zinc/ abduction sodomy/ abduction other crimes Under- trial (boys) 432 197 159 161 Under trial (girls) - - 112-158.- 135 8 122 - - 49–1425 13 Convicted (boys) 147 25 10 73 20 33 1317 Convicted (girls) 2---21--5 1992 Total juvenile prisoners 1974 total boys total girls 18 total boys and girls sentenced to death 13. convicted boys. 3575. convicted girls 1604' under-trial boys undergrad girls 13 30 number of jails for juveniles 2 These figures clearly manifest that the apprehensions expressed by the learned counsel for; the petitioner in this regard are not. merely hypothetical or conjectural bit the same find support from hard facts and conscious and deliberate misuse of the impugned Ordinance is more of stark reality than merely a possibility. 22. The Preamble to the impugned Ordinance has also received our careful-, consideration. According, to the Preamble the impugned Ordinance is “An Ordinance to provide for protection of the nights of children involved in criminal. litigation”. This Preamble is remarkably different from, the Preamble to the Indian Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 which reads as follows: “An Act to provide for the care, protection, treatment development and 27145 rehabilitation of neglected or delinquent juveniles and for the adjudication of certain matters relating to, and disposition, of delinquent juveniles”. According to section. 2(e) of the Indian Act a ‘delinquent juvenile’ TS “a juvenile who has been found to have committed an offense” and according to section 2(1) a ‘neglected juvenile’ is a juvenile who is found bagging or who is homeless and without any, ostensible means of subsistence and is a destitute or whose parent or guardian is unfit or incapacitated or who lives in or frequently visits a brothel or who is being or is likely to be abused or exploited for immoral or illegal purposes or unconscionable GAM! Thus, the emphasis in India appears to be on a juvenile already found guilty of committing a crime or a helpless and neglected juvenile whereas, in Pakistan the focus is only on protection of the “nights of children” “involved in criminal; litigation’. These so-called ‘rights’ of children have been debated before us by the learned counsel for the parties as well as the learned amici curiae at some length. The learned Deputy Attorney-General and one of the learned amici curiae namely Mrs. Jahangir have tried to defend the impugned Ordinance on the premise that the same; is meant to protect the ‘rights’ of children, but they have, however, failed to refer to any such right’ recognized by our Constitution. All that they could allude to in this respect are Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution which provide as follows: “25. Equality of citizens.--(1) ALF citizens are equal before 'the law and are entitled to equal protection of law. (2) There shall be no discrimination on the basis of sex alone. (3) Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from-making any Special provision for the protection of women and children.” “26. Nondiscrimination in respect of access to public places. (1) In respect of access to places, of public entertainment or resort, not intended, for, religious purposes only, there shall be no discrimination against any citizen on the ground only of race, religion, caste, sex; residence or place of birth. (2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.” They could not dispute the fact that “special provisions” for the protection of women and children contemplated by these provisions of the Constitution are meant to be additional advantages for women and children in certain respects and such “special provisions” cannot be allowed to have the effect of denying others their own rights under the said or other provisions of the Constitution. The case of Shim Muir and others v. Government of Punjab through Secretary Health and another (PLD 1990 SC 295) has already settled this issue. As regards the generality of citizens the right to life guaranteed by Article 9 of the Constitution is to be read in conjunction with Article 4(1) of the Constitution which provides that “To enjoy the protection of law’ is an inalienable right of every citizen and with Article 25(1) which mandates that all citizens “are entitled to equal protection of law’. It has already been observed by us above that different provisions of the impugned Ordinance contain incentives for and have the tendency of encouraging young persons to commit serious crimes and for older people in our society to prompt their young ones to commit such crimes with an understanding and assurance that they would get away with lesser sentences apart from availing of concessions in the matters of bail and release on probation. Such a plausible and serious potential for misuse of the impugned Ordinance surely poses a grave threat to and creates a grim peril for the lives of citizens at large, and we cannot close our eyes, disregard, overlook or ignore the same. In this view of the matter we have felt confident that the constitutionally guaranteed right to If enjoyed by generality of citizens has become vulnerable and the constitutional assurance regarding the enjoying the protection of law has either been taken away or seriously abridged by the impugned Ordinance. We are sanguine that through providing protection for the benefit of one relatively small section of the society the impugned legislation has rendered the other and larger sections of the society unprotected. Possibility of an equal or proportionate reprisal or punishment has always been accepted as the surest deterrence against aggression. The Maker of human body, mind and soul surely knows how the same can function or adjust best in their interaction with others. It has been ordained by Almighty Allah in respect of Visas (retaliation) that:- “O believers! Retaliation is proscribed for you in the cases of murder; a free man for a free man, a Slave for a slave, and a female for a female. But if anyone is pardoned by his aggrieved-brother, then blood wit should be decided according to the common law and payment should be made with gratitude. This is a concession and a mercy from your Lord, Now, whoever exceeds the limits after this, shall have a painful punishment. O men of understanding! There is security of ITF for you in the. law of retaliation, so that you may learn self-restraint.” (Aqua’an: Sura-2, Verses 178 179) An attempt by a creation to become wiser than its Creator would hardly commend itself for appreciation or approval. The recent movement in some parts of the Western world in favor of abolishing the penalty of death may just be a passing or a temporary phase in the sociological development of human race, and we are not surprised that in many of such parts of the world the penalty of death is staging a comeback and is being reproduced, not for the love of such a punishment but purely for its utility and efficacy as the most suitable deterrence. 23. An exercise in legislation which, while affording protection to the life of one, exposes another’s life to danger or which, while extending a benefit to one, exposes another to a serious disadvantage may militate against Articles 4, 9 and 25 of the Constitution and the same cannot be termed or accepted as reasonable. An analogy in this regard may be found in the law relating to civil servants which provides for relaxation of rules by the competent authority for the benefit of a civil servant whose case may be one of hardship, inequity or injustice. It had been held by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Muhammad Iqbal Shikhar and 3 others v. The Government of the Punjab through the Secretary to Government of the Punjab, Lahore and 2 others [PLD 1991 SC 35] that: ‘The dispensation under section 22 of the Punjab Civil Servants Act is individual and is limited and controlled by a proviso which establishes the supremacy of the Act and the Rules. The relaxation can be-beneficial to the civil servant without being prejudicial to anyone else even to the civil servant who is granted relaxation or exemption. ” (per Shaffer Rahman, J.) (Emphasis has been supplied) It was further held that, “This section is primarily a saving section, basically intended to correct serious cases, where unusual factors place a civil servant in serious disability, which requires correction on the basis of equity and justice by the Governor himself, sitting at the apex of the executive hierarchy. Amendments, additions and’ substitutions effected in the rules from time to time, mergers in and transfers from one service to another, etc. create a host of problems, where civil servants placed under serious disability and hardship call for a fair and equitable resolution of their difficulties. To meet these genuine cases, the Governor has been granted this special savings power to deal with such cases, so as to remove injustice and inequity which may stand in the way of a civil servant in securing his just rights. In short, it is a power rarely used, unless to serve justice or correct grave injustice, and perhaps never used arbitrarily to reward a person or to grant him an undue privilege over the right of another. -------These provisions permit the Chief Minister and the Punjab Government, in individual cases of hardship to relax the rules. It is one thing to remove the strict application of a rule to remove hardship MN an individual case. It is another to defeat the rule to bolster a dividual’s case, so as to destroy another’s right. Still further, the order of the Governor relaxing the Condition of 5 years service in the Department as Assistant Engineer for promotion of the said respondent No. to the post of Executive Engineer out of turn, contravenes the rights of others because the respondent has been given forced seniority. The order of the learned Governor in the instant case not only violates the law declared by this Court, which strikes down retrospective regularization, but directly contravenes Rule 8 of the 1967 and 1974 Rules and adversely affects the seniority and right of promotion of the 1974 batch of direct inductees and I would, therefore, with profound respect to the learned Governor, declare that the same deserves to be set aside.” (per RUSTA S. Schwa, J.) (Emphasis has been supplied) We may observe here in the context of Article 25 of the Constitution that if children have a right to be protected from the harm of adults then a corresponding right must also be implied that adults or other children must also enjoy a right to be protected from the harm deliberately inflicted upon them by children consciously or otherwise of their privileges in the law as children. 24. The discussion made above leads us to observe that the impugned Ordinance has many incompatibilities with some other laws of the land and, therefore, the same does not fit well in our system of criminal justice. The law and the judicial pronouncements referred to above clearly highlight the fact that special treatment of a child is necessarily referable to his innocence and lack of understanding of the nature or consequences of his acts and the moment he is shown to have lost his childhood innocence he ceases to qualify for any special treatment and also that no particular or exact cut-off age limit can be prescribed in this regard except in cases of extreme tenderness of age where there cannot be any doubt about absence of proper understanding of the nature or consequences of acts. This jurisprudential concept finds a very clear, and categorical expression in the provisions of sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code MN the following words: “82. Act of child under seven years of age. Nothing is an offense which TS done by a child under seven years of age.” 83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of, immature understanding. Nothing is an offense which is done, by a child above seven years, of age and under, twelve, who has not at tamed sufficient maturity of understanding judging of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.” According to section, 14 of the impugned Ordinance “The provisions of this Ordinance shall be’ in addition to and not MN derogation of, any other law for the time hieing in force”’. This shows that the impugned Ordinance has not done away with or replaced the above-mentioned jurisprudential concept contained in the Pakistan Penal Code in this regard and the above reproduced provisions of the Code are still, the law of the land pertaining to young offenders. The provisions of sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code show that'a child below’ the age of seven years is incapable of committing an offense because he is a doli capax incapable of form mg or possessing the necessary mens rea for an offense whereas a child between the ages of seven and twelve years can be. capable of forming or possessing the necessary mens rea for an offense unless it is established that he “has not attained sufficient 'maturity of understanding judging of the nature and consequences of his conduct.” It is interesting to notice that as regards a young delinquent above the age of twelve years the. Pakistan Penal Code as, well as the impugned Ordinance both treat him at par with an adult as far as his criminality or lability to conviction are concerned but the two, differ mainly in respect of the mode and forum of his trial and with regard to his sentencing’ Under the Offer ice of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, the Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 and the Prohibition (Enforcement of Had) Order, 1979 an offender who has already at tamed puberty is to be treated as an. ordinary criminal even if he is otherwise below eighteen years Of age and some of the offenses under the said enactments carry a sentence of death. Even the Anti- Terrorism Act, 1997 and the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 recognize no WW. significant distinction between a child and an adult once the offender’s criminality is established on the record. It is starting to post out that an offense of gang-rape-;under section 10(4) of the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 carries only a sentence of death and no other sentence, as already held by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in the cases of Shaheed alias Shadow and others v. The- State [2002 SCMR 1009] and Bashir Ahmed and two others v. The State [PLD 2002 SC 775], and the position regarding an offense of blasphemy under section 295-C of the Pakistan Penal Code is also the same. If the Ordinance impugned through the present petition is to have its way then a ‘child’ committing a famous offense of gang-rape or perpetrating an outrageous offense of blasphemy cannot be sentenced to death. In such a situation such a child can be convicted for the offense but cannot be sentenced at all! Nothing could be more’ absurd and unreasonable than such a situation. There has to be something seriously wrong with a law that allows such grave and serious offenses to go unpunished. In this backdrop we are quite clear in our minds that on the jurisprudential plane what is relevant is the capacity of an accused person to understand the nature and consequences of his conduct and if an accused person is found to be of sufficient maturity of understanding then no special treatment is warranted qua him by the law in the matter of sentence which should be left to the relevant court to be decided in the light of the peculiar circumstances of a given case. Tender age of the offender can surely be one such peculiar circumstance. By making a departure in this regard through providing a cut-off age limit for special treatment the impugned Ordinance has not only become incompatible with the rest of the body of our laws, but the same has also made a departure from the established jurisprudential concepts. 25. It may not be lost sight of in this context that in societies which are still struggling to get out of medieval criminal trends or tendencies a young person’s criminality 1s, barring cases of exceptional and extraordinary circumstances, generally not visited with any special treatment or lenience only on account of his tender age. It may be argued in this context that a criminal who starts his criminal activity at a relatively young age cannot be turned loose on the society for a possible repetition of his offense or unlawful activity. To MIP the evil in the bud is not just a cliché or an adage. It is based upon human experiences and accumulated wisdom, and it was expressly referred to by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan with approval in a case to be referred to shortly. The matter of sentencing of a young offender, nay an adjudged young murderer, in the Indo-Pak subcontinent had come under discussion in the case of Sheikh Hassan v. Bashir Ahmad and another [PLD 1966 (W.P.) Peshawar 97] and a Hon’BLE Full Bench of the erstwhile West Pakistan High Court especially constituted to consider a question MN that regard had observed mm that respect as follows: “8. We had the advantage of full argument on the subject and on a careful review of the case-law on the point, we are clearly of the view that it is almost well settled that mere youth by itself would not entitle the accused on the charge of a deliberate murder to the lesser/penalty, and that, at any rate, a person aged 16 years who commit a deliberate act of murder must be assumed to act with full responsibility unless it is shown that he is mentally, retarded, or that he had acted under the influence of somebody. It will be convenient here to read section 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code, which is as under:,------. 9. It will be plain from reading the language of the section. Reproduced above that where the accused is above seven years of age and under twelve, “sufficient maturity of understanding” to be presumed in case of such a child unless negative be proved: on defense, 1e. the burden of proof lies on the accused above the age of seven and below twelve to show that he had not attained sufficient maturity. A person at the age of sixteen is sufficiently matured to understand the full implication of his acts, and therefore if he commits a'deliberate murder, he cannot on account of mere age legitimately claim the benefit of the lesser penalty.” After making those observations the Hon’BLE Full Bench adverted to the entire case-law available on the subject till then and concluded as under: “To sum up all the authorities referred to above are agreed that mere youth by itself would not earn the accused the lesser penalty in absence of any other extenuating circumstances.-- ----the overwhelming authority including the authority of the Supreme Court referred to above that youth by, itself is not ground for awarding a light sentence.” :. Later on in the case of Shana and two others v. The State [1999 SCMR 1507], the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan had commented upon this ; aspect of the matter in the following words : “TT is a cardinal principle-of criminal law that every case is to be adjudged on the totality of its own facts and the attending. circumstances: If a boy of sixteen years, forces a girl to marry him and on refusal kills her or compels a boy of lesser in age than him to make friendship with him for illicit purposes arid on, his denial, murders him, then on what legal or moral basis such ' murderer can clam the benefit of lesser penalty and on what moral value the fac tum of “tender age” can be pleaded as a mitigating circumstance. In such a case it would be most appropriate to award normal penalty of death so as to nip the evil in the bud. On the other hand, if an immature lad, who is entirely dependent on his father and reams under his influence commits murder m the company of his father or independently of him but at his behest and instigation in order to take revenge of his close relation or to avenge family honor, then ends of justice would not be defeated if he is given lesser penalty of life imprisonment.” The American approach m this respect also appears to be somewhat similar as in that country mere young age of the offender is not the sole criterion for treating him as a juvenile or for extending a concession to him in the matter of sentence. We may refer in this context to the relatively recent cases of Kevin N. Stanford v. Kentucky and Heath A. Wilkins v. Missouri [106 L. Ed. 2d. 306] decided by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of the United States of America wherein the question in issue was whether the position of capital punishment on juvenile offenders constituted cruel and unusual punishment prohibited by the Federal Constitution’s Eighth Amendment or not. In one of those cases a boy aged about seventeen years had robbed a gas station, raped and sodomized a station attendant and finally shot the attendant to death so that she could not identify him. The Jefferson District Court, Kentucky determined that the boy should be tried as an adult in the Jefferson Circuit Court, Kentucky, as allowed by the state law, in the light of seriousness of the offenses. The boy was ultimately-convicted of murder, first-degree sodomy, first-degree robbery and receiving stolen property and was sentenced to death plus forty-five years’ imprisonment. The Supreme Court of Kentucky affirmed the convictions and sentences of that boy. In the second case a boy aged about sixteen years conceived a plan to rob a convenience store and to murder whoever would be behind the counter so as to leave no witness and, in executing that plan, stabbed the store’s owner/operator and left her to die. A Missouri Juvenile Court certified the boy for TNA as an adult on account of the viciousness of the crime, the boy’s maturity and the failure of the juvenile justice system to rehabilitate him after previous delinquent acts. The trial Court convicted the boy and found that the death penalty was appropriate, given the fact that it was committed in the course of robbery. The Supreme Court of Missouri affirmed the boy’s convictions and sentences. In both those cases the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of the United States of America affirmed the young convicts’ sentences of death as valid and held that: (1) The imposition of the death penalty for crimes committed at age 16 or 17 was not one of the modes or acts of punishment that was considered cruel and unusual at the time that the Constitution’s Bill of Rights was adopted; (2) there was no modern national consensus forbidding the imposition of the death penalty for crimes committed at those ages, given that (a) a majority of the states that permitted capital punishment authorized it for crimes committed at age 16 or above, (b) the number of states which did not permit capital punishment at all was irrelevant to the specific question of the propriety of the death penalty for juveniles, (c) foreign countries’ sentencing practices not reflecting’ American conceptions of decency were irrelevant to such question, (d) the: provision of the Anti- Drug Abuse Act of 1988 limiting the death. penalty for CERTAM drug-related offenses to offenders aged 18 and over did not embody a judgment by Congress that no murder was famous enough to warrant the execution of younger. offenders, (e) even if there were no federal statute permitted the execution of persons under age 18, that Would not establish a national consensus forbidding such executions in the face of a substantial number of state statutes, to the contrary, and (f) statistics indicating that the death penalty is very rarely sought or imposed for offenses committed by persons under age 18 did not establish that prosecutors or juries found the imposition of the death penalty, categorically unacceptable in such cases, but. might mean only that they thought it should rarely be imposed; (3) there was no relevance in statutes which set 18 or more as the legal age for engaging in such activities as driving, drinking and voting;, (4) other evidence of a national consensus, such as public opinion polls and the views of interest groups and professional associations, was not sufficient for constitutional purposes and should properly be addressed to the citizenry; - WW. (5) the Supreme Court could riot apply its own “informed judgment” as to the desirability of permitting the death penalty for crimes by 16 and 17-year-olds; and. (6) the Supreme Court had never invalidated a punishment solely on the basis of a disproportion between that punishment and the convict’s blameworthiness. Inspired by the above-mentioned observations made by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan as well as by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of the United States of America we may remark here that it may be advisable to keep the deterrence of the capital. sentence intact even in case of young offenders while leaving the matter of sentencing in the hands of the courts so as to pass an appropriate order in that regard while keeping in view the circumstance sofa given case, including the factor regarding the offender’s age. It may not be out of place to mention here that although special concessions have been extended by the impugned Ordinance to a child in the matter of bail but even in respect of bail it has been provided by the proviso to subsection (7) of section 10 of the impugned Ordinance that bail may be refused to an offender by the Court “if there are reasonable grounds to believe that such child is.evolved in an offense which in its opinion is serious, heinous, gruesome, brutal, sensational in character or shocking to public morality, or he is a previous convict of an offense punishable with death or imprisonment for life”. It, therefore, defies reason that in a case of such nature the impugned Ordinance envisages refusal of bail during trial but at the same time it provides for withholding of the normal sentence and release on probation after conviction. It, thus, appears that the impugned Ordinance has been unthoughtful in this regard as well and all these critical aspects of the matter, including the accumulated wisdom gathered through consistent judicial pronouncements, had not been adverted to or considered before its promulgation. 26. We consider it necessary to reiterate here that the law in our country existing prior to introduction of the impugned Ordinance already substantially and satisfactorily took care of the objectives and purposes of the impugned Ordinance and, thus, there was hardly any pressing requirement or need for promulgating the impugned Ordinance at this stage and thereby to add unnecessary confusion and oddities in that regard. A survey of the pre-existing laws shows that the existing laws already provided for sympathetic and concessionary treatment of minor accused persons and offenders in the matters of capacity to commit a crime, bail and custody as is evident from the provisions of sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code and sections 29-B, 497 and 399 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The concept of Borstal Institutions and Reformatory Schools for young prisoners already stood recognized and1 put into practice by various legislative enactments. Even in the matter of sentencing the courts have generally been very particular in attending to the factor regarding age of the offender. In that backdrop production of the impugned Ordinance, and that too in the absence of any public debate or parliamentary discussion, has been found by us to be imprudent, to say the least, if not an exercise in superfluity at this stage. 27. On the authority of Lord'Reid in the case of Haughton v. Smith 1975 A.C. 476, 500 it is said that the law may sometimes be an ass, but it cannot be so SMME as that. The Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan had also observed in the case of Rashad ENSAN and others v. Bashir Ahmad and another [PLD 1989 SC 146] that “The law is sometimes called an ass but the Judge should, as far as it is possible, try not to become one”. Similarly in the case of MST. Aziz Begum v. Federation of Pakistan and others PLD 1990 SC 899 the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan had reiterated “the principle” that the “law may be blind, but the Judge is not”. The, infirmities, impracticalities. absurdities, obscurities and unreasonableness of the impugned Ordinance found by us above have convinced us that the said law 'does riot fit MTO and piece well with our Constitutional and legal system of dispensation of criminal justice and, thus, the same needs to be struck down in the larger interest of our society. In THS view of the matter notwithstanding any moral or legal obligation created by any international Declaration or Convention we cannot blindly or, blindfolded allow the impugned Ordinance to destroy the moral and legal fiber of our criminal justice system at this stage. According to the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1959) and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989) a child, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needs special safeguards and care, including appropriate legal protection. However, the said international instruments did not provide anything for a ‘child’ who-has already attained physical and mental maturity and who is capable of intentional commission of serious and famous crimes. Even otherwise it has not been shown before is as to how the provisions of any such international declaration or convention have a binding effect vis-à-vis the municipal law of our country. It is a settled principle of public international law that considered in themselves, and particularly in their inception, all declarations, conventions or even treaties WW. are, formally, only a source of obligation rather than a source of law. A statute is always, from its inception, law whereas a declaration, convention or treaty may reflect or lead to law but, particularly MN its inception, is not, as such, law. A source of international obligation cannot be allowed by us to, through its premature local application, become a source of our domestic social doom. 28. It ought not to be ignored Or overlooked in this context that the. West has reached its present state and stage of criminal law and criminology after centuries of social and behavioral developments peculiar to its own culture and history and the impact and real results of its reforms in this regard are yet to be properly assessed and examined. We, thus, cannot blindly modulate, our own policies and approaches and emulate the Western standards MN this regard without appropriate social advancement and _ behavioral development in terms of our own social patterns and outlooks. In his book titled “The Young Offender’ (published by Penguin Books, Ltd. England in 1967) D. J. West had found that according to the published statistics the young offenders in England were mostly involved in crimes like petty theft, larceny, breaking and enter mg property, robbery, simple violence, sexual delinquency and to some extent fraud. In his words most of such reported crimes “were rather trivial’. He had found that: “violence constituted no more than ten percent of the total of offenses. Among these offenses of violence, no more than six percent led to serious jury or death. The circumstances of the offenses divided into three groups of roughly equal number: youngsters brawling amongst themselves, fights with the police in the course of arrests, and attacks made on others in the course of thefts. In addition, there were a few cases of family squabbles. In the bulk of offenses the violence consisted of punching or pushing aside, and the injury was trivial or technical’. He had gone on to observe that: “At the same time one must never lose sight of the fact that, though the majority of young offenders may not commit very’ serious crimes, a small minority are as dangerous as anyone can ever be, and are responsible for some of the most atrocious, and brutal crimes on the record. Robbery with violence is most frequent amongst young men in their late teens or very early twenties. In the case of murder, it is often pointed out that the majority of offenders are over thirty years of age and that most of them are ordinarily law-abiding citizens who have attacked one of their own family under the influence of insanity or serious mental stress.” He had added that: ‘Most of the offenses of juveniles lack the gravity and substance, or the scheming and planning, which the public associates with crime. Even when one examines the crimes of boys from approved schools, many of whom are confirmed recidivists, it appears that their range is mostly limited to Moor thefts and traffic offenses, and that serious violence, sexual assaults and professionally organized crimes are most. uncommon. A somewhat older age group, the late teens and early twenties, includes some of the most dangerously violent. offenders in existence, but fortunately they are very rare, and have little in common with the general run of young thieves or sporadic hooligans. The over-all impression left behind from a cursory examination of the statistical trends is that though the numbers are enormous they mostly stand for minor offenses.” If England is to be taken as a representative sample of the Western society or standards then the above analysis by D. J. West highlights the fact that the criminal trends in the West sharply differ from those in our society. It has already been observed by us above that in our society it is not uncommon for young persons to be involved in serious and heinous crimes like murder, gang-rape, terrorism and trafficking in narcotics, etc. and the impugned Ordinance, through the concessions visualized by it in. the matters of bail, trial, sentence and probation, contains a serious potential for aggravating the situation in this regard besides providing incentives and impetus to older members of the society to prompt their young ones to commit such crimes. Today the youth in the West is, by and large, not involved in the serious crimes BMG committed by our youth and this trend in the West has evolved over a period of centuries. There were times when young persons in the West were prone to committing serious offenses, and they were also dealt with and sentenced appropriately and accordingly’. D. J. West had observed that: “On the scale of history, methods of disposal of convicted offenders of any age other than by death, flogging or imprisonment under highly deprived conditions are quite recent developments. The hanging of small children used to be “by no means unusual’ in England. In 1816, Samuel Reilly, in pleading unsuccessfully before the House of Commons for the abolition of hanging as. a penalty for shoplifting, mentioned the case of a ten-year-old boy at that very moment in Newgate Prison under sentence of death. In fact, since crime has always been, a youthful activity, most of those hanged in the days when thieves were able to execution were youngsters. The English Solicitor general, MN 1785, noted that nine out of ten offenders - hanged at that time were under twenty-one. In the first part of the nineteenth century, in England as in most other countries children and young persons, both those convicted. And those awaiting trial, were sent, to the same appalling prisons as adults, where no doubt they were quickly depraved and brutalized by the experience. In 1817, the Second Report of the House, of Commons Committee on the State. of the Police in the Metropolis, reported that in the previous year the new prison at Clerkenwell had received 399. felons aged from nine to nineteen, and that young and old were mixed indiscriminately, regardless. of the nature or gravity of their offenses. The report went on to, describe how petty street pilferers, many of whom might be boys just starting a career of, crime, were ‘usually committed for a short time to prison, sometimes seriously flogged, and then, without a shilling in their pockets, turned loose upon the world more hardened in character than ever’. Sir Edmund Du Cane, writing of the same period, 1816, noted that of the 3000 prisoners in London aged under twenty a half were juveniles under seventeen.” In his book titled ‘The Law Relating To Children’ (published by Butterworth's, London in 1973) H. K. Bevan had, in relation to "orders that may be passed against juvenile offenders by criminal courts, observed as follows: “Whatever view earlier law or practice may have adopted concerning the punishment of juveniles and there are indications of some mitigation in their favor- certainly by the 17th century the principle of equality was firmly established, with no distinction BMG drawn between juvenile and adult offenders in the forms of punishment that could be inflicted. Depending upon the-penalties attaching to the particular offense committed, juveniles, like adults’, could be hanged, transported, imprisoned, subjected to various forms of corporal punishment or fined. In the 18th century cases of juveniles being sentenced to death were quite common, and sometimes the sentence was carried out. Nevertheless, there was a distinct reluctance to execute children, save for a period at the beginning of the 19th century when there was apparently some readiness to do so in order to check the practice of parents ordering their children to steal on the assumption that the latter would escape the penalty because of their age. This stricter attitude seems to have, been short-lived; yet, it was only with the passing of the Children Act 1908 that sentence of death was abolished in respect of persons under the age of 16. The steep rise in the number of juvenile offenders from 1800 onwards is, however, only partly explained by parental pressures. The main cause lay in the new social conditions created by the Industrial Revolution. Overpopulated urban areas soon became fertile breeding grounds for juvenile offenders, many of whom, especially NM London, frequented the notorious “flash houses”, which served as social centers for debauchery and the organization of criminal activities. That juvenile delinquency was one of the main social problems is evidenced by the formation in quick succession of two reforming bodies both of which devoted much of the work to inquiries into the reasons for its widespread existence. These were the Society to Inquire to Causes of Juvenile Delinquency, founded in 1815, and the Society for the Improvement of Prison Discipline and for the Reformation of Juvenile Offenders, founded in 1818. But the solution to the problem would not be found merely in inquiries of this kid. Reformers recognized also the need for mitigation of the severity of the criminal law and the introduction of separate methods for dealing with juvenile offenders. The immediate response of the legislature was modest. As we have seen, its relevant contribution to the substantive law was essentially to extend summary Jurisdiction over young offenders, but gradually much more began to be done with regard to the treatment of young offenders. It will be seen that some of the orders which a court may make today owe their origin to 19th. century legislation. (Emphasis has been supplied) It was in that backdrop that, according to D. J. West and H, K. Bevan, the process of reform started and progressed in England piece by piece and through such a progression of gradual and steady historical and.socko-legal developments the said process has reached its present stage. It may be said that children in the West have by now been, by and large, tamed and disciplined by centuries of social and legal guidance and instruction, and it would be naive to WW. believe that we can cover this distance of centuries through one quantum leap or to expect that our peculiar socko-legal culture-would undergo a’ drastic metamorphosis through one stroke of pen or through introduction of one Ordinance. Was it not Sir Francis Bacon who had observed mm his essay titled ‘Of Innovations’ that: “As the births of living creatures at first are L-shaped, so are all novations, which are the births of time. Yet, notwithstanding, as those that first bring honor into their family are commonly more worthy than the most that succeed, so the first precedent (if it is good) is seldom attained by imitation For 111, to man’s nature as it stands perverted, hath a natural Motion, strongest in continuance; but Good, as a forced motion, strongest at first. Surely every medicine is. a novation and he that will apply new remedies must expect new evils. For time; is the greatest innovator; and wisdom and counsel shall not alter them to the better, what shall be the end? It is true that what is settled by custom, though it is not good, yet at least it is fit; and ' those, things which have long gone together, are, as it were, confederate within themselves; whereas new things piece not so, well; but, though they help by their utility, yet they trouble by their inconformity. Besides, they are like strangers, more ' admired, and less favored: All this is true, if time stood still; which contrariwise move so round that a forward retention of custom is as turbulent a thing as an innovation; and they that reverence too many old times, are but a scorn to the new. It were good, therefore, that men in their innovations, would follow the example of time itself which indeed Monteith, greatly, but quietly, and by degrees scarce to be perceived; for otherwise, whatsoever is new is Unlooked for; and ever it mends some, and pairs other; and he that is Holden takes it as a fortune, and thanks the time and he that is hurt, for a wrong, and imputed it to the author. It is good also not to try experiments in States, except the necessity be urgent, or the utility evident; and well to beware, that it be the reformation that drawer on the change; and not the desire of the change that pretended the reformation: and lastly, that the novelty, though it is not rejected, yet be held for a suspect; and, as the Scripture saith, that “we make a stand upon the ancient way, and then look about us, and discover what is the straight and right way, and so to walk in TT’. 29. For what has been discussed above we have entertained no manner of doubt that most of the provisions of the impugned Ordinance, in the words of Bacon, “piece not so well’ with the Constitutional and legal dispensation of criminal justice in' our country and they also “trouble by their conformity” because, perhaps, it was not strictly the reformation that drew on the change but just the desire for change that had pretended the reformation. Our societal attitudes do not appear to be MPE enough at this stage for the desired change. A quantum leap may be possible mm the fields of science or technology, but the same is surely not achievable in social or legal trends or attitudes which take some time to: evolve. It appears that the impugned Ordinance has tried to achieve through a revolution an objective which was fit for evolution and measured growth. An imported romance for a young offender should not have been allowed to stretch the legal dispensation in our country to the limits of absurdity. How can we forget in this context that the concept of avoidance of phased-fil-arz is a cornerstone of Islamic system of dispensation of criminal justice. We are sanguine that if the impugned Ordinance had been preceded by a parliamentary or at least a public debate then the same would not have suffered from the maladies and infirmities noticed by us therein. 30. On the basis of the reasons recorded above this wait petition is allowed and the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 (Federal Ordinance No. XXJI of 2000) is hereby struck off the statute book on account of its BMG unreasonable, unconstitutional and impracticable. It, however, goes without saying that the Parliament may, if it so desires, 1 enact a fresh law mm this regard after attending to all the infirmities of the impugned Ordinance highlighted by us above. As a necessary consequence of the declaration made and the order passed by us above the Juvenile Courts established under the said Ordinance shall stand abolished forthwith and all the cases pending before all such Courts shall ipso facto stand transferred to the ordinary courts of competent jurisdiction. There shall be no order as to costs. 31. For the purpose of removal of possible doubt we consider that a clarification may be necessary. From the date of promulgation of the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 to the date of its annulment by us through the present judgment accused persons below the age of eighteen years involved in criminal cases: have enjoyed immunity from the sentence of death but now through annulment of the said Ordinance that immunity from the sentence of death has disappeared. By virtue of the provisions of Article T2(-1)(b) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 an accused person who has enjoyed such immunity from; the sentence of death at the time of commission of, an offense cannot subsequently, be sentenced to death. In view of this : constitutional position TT is clarified that an accused person involved in an offense committed between 'the date" of promulgation of the Juvenile justice System Ordnance, 2000 and the date of announcement of this judgment shall be well within his constitutional right to assert,and establish that he was less than eighteen years of age at the time of commission of the alleged offense and. then to claim immunity, from the. sentence of death. 32. Before parting with this judgment we would like to place on record our appreciation of the hard work put MN by the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned law officers and the valuable assistance rendered to us by the learned amici cure#&“P@k!egaldatabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA, J.-Sages down the ages have generally, perceived an accused person, before establishing of his guilt beyond reasonable doubt, as the darling of criminal court and if such an accused person happens to be a child then the romance about him usually receives a further sympathetic boost. The raison d'être for such sympathy may not, be difficult to discern as by and large a child is considered to be deserving of special treatment because of his innocence and lack of proper understanding of the nature or consequences of his conduct. However, a young person who has already lost. His childhood virtue, innocence and incorruptibility and who understands the nature or the normal consequences of his conduct, no matter what his age; may cease to qualify for such special handling as a child. It. is-the quandary posed by such a mature pubescent, or a ripe juvenile, who may be of relatively young age but has already attained sufficient. Maturity, of understanding, that is the subject of the present petition. It is madly in this, context that we have, been called: upon through this petition to examine, the virus, of the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 introduced in, our legal, system on July 1, 2000, through Federal Ordinance No. XXII of 2000. The petitioner bringing up this challenge, happens, to be the complainant of case of murder min which an accused person is claiming, to be a ‘child’, within the purview of the Juvenile. Justice System-Ordinance. 2000 and thus, entitled to concessionary, treatment in the matters of bail, trial and sentence, if any T 2. For facility of reference the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 may be reproduced here in its entirety (as published in PLD 2000 Central Statutes 385): “ORDINANCE XXII OF 2000 JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM ORDINANCE, 2000. An Ordinance to provide for protection of the rights of children involved in criminal litigation [Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, Part I, 1st July, 2000] No. F.2(1)/2000-Pub. dated 1.7.2000.-The following Ordinance made by the President is hereby published for general information:- Whereas it is expedient to provide for protection of children involved in criminal litigation, their rehabilitation in society, reorganization of Juvenile Courts and matters connected WW. therewith and incidental thereto; And whereas the National Assembly and the Senate stand suspended in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth day of October, 1999, and the Provisional Constitution Order No. of 1999; And whereas the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action; Now, therefore, in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth day of October, 1999 and the Provisional Constitution Order No. of 1999, as well as Order No. of 1999, and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance-- 1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000. (2) It extends to the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance-- 1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000. (2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan. (3) It shall come into force at once. 2. Definitions.- In this Ordinance, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, (a) ‘Borstal institution’ means a place where child offenders may be detained and given education and training for their mental, moral and psychological development; (b) ‘child’ means a person who at the time of commission of an offense has not attained the age of eighteen years; (c) ‘Code’ means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898); (d) ‘guardian’ means a parent or a person who has actual care, of the child and includes such relative who is willing to bear the. responsibility of the child; (e) ‘Juvenile Court’ means a Court established under section 4; (f) ‘offense’ means an offense punishable under any law for the time being in force; and; (g) ‘Probation Officer’ means a person apported under the Probation of Offenders Ordinance, 1960 (XLV of 1960), or such person as the Provincial Government may appoint to perform the functions of Probation Officer under this Ordinance. 3. Legal assistance.- (1) Every child, who is accused of the commission of an offense or is a victim of an offense shall have the right of legal assistance at the expense of the State. (2) A legal practitioner appointed by the State for providing legal assistance to a child accused of the commission of an offense, or victim of an offense, shall have at least five years standing at the Bar. 4. Juvenile Courts. (1) The Provincial Government shall in consultation with the Chief Justice of High Court, by notification in the official. Gazette, establish one or more Juvenile Courts for any local area with TTS jurisdiction. (2) The High Court may. (a) confer powers of Juvenile Court on. (i) Court of Session; or (i) Judicial Magistrate of the First Class; and (b) apport, from amongst practicing Advocates having" at least seven years standing at the Bar, Presiding Officer of Juvenile Courts with powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class for the purposes of this Ordinance on such terms and conditions as the High Court may determine." (3) The Juvenile Court shall have the exclusive jurisdiction to try cases in which a child 1s accused of commission of an offense. (4) Subject to subsection on commencement of this Ordinance, all cases pending before trial Court in which a child is accused of an offense shall stand transferred to the Juvenile Court having jurisdiction. (5) The Juvenile Court shall not, merely by reason of a change MN its composition, or transfer of a case under subsection be bound to recall or rehear any witness who has given evidence and may act on

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): of an offense shall stand transferred to the Juvenile Court having jurisdiction. (5) The Juvenile Court shall not, merely by reason of a change MN its composition, or transfer of a case under subsection be bound to recall or rehear any witness who has given evidence and may act on the evidence already recorded. (6) On taking cognizance of an offense, the Juvenile Court shall decide the case within four months. 5. No joint trial of a child and adult person.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contamed in section 239 of the Code, or any other law for the time being in force, no child shall be charged with or tried for an offense together with an adult. (2) IFA child TS charged with commission of an offense for which under section 239 of the Code, or any other law for the time being in force such child could be tried together with an adult, the Court taking cognizance of the offense shall direct separate trial of the child by the Juvenile Court. 6. Procedure of Juvenile Courts.- (1) Juvenile Court shall, unless provided otherwise in this Ordinance, follow the procedure provided for in the Code. (2) A Juvenile Court shall not ordinarily take up any other case on a day when the case of child accused is fixed for evidence on such day. (3) No person shall be present at any sitting of Juvenile Court except (a) members and officers of the Juvenile Court; (b) parties to the case before the Juvenile Court and such other persons who are directly concerned with the proceedings including the police officers; (c) Such other persons as the Juvenile Court directs to be present; and (d) guardian of the child. (4) At any stage during the course of the trial of a case under this Ordinance, the juvenile Court may, in the interest of such child, decency or morality, direct any person to withdraw from Court for such period as the Court may direct. (5) Where at any stage during the course of the trial of case, the juvenile Court is satisfied that the attendance of the child is not essential for the purposes of the trial, the juvenile Court may dispense with the attendance and proceed with the trial of the case m absence of the child. (6) When child who has been brought before a juvenile Court and is found to be suffering from serious illness, whether physical or mental, and requires treatment, the Court shall send such child to a hospital or a medical institution where treatment shall be given to the child at the expense of the State. 7. Determination of age. IFA question arises whether a person before TT is a child for the purposes of this Ordinance, the juvenile Court shall record a finding after such inquiry which shall include a medical report for determination of the age of the child. 8. Prohibition to publish proceedings of cases- (1) Unless the juvenile Court specifically authorizes, the Court proceedings shall

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): a child for the purposes of this Ordinance, the juvenile Court shall record a finding after such inquiry which shall include a medical report for determination of the age of the child. 8. Prohibition to publish proceedings of cases- (1) Unless the juvenile Court specifically authorizes, the Court proceedings shall not be published in any newspaper, magazine or journal in any form which may disclose the name, address, school or any identification or particulars calculated to lead directly or indirectly to the identification of such child, nor shall any picture of the child be published. 9. Probation Officer- (1) The Probation Officer shall assist the juvenile Court by making a report, on the child’s character, educational, social and moral background. (2) Subject to subsection (3) the report of the Probation Officer submitted to the juvenile Court shall be treated as confidential. (3) The juvenile Court, if it so thinks, communicate the substance of the report to the child or his guardian and, where any one of them disputes the contents or views contained therein, the Juvenile Court may give such child or, as the case, may be, guardian an opportunity of producing such evidence as may be relevant to the matter stated, in the report. 10. Arrest and bail- (1) Where a child is arrested for commission of an offense, the officer in charge of the police station in which the child is detained shall, as soon as may be, inform (a) the guardian of the child, FHE can be found, of, such arrest and inform him of the time, date and name of the juvenile Court before which the child shall be produced; and, (b) the concerned Probation Officer to enable him to obtain such information about the child and other material circumstances which may be of assistance to the juvenile Court for making inquiry. (2) Where a child accused of a non-bailable offense is arrested, he shall; without any delay and in no case later than twenty-four hours from such arrest, be produced before the juvenile Court. (3) Without prejudice, to the provisions of the Code, a child accused of a bailable offense shall, if already not released under section 496 of Code, be released by the juvenile Court on bail, with or without surety, unless it appears that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the release of the child shall bring him into association with any criminal or expose the child to any danger, in which case, the child shall be placed under the custody of a Probation Officer or a suitable person or institution dealing with the welfare of the children if parent or guardian of the child is not present, but shall not under any circumstances be kept Ina police station or jail in such cases. (4) The juvenile Court shall, in a case where a child is not granted bail under subsection direct for tracing the guardian of such child and where the guardian of the child is traced out, the juvenile Court

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): any circumstances be kept Ina police station or jail in such cases. (4) The juvenile Court shall, in a case where a child is not granted bail under subsection direct for tracing the guardian of such child and where the guardian of the child is traced out, the juvenile Court may immediately release the child on bail. (5) Where a child under the age of fifteen years is arrested or detained for an offense which is punishable with imprisonment of less than ten years, shall be treated as FHE was accused of commission of a bailable offense. (6) No child under the age of fifteen years shall be arrested under any of the laws dealing with preventive detention or under the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Code. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code and except where a juvenile Court is of the opinion that the delay in the trial of the accused has been occasioned by an act or omission of the accused or any other person acting on his behalf or in exercise of any right or privilege under any law for the time being in force, a child who, for commission of an offense, has been detained, shall be released on bail, (a) if} BMG accused of an offense punishable with death has been detained for such an offense for a continuous period exceeding one year and whose trial for such an offense has not concluded; (b) if BMG accused of any offense punishable for imprisonment for life has been detained for such an offense for a continuous period exceeding six months and whose TNA for such offense has not concluded; or (c) who, being accused of any offense not punishable with death, or imprisonment for life, has been defamed for such an offense for a continuous period exceeding four months and whose trial for such an offense has not concluded: Provided that where a child of the age of fifteen years or above is arrested the Court may refuse to grant bail if there are reasonable grounds to believe that such child is involved in an offense which in TTS opinion TS serious, famous, gruesome, brutal, sensational in character or shocking to public morality, or he is a previous convict of an offense punishable with death or imprisonment for life. 11. Release on probation Where on conclusion of an inquiry or trial, the juvenile Court finds that a child has, committed, an offense, then notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained m any law for the time being m force, the juvenile Court may, if it thinks fit. (a) Direct the child offender to be released on probation for good conduct and place such child under the care of guardian or any suitable person executing a bond with or without surety as the Court may require, for the good behavior and well-being of the child for any period not exceeding the period of imprisonment awarded to such child Provided that the child released on probation be

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): the care of guardian or any suitable person executing a bond with or without surety as the Court may require, for the good behavior and well-being of the child for any period not exceeding the period of imprisonment awarded to such child Provided that the child released on probation be produced before the juvenile Court periodically on such dates and time as it may direct. (b) make an order directing the child offender to be sent to a Borstal institution until he attars the age of eighteen years or for the period of imprisonment whichever is earlier. (c) reduce the period of imprisonment or probation in the case where the Court is satisfied that further imprisonment or probation shall be unnecessary. 12. Orders that shall not be passed with respect to a child. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being, in force no child shall be. (a) awarded punishment of death, or ordered to; labor during the time spent in any Borstal or such other institution; and. (b) handcuffed, put in fetters or given any corporal punishment at any time while in custody: Provided that where there is reasonable apprehension of the escape of the child from custody, he may be handcuffed. 13. Appeal, etc. (1) A child convicted on a trial by a juvenile Court, or any other person on his behalf, within thirty days from the date, of such order; prefer an appeal in accordance with the provisions of the Code (2) The Provincial Government or any person aggrieved by an order of acquittal passed by a juvenile Court, may, within thirty days, prefer an appeal against such order MN accordance with the provisions of section 417 of the Code. 14. Ordinance hot to derogate from other laws.- The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force. 15. Power to make rules. The Provincial. Government may, by notification the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance.” 3. Due to the importance of the matter and the far-reaching consequences of any conclusion that we may arrive at while deciding this petition we had issued notice to the learned Attorney-General for Pakistan and the learned Advocate-General, Punjab and had also requested Mr. Acid Hassan Into, Mrs. Asia Jahangir and Mr, Manor Ahmad Malik, Advocates to assist us as amici curiae. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, the learned Deputy Attorney-General appear mg for the Federation of Pakistan, the learned Assistant Advocate- General representing the Province of the Punjab and two of the learned amici curiae at some length and have gone through the material referred to by each of them. 4. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the matter of treatment of a child accused of committing a crime has already been adequately and satisfactorily taken care of by sections 82, 83 and 299 (a)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): through the material referred to by each of them. 4. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the matter of treatment of a child accused of committing a crime has already been adequately and satisfactorily taken care of by sections 82, 83 and 299 (a) (1) of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 as well as by section 399 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and that production of the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 (hereafter referred to as the impugned Ordinance) has created unnecessary confusion in this field. He has maintained that most of the provisions of the impugned Ordinance are unreasonable, absurd and downright impracticable. He has added that the matter of sentencing of a young offender always receives a careful and generally sympathetic consideration by our courts keeping in view the special features of a particular case and, thus, there was no occasion for the impugned Ordinance to categorically forbid passing of a sentence of death against an offender below the age of eighteen years. He has gone on to maintain that the provisions of Articles 25(3) and 26(2) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (hereafter. referred to as the Constitution) do not envisage extending protection to children in a manner that leaves others unprotected at the hands of such children. According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the protection afforded to young offenders through the impugned Ordinance against the sentence of death has encouraged the adults in our society to settle their murder, feuds by prompting their young ones to kill their enemies and to get away with lesser sentences. This abuse or misuse of the provisions of the impugned Ordinance, according to him, has promoted murders and has gone a long way in denying the victims their right to life guaranteed by Article 9 of the Constitution. It has also forcefully been maintained by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned Ordinance has encouraged and promoted corruption in the society Inasmuch as fake School] Leaving Certificates are being obtained, incorrect medical opinions about age are being procured, forgeries and interpolations are BMG committed in the Registers of Births maintained at the Union Councils and false Nikahnamas of parents of accused persons are BMG prepared with a view to show the age of an offender, to be less than, eighteen years at the time of occurrence so that a possible sentence of death may, be avoided against him in cases of terrorism, murder, gang-rape or trafficking in narcotics, etc. It has, thus, been canvassed by the learned counsel for the petitioner that a law which corrupts the society" at large in the name of protection to children is not worth renaming on the statute book. It has been added by him in this context that the impugned Ordinance had been introduced without prior public debate and in the absence of any discussion in the Parliament which was non-existent at that time. It has lastly

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): protection to children is not worth renaming on the statute book. It has been added by him in this context that the impugned Ordinance had been introduced without prior public debate and in the absence of any discussion in the Parliament which was non-existent at that time. It has lastly been argued by him that the impugned Ordinance had been promulgated by an unrepresentative government under the pressure of the Western governments and donor agencies without appreciating that in view of the peculiar social, economic, climatic and dietary factors a child in our part of the world attains maturity of understanding relatively sooner than in-the West. Thus, according to him, the Western standards in this regard could not blindly or slavishly be applied in our country. He has referred to. the case of Emperor v. Paras Ram Due [AIR 1915 Allahabad 134] wherein it had been held that in our part of the world a boy aged less than fourteen years may have. Sufficient maturity of understanding, the case of Teal Singh and others. v. State of Punjab [1985 PSC 1407] wherein it had been observed that a thirteen years old witness may not necessarily be termed as a child witness and the case of Sheikh Hassan v. Bashir Ahmad and another [PLD 1966 (W.P.) Peshawar 97](FB) wherein it had been laid down that in a case of murder mere youth of ah offender may not by itself be a mitigating factor in the matter of sentence to be passed against him. With these submissions the learned counsel for the petitioner has prayed that the impugned Ordinance may be struck down by this Court on account of its unreasonableness as well as on account of its provisions being violative of the Fundamental Rights contained in Articles 9 and 25 of the Constitution. 5. At the time of admission of this petition to regular harem on 28.11.2002 we had issued a notice of this petition to the learned Attorney- General for Pakistan and on 18.12.2002 Mr. Bathroom Ali Khan, Attorney-General for Pakistan personally appeared before this Court in connection with this petition along with Mr. Muhammad Nawab Bhakti, Deputy Attorney-General for Pakistan. It, however, appears that thereafter Mr. Muhammad Nawab Bhakti, Deputy Attorney-General had been entrusted by the learned Attorney- General the task of representing not only the Federation of Pakistan but also the learned Attorney-General Mr. Muhammad Nawab Bhakti, Deputy Attorney- General has wholeheartedly supported the impugned Ordinance before us and has argued that by virtue of the provisions of Articles 25(3) and 26(2) of the Constitution laws can be enacted, and special provisions can be made for the protection of children and, therefore, despite a number of impracticalities in the impugned Ordinance the same may not be interfered with by this Court as the precedent law requires this Court to be extremely slow in strike down a law duly enacted or promulgated by the legislature. In this connection he has referred to the cases of Sh. Loquat Hussain and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): the impugned Ordinance the same may not be interfered with by this Court as the precedent law requires this Court to be extremely slow in strike down a law duly enacted or promulgated by the legislature. In this connection he has referred to the cases of Sh. Loquat Hussain and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Islamabad and others [PLD 1999 SC 504], Meir Cultivar Ali Baby and others v. Government of the Punjab and others [PLD 1997 SC 11], Messes Elah Cotton Mills Ltd. and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Islamabad and six others [PLD. 1997 SC 582], Mehran Ali and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others [PLD 1998 SC 1445] and Federation of Pakistan and another v. Malik Ghulam Mustafa Khan [PLD 1989 SC 26]. We have found the said precedent cases to be quite illuminating and instructive but, with profound respect, hardly relevant to the issues involved in the present petition. WW. 6. On 28.11.2002, at the time of admission of this petition to regular hearing, we had also issued a notice of this petition to the learned Advocate-General, Punjab but the learned Advocate-General has never appeared before this Court in connection with this petition and instead Mrs. Yasmin Segal, Assistant Advocate-General has been appearing for the Province of the Punjab. She has, while assisting this Court honestly and candidly, expressed reservations about the validity and propriety of the impugned Ordinance and has maintained that the law existing prior to introduction of the impugned Ordinance adequately catered for the interests of a young or minor accused person. In this connection she has referred to the provisions of sections 306 and 308 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 and to the case of Muhammad Axial alias Seems v. The State [1999 SCMR 2652]. In the said case it had been held that the question of maturity of a young offender is to be gone into by the court before proceeding to convict and sentence him She has gone on to maintain that the impugned Ordinance has created unnecessary confusion in our criminal justice system and also that the impugned Ordinance is replete with practical difficulties. 7. Mrs. Asia Jahangir, Advocate had appeared as an amicus curiae on a couple of dates of hearing and had partially addressed her arguments on one of such dates. Thereafter she never entered appearance in connection with this petition despite the fact that her name kept on appearing in the cause-list regularly: She had, as was expected of her as she is a renowned human rights activist, supported the impugned Ordinance and had explained the conceptual background in-which the said. Ordinance had been produced. According to her the impugned Ordinance is an outcome of a growing awareness in the world about the ‘rights’ of a child which awareness/.was. epitomized by the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1959) and then the United Nations Convention on the Rights

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): Ordinance had been produced. According to her the impugned Ordinance is an outcome of a growing awareness in the world about the ‘rights’ of a child which awareness/.was. epitomized by the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1959) and then the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989). Pakistan TS said to have voted in favor of the Declaration of 1959 and the Convention of 1989 is stated to have been ratified by Pakistan. She had read out different parts of the said Declaration and Convention to show that the impugned Ordinance is completely in accord with that Declaration and Convention. According to Mrs. Jahangir Pakistan was under an international moral and legal obligation to legislate in that regard and, thus, the Federal Government was quite justified in promulgating the impugned Ordinance. She had, however, agreed that due to lack of any public or parliamentary, debate before enactment of the impugned Ordinance various factors highlighted by the learned counsel for the petitioner had renamed unattended to at WW. the time of promulgation of the said Ordinance. She. too had referred to Articles 25(3) and 26(2) of the Constitution which permit enactment of laws and making of special provisions for the protection of children. 8. Mr. Acid Hassan Into, Advocate appeared before this Court as an amicus curiae on a couple of dates of hearing, but he could, not get. an opportunity to address the Court on those dates; Thereafter he too did not show any interest in assisting this Court and failed to, appear before the Court i connection with this petition despite his name regularly appearing in the cause-list issued for each and every date of harem, We have, thus, been deprived of his assistance which, we are sure, would have been valuable. 9. Mr. Manor Ahmad Malik, Advocate appearing as an amicus curiae has addressed elaborate arguments before us and has seriously criticized the impugned Ordinance. He has submitted that the title of the impugned Ordinance contains the word ‘juvenile’ but the said word has not been defined in the Ordinance but instead a ‘child’ has been defined by section 2(b) of the said Ordinance to be “ a person who at the time of occurrence of an offense has not attained the age of eighteen years”. Malik has posted out that by virtue of section 29-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 a ‘juvenile’ already stood defined as a person “under the age of fifteen years” and section 29(l)(a) of the Punjab Youthful Offenders Ordinance, 1983 already defined a ‘child’ as a person who “has not attained the age of fifteen years” and, thus, the definition of a ‘child’ contamed in section 2(b) of the impugned Ordinance fixing the age as below eighteen years is in direct conflict with the above-mentioned existing laws. He has brought the entire Ordinance under scathing criticism but has taken particularly strong exception to the provisions of section 5 thereof which requires separate trial of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): in section 2(b) of the impugned Ordinance fixing the age as below eighteen years is in direct conflict with the above-mentioned existing laws. He has brought the entire Ordinance under scathing criticism but has taken particularly strong exception to the provisions of section 5 thereof which requires separate trial of a ‘child’ and section 12 thereof which contains a prohibition against the punishment of death for a ‘child’ offender. According to him in cases where a ‘child’ commits an offense jointly with an adult section 5 of the impugned Ordinance ensures duplicity of effort by the prosecution and also contains an inherent risk of conflicting judgments being rendered by a Juvenile Court and an ordinary court. Being a busy trial lawyer, and very able too, he has categorically stated on the basis of his personal experience that the spirit of the provisions of the said section is variably being ignored by the trial courts as the same Sessions Judges and Additional Sessions Judges are functioning both as the ordinary courts as well as the Juvenile Courts and more often than not a ‘child’ accused is tried by the same Judge who tries the adult accused and WW. the evidence recorded in the adult’s trial is usually transferred and adopted by such courts for the purposes of the child’s trial. He has also main tamed that because of the prohibition against the punishment of death for a ‘child’ contamed in section 12 of the impugned Ordinance more and more cases are now coming up for trial m which accused persons below the age of eighteen years are alleged to have committed serious offenses like murder and gang-rape or alleged to have indulged in terrorism or dealing in narcotics. He has further argued that the law existing prior to production of the impugned Ordinance took adequate care of a minor offender and that the impugned Ordinance is idealistic and divorced from the local ground realities. 10. After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, the learned law officers and the learned amici curiae at some length and after going through the material referred to by each of them we are constrained to observe at the outset that the impugned Ordinance has not appeared to us to be the finest example of legislative craftsmanship inasmuch as its language as well its contents have been found by us to be defective and unthoughtful in many ways. A defect in the form or language of a legislative instrument can be swallowed with a pinch of salt or overlooked with disappointment but a defect in its substance or content cannot remain without being followed by the requisite or necessary legal consequences. There is no denying the fact that on account of his tender age a child deserves special handling and treatment and even before the production, of the impugned Ordinance different laws in our country already provided for sympathetic and concessionary treatment of minor accused persons and offenders in the matters of capacity, to commit a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): fact that on account of his tender age a child deserves special handling and treatment and even before the production, of the impugned Ordinance different laws in our country already provided for sympathetic and concessionary treatment of minor accused persons and offenders in the matters of capacity, to commit a crime, bail and custody as is evident from the provisions of sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code and sections 29-B, 497 and 399 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The concept of Borstal Institutions and Reformatory Schools for young prisoners already stood recognized and put into practice by various legislative enactments even prior to promulgation of the impugned Ordinance. Even in the matter of sentencing the courts have all along been particular in attending-to the factor regarding age of the offense before passing a sentence against him. All these measures had blended well with the remaining body of laws and the progress and direction of the law relating to children was by and large steady and positive. The injection of the impugned Ordinance into our legal system has, however, been found by us. to be rather abrupt and not very well thought of besides the dose BMG heavier than required at such a stage of development of our laws and social behavior. Apart from that we are constrained to observe that we have found the impugned Ordinance to be inconsistent with and violative of Articles 4, 9 and 25 of the Constitution besides being replete with incompatibilities with other laws, alarm impracticalities, some downright absurdities and a number of obscurities rendering the same unfit and unsafe for retention in our criminal justice system. Definition of a ‘child’, provisions relating to separate trial of a child, a part of the. provisions concerning bail during trial and abolition, of the sentence of death vis-à-vis a child are some of the areas which require special attention in this context. 11. The age fixed by the impugned Ordinance, for determine whether an accused person is a ‘child’ or not, has been found by us to have been fixed arbitrarily and randomly. Section 2(b) of the impugned Ordinance defines a ‘child’ as “a person who at the time of commission of ah offense has not at tamed-the age of eighteen years”. This definition of a ‘child’ makes no distinction between a male and a female and no other yardstick has been provided by this definition except age in terms of years. In England, according to section 50 of the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933 as amended by section 16 of the Children and Young Persons Act, 1963, there is a conclusive presumption that no child under the age of ten years can be guilty of any offense and an infant between the ages of ten and fourteen years is presumed to be doli incapax incapable of possessing the requisite mens rea for committing a crime. Thus, in England the age limit for a child stands fixed at fourteen years In India

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): can be guilty of any offense and an infant between the ages of ten and fourteen years is presumed to be doli incapax incapable of possessing the requisite mens rea for committing a crime. Thus, in England the age limit for a child stands fixed at fourteen years In India section 2(h) of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 provides that ‘ ‘juvenile’ means a boy who has not attained the age of sixteen years or a girl who has not at tamed the age of eighteen years”. This shows that in Pakistan, England and India different ages have been specified for declaring an accused person a ‘child’ or a ‘juvenile’ for the purposes of special treatment as such. In Pakistan itself different measures have been provided in this regard by different statutory provisions. Section 3 of the Majority Act, 1875 fixes the age of majority as eighteen years and in one particular situation twenty-one years. Section 82 of the Pakistan Penal Code provides that “Nothing is an offense which is done by a child under seven years of age” and section 83 of the same Code provides that “Nothing TS an offense which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding judging of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.” As already mentioned above the impugned Ordinance fixes the age of ‘child’ as less than eighteen years. As against that according to the definition of an ‘adult’ contained in section 2(a) of the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 ‘adult’ means a person who has at tamed, being a male, the age of eighteen years or, being a female, the age of sixteen years, or has attained puberty”. This definition of an ‘adult’ contamed in the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 not only recognizes the distinction between different ages at which males and females-attain adulthood, but it also recognizes that adulthood may be attained by both males and females even before the specified ages if it is established that they have attained puberty. Even section 2(a) of the Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 and Article 2(a) of the Prohibition (Enforcement of Had) Order, 1979 define an ‘adult’ as “a person who has attained the age of eighteen years or puberty”. In the case of Farrukh Vikram v. The State [PLD 1987 SC 5] the Hon’BLE Shan't Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan had decided that a female attains puberty when she starts menstruating and in the case of Abdul Jabbar v. The State [PLD 1991 SC 172] the same Court had laid down that a male attains puberty when he starts secreting semen. Section 29-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 refers to a ‘juvenile’ as a person “under the age of fifteen years” and according to section 29(I)(a) of the Punjab Youthful Offenders Ordinance, 1983 a ‘child’ is as a person who

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): a male attains puberty when he starts secreting semen. Section 29-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 refers to a ‘juvenile’ as a person “under the age of fifteen years” and according to section 29(I)(a) of the Punjab Youthful Offenders Ordinance, 1983 a ‘child’ is as a person who “has not attained the age of fifteen years” The law officers appearing before us on behalf of the Federation and the Province have failed to point out as to on what basis, material or criterion the impugned Ordinance has fixed the age of ‘child’ as less than eighteen years. They have also failed to refer to any peaceful or detailed study of our social patterns or criminal trends or any statistical data m that regard supporting such fixation of age of ‘child’ by the impugned Ordinance. All this shows that while fixing the age of a ‘child’ in the impugned Ordinance the criterion adopted was nothing but arbitrary and whimsical. Such an arbitrary or random exercise in legislation can hardly be accepted by a court of law as reasonable or based upon any intelligible differentia So as to save it from challenge based upon unreasonable classification and discrimination. 12. We have also found a lot of substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the stages and standards pertaining to at taming of maturity by young persons in different parts of the world are different and the stages and standards in that regard acceptable in one part of the world may not be strictly relevant to other parts of the world. Such attachment of maturity of understanding is dependent upon social, economic, climatic and dietary factors, and we have every reason to. Understand that a child in our part of the world starts understanding the nature and consequences of his conduct sooner than a child in the West. Growing up in proximity and interaction with adults due to social v and economic conditions, dog odd jobs and getting employed at a relatively young age due to WW. general poverty, hot climate and exotic and spicy food all contribute towards a speedy physical growth and an accelerated maturity of understanding of a child in our society. Criminal lability of a meant in the Indo-Pak subcontinent was commented upon by Piggott in the case of Emperor v. Paras ram Due [AIR 1915 Allahabad 134] mm the following words: ‘The presumption of English Law against the possibility of the commission of the offense of rape by a boy under the age of 14 years has no application in this-country. The law on the subject of infancy in connection with criminal ability is laid down in Ss. 82 and 83 of the Indian Penal Code and nowhere else.” It is relevant and significant to mention here that the British Parliament which had enacted sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code at that time the Indian Penal Code, 1860) had subsequently fixed a different yardstick MN terms of age

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): of the Indian Penal Code and nowhere else.” It is relevant and significant to mention here that the British Parliament which had enacted sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code at that time the Indian Penal Code, 1860) had subsequently fixed a different yardstick MN terms of age regarding attachment of maturity of understanding of the nature and consequences of conduct in respect of young offenders in England. As already observed above, according to section 50 of the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933 as amended by section 16 of the Children and Young Persons Act- 1963 there is a conclusive presumption that no child under the age of ten years can be guilty of any offense and an infant between-the ages of ten and fourteen years was presumed to be doli incapax, but this presumption was rebuttable by evidence of “mischievous discretion” or guilty knowledge that he was doing something which was wrong, This aspect of the matter has been commented upon by Smith and Hogan (‘Criminal Law’, Tenth Edition, Butterworth's 2002) at pages 211 and 212 in the following words: “Infants or, i more modern terminology, minors, are persons-under eighteen years of age. As such, they are (with some exceptions) incapable of making contracts or wills, but the law imposes no such Mutations on their ability to commit crimes, for, as Kenny put it, ‘a child knows right from wrong long before he knows how to make a prudent speculation or a wise will’. Ten is a comparatively low age for the beginning of criminal responsibility; but as Ingle by Committee posted out: ‘In many countries the “age of criminal responsibility’ is used to signify the age at which a person becomes liable to the “ordinary” or “‘full’ penalties of the law. In this sense, the age of criminal responsibility in England is difficult to state: it 1s certainly much higher than eight.’ WW. At common law there was a rebuttable presumption that a child aged not less than 10 but under 14 years was doli incapax, incapable of committing crime. The presumption was rebutted only if the prosecution proved beyond reasonable doubt, not only that the child caused an actus reus with mens rea, but also that he knew that the particular act was not merely naughty or mischievous, but ‘seriously wrong’. If there was no evidence of such knowledge, other than that implicit in the act itself, the child had no case to answer. In C v. DPP ({1996] AC 1) the Divisional Court held that this ancient rule of the common law was outdated and no longer law; but the House of Lords ruled ([1995] 2 All ER 43) that it was not open to the courts so to hold. That decision was followed by a series of acquittals which caused disquiet. Parliament responded by ' abolishing the rebuttable presumption (Crime and Disorder Act,' 1998, section 34). This was probably intended to put children aged ten and above on an equal footing with

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): open to the courts so to hold. That decision was followed by a series of acquittals which caused disquiet. Parliament responded by ' abolishing the rebuttable presumption (Crime and Disorder Act,' 1998, section 34). This was probably intended to put children aged ten and above on an equal footing with adults, so far as lability to conviction is concerned.” Such different treatment of young delinquents MN different parts of the world by the same legislative source goes a long way in fortifying our observations made above that no universal yardstick can be fixed in that regard. Speedy attachment of maturity of understanding by children in rural areas of the Indo-Pak subcontinent was also commented upon by the Supreme Court of India in the case of Teal SMG and others v. State of Punjab [1985 PSC 1407] and while discussing the statement of a thirteen years old witness in a case of murder it had been observed as follows: “6. Hardin Singh is a Had of 13 years. In our country and particularly in the rural, areas it 1s difficult to think of lad of thirteen years as a child. A vast majority of boys round about that age go to the. Fields and do men’s work. They are certainly capable of understanding The significance of the oath and the necessity to speak the truth. The learned Sessions Judge who had the opportunity of seeing the witness Hardin Singh in the witness-box did not consider it necessary to treat him as a child witness. A perusal of his evidence also shows that he has certainly at tamed a measure of mature understanding. We do not think we can accept. Dr. Chi tale’s argument and on the basis that, Hardin Singh TS a child witness.” Even in England in the case of 2L. v. [(1960). 44 Cr. App. Rep* ] evidence that a boy, aged just under nine years, came from a respectable family, had been properly brought up WW. and was generally well-behaved was held sufficient to prove that he knew that house-breaking and theft were wrong. That case was, of course, decided when the maximum age of criminal responsibility was eight years. In the case of F. v. Pad wick [(1959) Crim. L. R. 43,9] the Divisional Court in, England went further by emphasizing the general desirability of admitting evidence of the child’s home background “and all his circumstances”, even at the risk of disclosing information highly prejudicial to, him, so as to assess his maturity of understanding. In England a boy under the age of 14 cannot be found guilty of committing rape or of assault with intent to commit rape or of offenses involving carnal knowledge. This rule primarily rests upon the principle of physical impossibility and, therefore, no evidence is admissible to. prove that the particular boy had attained puberty before the age of 14. The law in this regard is, however, different in Pakistan. It has already been observed by us above that according to the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): primarily rests upon the principle of physical impossibility and, therefore, no evidence is admissible to. prove that the particular boy had attained puberty before the age of 14. The law in this regard is, however, different in Pakistan. It has already been observed by us above that according to the definition of an ‘adult’ contained in section 2(a) of the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 “ ‘adult’? means a person who has attained, being a male, the age of eighteen years, or, being a female, the age of sixteen years, or has attained puberty” and even section 2(a) of the Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 and Article 2(a) of the Prohibition (Enforcement of Had) Order, 1979 define an ‘adult’ as “a person who has attained the age of eighteen years or puberty’. As mentioned above, the Hon’BLE Sharia Appellate. Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan has already decided that a female attains puberty when she starts menstruating and that a male attains puberty when he starts secreting semen. This difference MN the laws of Pakistan and England in this regard may have a direct nexus with the-local social, economic, climatic and dietary factors and the same goes a long way in highlighting that questions of adulthood may receive different responses in different parts of the world. Even in the Indo-Pak subcontinent itself the standard of adulthood MN the context of juvenility has been fixed differently. We; have already noticed that according to section 2(b) of the impugned Ordinance a ‘child’ is “a person who at the time of commission of an offense has not attained the age of eighteen years” whereas in India section 2(h) of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 provides that “ ‘juvenile’ means a boy who has not attained the age of sixteen years or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years”. This again highlights the importance of undertaking an in-depth study of the local social and other conditions before promulgating a law like the impugned Ordinance but, alas, no such exercise is shown to have been undertaken in this WW. regard in our country before introduction of the impugned Ordinance. This has made the unreasonableness in this regard worst confounded. 13. The impugned Ordinance has also been found by us to be marred by various impracticalities of diverse nature. For instance subsection (3) of section of the impugned Ordinance provides that “The Juvenile Court shall have the exclusive jurisdiction to try cases in which a child-is accused of commission of an offense”. This shows that all offenses allegedly committed by a child are triable exclusively by a Juvenile Court. This provision TS, however, directly in conflict with many other laws which make certain specified offenses triable exclusively by Special Courts, 1e. Anti-Terrorism Courts, Narcotics Courts, Drug Courts, Banking Courts, etc. It is starting to notice that a Juvenile Court has been conferred the exclusive jurisdiction to try an offender whereas the Special Courts mentioned above

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): conflict with many other laws which make certain specified offenses triable exclusively by Special Courts, 1e. Anti-Terrorism Courts, Narcotics Courts, Drug Courts, Banking Courts, etc. It is starting to notice that a Juvenile Court has been conferred the exclusive jurisdiction to try an offender whereas the Special Courts mentioned above have the exclusive jurisdiction to try the relevant offenses. An offender cannot be tried by a court having no jurisdiction to try the relevant offense and conversely an offense cannot be tried by a court having no jurisdiction over the offender! Section 14 of the impugned Ordinance providing that “The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force” has compounded the confusion in this regard as instead of resolving the conflict it has provided feed to the same. 14. Likewise, the provisions of section 5 of the impugned Ordinance present a nightmare of impracticality by mandating that “no child shall be charged with or tried for an offense together with an adult” and in a case involving adult as well as child accused persons separate trials are to be conducted of the adult accused by the ordinary court and of the child accused by the Juvenile Court. Such separate trials of different accused persons in the same case by different courts not only raise questions of undue inconvenience and hardship for the complaint party involving issues pertaining to equality before law and equal protection of law under Article 25 of the Constitution, but they also present a real prospect of conflicting judgments being rendered by different courts trying the same case. Interestingly section 5 of the impugned Ordinance excludes the application of section 239 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in this regard but at the same time section 14 of the impugned Ordinance provides that “The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in addition to, and riot in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force”. We may, therefore, not be unjustified in. observing that the impugned Ordinance has appeared to us to be unthoughtful and not a fine ' example of legal craftsmanship. It may not be out of place to mention here that in England section 6 of the Children and Young Persons Act. 1969 permits a joint trial of a juvenile and an adult where the offense charged is an indictable one. Even section 46 of the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933 recognized a few exceptions to the rule that the criminal jurisdiction over juvenile offenders was to be exercised by a juvenile court and not by any other court of summary jurisdiction. One of such exceptions enabling an adult court to hear the charge was where the juvenile was involved. With an adult in the same or allied offense. This was meant to avoid separate trials, and a possibility of conflicting judgments being handed down by different courts hearing the same case. In; India section 24.of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): enabling an adult court to hear the charge was where the juvenile was involved. With an adult in the same or allied offense. This was meant to avoid separate trials, and a possibility of conflicting judgments being handed down by different courts hearing the same case. In; India section 24.of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 requires that “no. juvenile shall be charged with or tried for any offense together With a person, who is not a juvenile”. Similar provisions were also incorporated, in the earlier statutes like the Children Act, 1960, the-"West Bengal Children Act, 1959, the Bombay Children Act, 1948 and the Madras Children Act, 1920." In the case of Robin Apart and, another v. State [1986 Coil.J. 381] the Calcutta High Court and in the case of State v. Basilar Ghhotelal and another [AIR 1957 Bombay 13] the Bombay High Court were. Of the view that a juvenile could be tried only by a Juvenile Court and hence, when the trials of an adult and a juvenile were separated by virtue of the Children Act, the trial of the adult was to proceed under the Code of Criminal Procedure while that of the child would be by the children’s court under the Children Act, However, in the case of Sessions Judge, Tirunelveli v. Perusal [1947 Cr.L.J. 261] a Full Bench of-.the. Madras, High Court, had rendered the same opinion as was. expressed in the Case of in re Keratin [(1972) Mad.L;W. (Cry), 1.95].by. Mahayana, J. in the following words: “Where a plurality of persons jointly take part MN an offense and some of them happen to be adult and others happen to be juveniles, it is eminently desirable and certainly permissible that the same forum tries all the. accused, adult and juveniles, not jointly but separately, try mg the adult accused in, accordance with the provisions of the Cr.P.C. and the juvenile accused in accordance with the provisions of the Madras Children Act and the WW. rules framed thereunder. Such a procedure Will, besides avoiding conflict of decisions in respect of the same occurrence; instill in the minds of the accused that even-handed justice is rendered to them, at least in, the matter of appreciation of evidence, without any discrimination being shown merely on the ground of age.” In her book titled ‘Treatise on The Juvenile Justice Act’ (published by The Indian Law Institute, New Delhi in 1993) Led Kumar has observed at page 189 that: “One finds that during the debates in Parliament on a similar provision in the Children Bill, 1953 and the Children Bill, 1959 the apprehension was raised that separation of trials of the juvenile and the adult accused of. The same offense will require duplication of work. It may result in different decision by the two forums.’ Also, findings of one court may prejudice that of the other. On the other hand, the provision was welcomed as separation of trial would mean that the child was not kept waiting while the case of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): require duplication of work. It may result in different decision by the two forums.’ Also, findings of one court may prejudice that of the other. On the other hand, the provision was welcomed as separation of trial would mean that the child was not kept waiting while the case of the non-juvenile accused dragged on, in the criminal court. The provision was made to ensure protection of the interest of the child by the Juvenile Court rather than to consider the magistrate’s difficulties and other, things.” We may, however, observe here with respect that it is not just the difficulties of a Magistrate or the delay in the child’s trial which are of primary or paramount importance but what is at stake is the interests of justice m the larger context. After all such serious questions of Justice pertaining to adults cannot be lightly or conveniently sacrificed at the altar of interests of children or juveniles. Left to us, we would prefer the English approach in respect of joint or separate trials of adults and children. Rather than the Indian approach towards the issue. Such differences of approach and the merits or demerits of each such approach could have been thrashed and ironed out if a public or parliamentary debate had preceded the promulgation of the impugned Ordinance, but unfortunately that was not the case. Apart from that it has been agreed before us by all concerned that, as posted out by Mr. Malik, the spirit of the provisions of section 5 of the impugned Ordinance is variably being ignored by the trial Courts as the Same Sessions Judges and Additional Sessions Judges are functioning both as the ordinary courts as well as the Juvenile Courts and more often than not a ‘child’ accused is tried by the same Judge who tries the adult accused, and the evidence recorded in the adult’s trial is usually transferred and adopted by such courts for WW. the purposes of the child’s trial. Such a practice is highly objectionable besides being clearly illegal, and the same appears to us to be counterproductive to the interests of the child accused as he is not even present before the ordinary court at the time of recording of the evidence in the adult’s trial. It is better not to have a law rather than to have a law which is universally disregarded or flouted with impunity. 15. Section 6 of the impugned Ordinance is yet another example of impracticability. According to subsection (2) of section 6 of the impugned Ordinance “A Juvenile’Court shall not ordinarily take up any other case on a day when the case of a child accused is fixed, for evidence on such day”. The word “ordinarily” has not been explained by the impugned Ordinance nor any exception has been specified and, thus, a discretion has been conferred without spelling out or indicating the parameters of its exercise. It has,-therefore, not surprised us to learn that this, provision is BMG completely ignored by the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): The word “ordinarily” has not been explained by the impugned Ordinance nor any exception has been specified and, thus, a discretion has been conferred without spelling out or indicating the parameters of its exercise. It has,-therefore, not surprised us to learn that this, provision is BMG completely ignored by the Juvenile Courts while] conducting cases. Apart - from that the same Sessions Judges and Additional Sessions Judges are functioning both as the ordinary courts as well as the Juvenile Courts acid it is not practically possible for such courts to abs tam from taking up any other case on a day when the case of child accused is fixed for evidence on such day. Such a manner of protection for a child at the cost of complete paralysis or breakdown of the judicial system at the plenary level vis-à-vis the adult'citizenry, has appeared to us to be too big a price to be even seriously contemplated, considered or mulled over. 16. While adverting to section 7 of the impugned Ordinance we may unhesitatingly observe that this provision has created nothing but havoc in our criminal justice system in particular and in the society in general. According to section 7 “If-a question arises whether a person before it is a,child for the purposes of this Ordinance, the juvenile Court shall record a finding after such inquiry which shall include a medical report for determination of the age of the child’. We take judicial notice of the fact that because of this provision a large number of criminal cases witness a mini-trial regarding the age of an accused person before or during, and sometimes even at the fag end of, the ma'am trial of the accused person and during this exercise evidence, both oral, and documentary, is received. A decision of the trial Court in that regard is then assailed through a revision petition before this Court and, then the matter is taken to the Hon’BLE Supreme Court. Sometimes such issues are also raised for the first time in appeals before this Court and in appeals or petitions before the Hon’BLE Supreme Court without this matter having been agitated before the trial Court at all. A,a lot of time is consumed in this process and more often than not such an exercise is undertaken with intentions, and purposes which are other than bona fide. In the case of Allah v. Najeebullah and others PLD 2003. SC 656 the Hon’BLE Supreme Court, of. Pakistan had not only taken notice of but had also deprecated a growing trend that convicts already sentenced to death were trying to prove themselves to be children for the first time after the matters of their convictions and sentences had attained finality through the judgments rendered by the apex court itself According to its annual report published by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan on the State of Human Rights in 2003’ in July, 2003 over 300 cases were pending m the Province of the Punjab alone wherein the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): had attained finality through the judgments rendered by the apex court itself According to its annual report published by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan on the State of Human Rights in 2003’ in July, 2003 over 300 cases were pending m the Province of the Punjab alone wherein the ages of convicts on death row were being contested and after exhausting all the judicial remedies against their conviction and sentence the convicts were trying to establish that they were less than eighteen years of age on the day of occurrence and, thus, they could not be sentenced to death. 17. With our experience in this sphere we are constrained to observe that the impugned Ordinance is encouraging and promoting corruption in the society at a scale which is riot only large but is also extremely alarming. Almost every day cases are coming up before us wherein fake School Leaving Certificates are obtained, incorrect medical opinions about age are procured, forgeries and interpolations are committed in the Registers of Births main tamed at Union Councils and false Nikahnamas of parents of accused persons are prepared with a view to show the age of an accused person to be less than eighteen years at the time of occurrence so that a possible sentence of death may be avoided against him in cases of terrorism, murder, gang-rape or trafficking in narcotics, etc. We are, therefore, inclined to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned Ordinance is promoting falsehood, lies, forgeries and corruption in the society at a large scale and a law which corrupts the society at large in the name of protection for children is not worth renamed on the statute book. Destruction of the moral fiber of the society as a whole is once again too big a price to be paid for protection of children. Such a protection of a child in one criminal case at the micro level is surely not protection at all in the larger context or in the real sense if the society which such child TS about to enter as an adult is allowed to be polluted and corrupted at the macro level. Even otherwise a law which contains such incentives for and has tendencies to corrupt the society in such a manner is counterproductive, paradoxical and at odds with the “protection of law” contemplated by the provisions of Articles and 25 of the Constitution. 18. Section 10 of the impugned Ordinance provides for bail for a child accused but subsection (3) of section 10 contemplates a situation where a child accused of even a bailable offense may not be released on bail. This is clearly a negation of the ‘right’ of bail in such cases provided for by section 496 of the Code-of Criminal Procedure. Such a denial of the right of bail by the impugned Ordinance is nothing but congruous and impracticable in the absence of an appropriate amendment of section 496 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): ‘right’ of bail in such cases provided for by section 496 of the Code-of Criminal Procedure. Such a denial of the right of bail by the impugned Ordinance is nothing but congruous and impracticable in the absence of an appropriate amendment of section 496 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Apart from that the concession of bail for a child accused contemplated by subsection (7) of section 10 of the impugned Ordinance has been whittled down by the proviso to that subsection with reference to the nature and gravity of the offense allegedly committed or previous conviction of the accused. If such considerations are acceptable or relevant for refusing even bail to a child accused then, there does not appear to be any justification for not allowing passage of the normal sentence against such accused person for such an offense committed by him. This inaptness in the impugned Ordinance exposes its lack of profundity and soundness: 19. All these infirmities in the impugned Ordinance have convinced us that the same is an impracticable piece of legislation which has been enacted without proper deliberation, thoughtfulness, care and attention to detail. In our considered view allowing such a law to continue’ to hold the field is risky and unsafe besides being perilous and hazardous to our criminal justice system. 20. By virtue of section 12 of the impugned Ordinance “Notwithstanding anything to thercontrary contained in any law for the time being in force no child shall be--(a) awarded punishment of death’. In England the Children Act, 1908 made an immunity from the sentence of death available to. An offender who is less than sixteen years of age and in India such an immunity is available under the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 to a boy less than sixteen years of age and a girl less than eighteen years of age. No reasonable or rational basis has been disclosed or made available before us to show as to why the age of eighteen years has been fixed, in that regard in Pakistan through the impugned Ordinance. Such an exercise of legislative authority is clearly unreasonable and discriminatory as the relevant classification is not based upon any intelligible differentia. 21. Apart, from an immunity from the sentence of death provided by section 12 of the impugned Ordinance the provisions of section 10 of the impugned Ordinance contemplate a WW. lenient and liberal approach towards bail for such accused persons and after their conviction section 11 of the said Ordinance provides for their release on probation. We have found a a lot of substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that such immunity from the sentence of death, lenience in the matter of bail after arrest and prospects of release on probation after conviction provided for in the impugned Ordinance contain incentives for and have the tendency of not only encouraging persons below the age of eighteen years to commit heinous crimes like murder, gang-rape, terrorism and trafficking in narcotics, etc. but

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): of bail after arrest and prospects of release on probation after conviction provided for in the impugned Ordinance contain incentives for and have the tendency of not only encouraging persons below the age of eighteen years to commit heinous crimes like murder, gang-rape, terrorism and trafficking in narcotics, etc. but the same may also embolden the older people in our society to prompt their young ones to commit such crimes with an understanding and assurance, that they would get away with lesser sentences apart from availing of concessions in the matters of bail and release on probation. It has, thus, not surprised us Jo learn, that incidents involving such; crimes have significantly increased after production of the impugned Ordinance and a substantial number of cases BMG tried at present by the Juvenile Courts evolve such famous offenses. According to its annual report published by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan on the ‘State of Human Rights in 2003’ over 12,000 children of less than 18 years of age were arrested in the Province of the Punjab from July 01, 2002, to March 01, 2003. The Amnesty. International had reported that in June, 2003 around 4,500 juveniles were in detention across Pakistan and in July, 2003 over 300 cases were pending in the Province of the Punjab alone wherein the ages of convicts on death row were being contested and after exhausting all the judicial remedies against their conviction and sentence the convicts were trying to establish that they were less than eighteen years of age on the day of occurrence and, thus, they could not be sentenced to death. The extent of involvement of young persons in cases evolving a sentence of death can well be gauged from the said report. The statistics published in the Daily Gang, Lahore on 15.11.2003 reveal the following picture as far as the Province of the Punjab is concerned: Juvenile prisoners in the Punjab jails: Penal provision (section) 302, PPC 324, PPC, PPC /, PPC, PPC, PEHO. OZEHO 12, OZEHO. total General statistics: WW. Offense murder attempted murder robbery/ dacoity trespass/theft/ handling stolen property kidnapping/ abduction narcotics zinc/ abduction sodomy/ abduction other crimes Under- trial (boys) 432 197 159 161 Under trial (girls) - - 112-158.- 135 8 122 - - 49–1425 13 Convicted (boys) 147 25 10 73 20 33 1317 Convicted (girls) 2---21--5 1992 Total juvenile prisoners 1974 total boys total girls 18 total boys and girls sentenced to death 13. convicted boys. 3575. convicted girls 1604' under-trial boys undergrad girls 13 30 number of jails for juveniles 2 These figures clearly manifest that the apprehensions expressed by the learned counsel for; the petitioner in this regard are not. merely hypothetical or conjectural bit the same find support from hard facts and conscious and deliberate misuse of the impugned Ordinance is more of stark reality than merely a possibility. 22. The Preamble to the impugned Ordinance has also received our careful-, consideration. According, to the Preamble the impugned Ordinance is “An Ordinance

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): conjectural bit the same find support from hard facts and conscious and deliberate misuse of the impugned Ordinance is more of stark reality than merely a possibility. 22. The Preamble to the impugned Ordinance has also received our careful-, consideration. According, to the Preamble the impugned Ordinance is “An Ordinance to provide for protection of the nights of children involved in criminal. litigation”. This Preamble is remarkably different from, the Preamble to the Indian Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 which reads as follows: “An Act to provide for the care, protection, treatment development and 27145 rehabilitation of neglected or delinquent juveniles and for the adjudication of certain matters relating to, and disposition, of delinquent juveniles”. According to section. 2(e) of the Indian Act a ‘delinquent juvenile’ TS “a juvenile who has been found to have committed an offense” and according to section 2(1) a ‘neglected juvenile’ is a juvenile who is found bagging or who is homeless and without any, ostensible means of subsistence and is a destitute or whose parent or guardian is unfit or incapacitated or who lives in or frequently visits a brothel or who is being or is likely to be abused or exploited for immoral or illegal purposes or unconscionable GAM! Thus, the emphasis in India appears to be on a juvenile already found guilty of committing a crime or a helpless and neglected juvenile whereas, in Pakistan the focus is only on protection of the “nights of children” “involved in criminal; litigation’. These so-called ‘rights’ of children have been debated before us by the learned counsel for the parties as well as the learned amici curiae at some length. The learned Deputy Attorney-General and one of the learned amici curiae namely Mrs. Jahangir have tried to defend the impugned Ordinance on the premise that the same; is meant to protect the ‘rights’ of children, but they have, however, failed to refer to any such right’ recognized by our Constitution. All that they could allude to in this respect are Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution which provide as follows: “25. Equality of citizens.--(1) ALF citizens are equal before 'the law and are entitled to equal protection of law. (2) There shall be no discrimination on the basis of sex alone. (3) Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from-making any Special provision for the protection of women and children.” “26. Nondiscrimination in respect of access to public places. (1) In respect of access to places, of public entertainment or resort, not intended, for, religious purposes only, there shall be no discrimination against any citizen on the ground only of race, religion, caste, sex; residence or place of birth. (2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.” They could not dispute the fact that “special provisions” for the protection of women and children contemplated by these provisions of the Constitution are meant to be additional advantages for women and children in certain respects and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.” They could not dispute the fact that “special provisions” for the protection of women and children contemplated by these provisions of the Constitution are meant to be additional advantages for women and children in certain respects and such “special provisions” cannot be allowed to have the effect of denying others their own rights under the said or other provisions of the Constitution. The case of Shim Muir and others v. Government of Punjab through Secretary Health and another (PLD 1990 SC 295) has already settled this issue. As regards the generality of citizens the right to life guaranteed by Article 9 of the Constitution is to be read in conjunction with Article 4(1) of the Constitution which provides that “To enjoy the protection of law’ is an inalienable right of every citizen and with Article 25(1) which mandates that all citizens “are entitled to equal protection of law’. It has already been observed by us above that different provisions of the impugned Ordinance contain incentives for and have the tendency of encouraging young persons to commit serious crimes and for older people in our society to prompt their young ones to commit such crimes with an understanding and assurance that they would get away with lesser sentences apart from availing of concessions in the matters of bail and release on probation. Such a plausible and serious potential for misuse of the impugned Ordinance surely poses a grave threat to and creates a grim peril for the lives of citizens at large, and we cannot close our eyes, disregard, overlook or ignore the same. In this view of the matter we have felt confident that the constitutionally guaranteed right to If enjoyed by generality of citizens has become vulnerable and the constitutional assurance regarding the enjoying the protection of law has either been taken away or seriously abridged by the impugned Ordinance. We are sanguine that through providing protection for the benefit of one relatively small section of the society the impugned legislation has rendered the other and larger sections of the society unprotected. Possibility of an equal or proportionate reprisal or punishment has always been accepted as the surest deterrence against aggression. The Maker of human body, mind and soul surely knows how the same can function or adjust best in their interaction with others. It has been ordained by Almighty Allah in respect of Visas (retaliation) that:- “O believers! Retaliation is proscribed for you in the cases of murder; a free man for a free man, a Slave for a slave, and a female for a female. But if anyone is pardoned by his aggrieved-brother, then blood wit should be decided according to the common law and payment should be made with gratitude. This is a concession and a mercy from your Lord, Now, whoever exceeds the limits after this, shall have a painful punishment. O men of understanding! There is security of ITF for you

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): blood wit should be decided according to the common law and payment should be made with gratitude. This is a concession and a mercy from your Lord, Now, whoever exceeds the limits after this, shall have a painful punishment. O men of understanding! There is security of ITF for you in the. law of retaliation, so that you may learn self-restraint.” (Aqua’an: Sura-2, Verses 178 179) An attempt by a creation to become wiser than its Creator would hardly commend itself for appreciation or approval. The recent movement in some parts of the Western world in favor of abolishing the penalty of death may just be a passing or a temporary phase in the sociological development of human race, and we are not surprised that in many of such parts of the world the penalty of death is staging a comeback and is being reproduced, not for the love of such a punishment but purely for its utility and efficacy as the most suitable deterrence. 23. An exercise in legislation which, while affording protection to the life of one, exposes another’s life to danger or which, while extending a benefit to one, exposes another to a serious disadvantage may militate against Articles 4, 9 and 25 of the Constitution and the same cannot be termed or accepted as reasonable. An analogy in this regard may be found in the law relating to civil servants which provides for relaxation of rules by the competent authority for the benefit of a civil servant whose case may be one of hardship, inequity or injustice. It had been held by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Muhammad Iqbal Shikhar and 3 others v. The Government of the Punjab through the Secretary to Government of the Punjab, Lahore and 2 others [PLD 1991 SC 35] that: ‘The dispensation under section 22 of the Punjab Civil Servants Act is individual and is limited and controlled by a proviso which establishes the supremacy of the Act and the Rules. The relaxation can be-beneficial to the civil servant without being prejudicial to anyone else even to the civil servant who is granted relaxation or exemption. ” (per Shaffer Rahman, J.) (Emphasis has been supplied) It was further held that, “This section is primarily a saving section, basically intended to correct serious cases, where unusual factors place a civil servant in serious disability, which requires correction on the basis of equity and justice by the Governor himself, sitting at the apex of the executive hierarchy. Amendments, additions and’ substitutions effected in the rules from time to time, mergers in and transfers from one service to another, etc. create a host of problems, where civil servants placed under serious disability and hardship call for a fair and equitable resolution of their difficulties. To meet these genuine cases, the Governor has been granted this special savings power to deal with such cases, so as to remove injustice and inequity which may stand in the way of a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): placed under serious disability and hardship call for a fair and equitable resolution of their difficulties. To meet these genuine cases, the Governor has been granted this special savings power to deal with such cases, so as to remove injustice and inequity which may stand in the way of a civil servant in securing his just rights. In short, it is a power rarely used, unless to serve justice or correct grave injustice, and perhaps never used arbitrarily to reward a person or to grant him an undue privilege over the right of another. -------These provisions permit the Chief Minister and the Punjab Government, in individual cases of hardship to relax the rules. It is one thing to remove the strict application of a rule to remove hardship MN an individual case. It is another to defeat the rule to bolster a dividual’s case, so as to destroy another’s right. Still further, the order of the Governor relaxing the Condition of 5 years service in the Department as Assistant Engineer for promotion of the said respondent No. to the post of Executive Engineer out of turn, contravenes the rights of others because the respondent has been given forced seniority. The order of the learned Governor in the instant case not only violates the law declared by this Court, which strikes down retrospective regularization, but directly contravenes Rule 8 of the 1967 and 1974 Rules and adversely affects the seniority and right of promotion of the 1974 batch of direct inductees and I would, therefore, with profound respect to the learned Governor, declare that the same deserves to be set aside.” (per RUSTA S. Schwa, J.) (Emphasis has been supplied) We may observe here in the context of Article 25 of the Constitution that if children have a right to be protected from the harm of adults then a corresponding right must also be implied that adults or other children must also enjoy a right to be protected from the harm deliberately inflicted upon them by children consciously or otherwise of their privileges in the law as children. 24. The discussion made above leads us to observe that the impugned Ordinance has many incompatibilities with some other laws of the land and, therefore, the same does not fit well in our system of criminal justice. The law and the judicial pronouncements referred to above clearly highlight the fact that special treatment of a child is necessarily referable to his innocence and lack of understanding of the nature or consequences of his acts and the moment he is shown to have lost his childhood innocence he ceases to qualify for any special treatment and also that no particular or exact cut-off age limit can be prescribed in this regard except in cases of extreme tenderness of age where there cannot be any doubt about absence of proper understanding of the nature or consequences of acts. This jurisprudential concept finds a very clear, and categorical expression in the provisions of sections 82 and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): limit can be prescribed in this regard except in cases of extreme tenderness of age where there cannot be any doubt about absence of proper understanding of the nature or consequences of acts. This jurisprudential concept finds a very clear, and categorical expression in the provisions of sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code MN the following words: “82. Act of child under seven years of age. Nothing is an offense which TS done by a child under seven years of age.” 83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of, immature understanding. Nothing is an offense which is done, by a child above seven years, of age and under, twelve, who has not at tamed sufficient maturity of understanding judging of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.” According to section, 14 of the impugned Ordinance “The provisions of this Ordinance shall be’ in addition to and not MN derogation of, any other law for the time hieing in force”’. This shows that the impugned Ordinance has not done away with or replaced the above-mentioned jurisprudential concept contained in the Pakistan Penal Code in this regard and the above reproduced provisions of the Code are still, the law of the land pertaining to young offenders. The provisions of sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code show that'a child below’ the age of seven years is incapable of committing an offense because he is a doli capax incapable of form mg or possessing the necessary mens rea for an offense whereas a child between the ages of seven and twelve years can be. capable of forming or possessing the necessary mens rea for an offense unless it is established that he “has not attained sufficient 'maturity of understanding judging of the nature and consequences of his conduct.” It is interesting to notice that as regards a young delinquent above the age of twelve years the. Pakistan Penal Code as, well as the impugned Ordinance both treat him at par with an adult as far as his criminality or lability to conviction are concerned but the two, differ mainly in respect of the mode and forum of his trial and with regard to his sentencing’ Under the Offer ice of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, the Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 and the Prohibition (Enforcement of Had) Order, 1979 an offender who has already at tamed puberty is to be treated as an. ordinary criminal even if he is otherwise below eighteen years Of age and some of the offenses under the said enactments carry a sentence of death. Even the Anti- Terrorism Act, 1997 and the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 recognize no WW. significant distinction between a child and an adult once the offender’s criminality is established on the record. It is starting to post out that an offense of gang-rape-;under section 10(4) of the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 carries only

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 recognize no WW. significant distinction between a child and an adult once the offender’s criminality is established on the record. It is starting to post out that an offense of gang-rape-;under section 10(4) of the Offense of Zina (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 carries only a sentence of death and no other sentence, as already held by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in the cases of Shaheed alias Shadow and others v. The- State [2002 SCMR 1009] and Bashir Ahmed and two others v. The State [PLD 2002 SC 775], and the position regarding an offense of blasphemy under section 295-C of the Pakistan Penal Code is also the same. If the Ordinance impugned through the present petition is to have its way then a ‘child’ committing a famous offense of gang-rape or perpetrating an outrageous offense of blasphemy cannot be sentenced to death. In such a situation such a child can be convicted for the offense but cannot be sentenced at all! Nothing could be more’ absurd and unreasonable than such a situation. There has to be something seriously wrong with a law that allows such grave and serious offenses to go unpunished. In this backdrop we are quite clear in our minds that on the jurisprudential plane what is relevant is the capacity of an accused person to understand the nature and consequences of his conduct and if an accused person is found to be of sufficient maturity of understanding then no special treatment is warranted qua him by the law in the matter of sentence which should be left to the relevant court to be decided in the light of the peculiar circumstances of a given case. Tender age of the offender can surely be one such peculiar circumstance. By making a departure in this regard through providing a cut-off age limit for special treatment the impugned Ordinance has not only become incompatible with the rest of the body of our laws, but the same has also made a departure from the established jurisprudential concepts. 25. It may not be lost sight of in this context that in societies which are still struggling to get out of medieval criminal trends or tendencies a young person’s criminality 1s, barring cases of exceptional and extraordinary circumstances, generally not visited with any special treatment or lenience only on account of his tender age. It may be argued in this context that a criminal who starts his criminal activity at a relatively young age cannot be turned loose on the society for a possible repetition of his offense or unlawful activity. To MIP the evil in the bud is not just a cliché or an adage. It is based upon human experiences and accumulated wisdom, and it was expressly referred to by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan with approval in a case to be referred to shortly. The matter of sentencing of a young offender, nay an adjudged young murderer, in the Indo-Pak subcontinent

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): adage. It is based upon human experiences and accumulated wisdom, and it was expressly referred to by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan with approval in a case to be referred to shortly. The matter of sentencing of a young offender, nay an adjudged young murderer, in the Indo-Pak subcontinent had come under discussion in the case of Sheikh Hassan v. Bashir Ahmad and another [PLD 1966 (W.P.) Peshawar 97] and a Hon’BLE Full Bench of the erstwhile West Pakistan High Court especially constituted to consider a question MN that regard had observed mm that respect as follows: “8. We had the advantage of full argument on the subject and on a careful review of the case-law on the point, we are clearly of the view that it is almost well settled that mere youth by itself would not entitle the accused on the charge of a deliberate murder to the lesser/penalty, and that, at any rate, a person aged 16 years who commit a deliberate act of murder must be assumed to act with full responsibility unless it is shown that he is mentally, retarded, or that he had acted under the influence of somebody. It will be convenient here to read section 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code, which is as under:,------. 9. It will be plain from reading the language of the section. Reproduced above that where the accused is above seven years of age and under twelve, “sufficient maturity of understanding” to be presumed in case of such a child unless negative be proved: on defense, 1e. the burden of proof lies on the accused above the age of seven and below twelve to show that he had not attained sufficient maturity. A person at the age of sixteen is sufficiently matured to understand the full implication of his acts, and therefore if he commits a'deliberate murder, he cannot on account of mere age legitimately claim the benefit of the lesser penalty.” After making those observations the Hon’BLE Full Bench adverted to the entire case-law available on the subject till then and concluded as under: “To sum up all the authorities referred to above are agreed that mere youth by itself would not earn the accused the lesser penalty in absence of any other extenuating circumstances.-- ----the overwhelming authority including the authority of the Supreme Court referred to above that youth by, itself is not ground for awarding a light sentence.” :. Later on in the case of Shana and two others v. The State [1999 SCMR 1507], the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan had commented upon this ; aspect of the matter in the following words : “TT is a cardinal principle-of criminal law that every case is to be adjudged on the totality of its own facts and the attending. circumstances: If a boy of sixteen years, forces a girl to marry him and on refusal kills her or compels a boy of lesser in age than him to make friendship with him for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): every case is to be adjudged on the totality of its own facts and the attending. circumstances: If a boy of sixteen years, forces a girl to marry him and on refusal kills her or compels a boy of lesser in age than him to make friendship with him for illicit purposes arid on, his denial, murders him, then on what legal or moral basis such ' murderer can clam the benefit of lesser penalty and on what moral value the fac tum of “tender age” can be pleaded as a mitigating circumstance. In such a case it would be most appropriate to award normal penalty of death so as to nip the evil in the bud. On the other hand, if an immature lad, who is entirely dependent on his father and reams under his influence commits murder m the company of his father or independently of him but at his behest and instigation in order to take revenge of his close relation or to avenge family honor, then ends of justice would not be defeated if he is given lesser penalty of life imprisonment.” The American approach m this respect also appears to be somewhat similar as in that country mere young age of the offender is not the sole criterion for treating him as a juvenile or for extending a concession to him in the matter of sentence. We may refer in this context to the relatively recent cases of Kevin N. Stanford v. Kentucky and Heath A. Wilkins v. Missouri [106 L. Ed. 2d. 306] decided by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of the United States of America wherein the question in issue was whether the position of capital punishment on juvenile offenders constituted cruel and unusual punishment prohibited by the Federal Constitution’s Eighth Amendment or not. In one of those cases a boy aged about seventeen years had robbed a gas station, raped and sodomized a station attendant and finally shot the attendant to death so that she could not identify him. The Jefferson District Court, Kentucky determined that the boy should be tried as an adult in the Jefferson Circuit Court, Kentucky, as allowed by the state law, in the light of seriousness of the offenses. The boy was ultimately-convicted of murder, first-degree sodomy, first-degree robbery and receiving stolen property and was sentenced to death plus forty-five years’ imprisonment. The Supreme Court of Kentucky affirmed the convictions and sentences of that boy. In the second case a boy aged about sixteen years conceived a plan to rob a convenience store and to murder whoever would be behind the counter so as to leave no witness and, in executing that plan, stabbed the store’s owner/operator and left her to die. A Missouri Juvenile Court certified the boy for TNA as an adult on account of the viciousness of the crime, the boy’s maturity and the failure of the juvenile justice system to rehabilitate him after previous delinquent acts. The trial Court convicted the boy and found

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): left her to die. A Missouri Juvenile Court certified the boy for TNA as an adult on account of the viciousness of the crime, the boy’s maturity and the failure of the juvenile justice system to rehabilitate him after previous delinquent acts. The trial Court convicted the boy and found that the death penalty was appropriate, given the fact that it was committed in the course of robbery. The Supreme Court of Missouri affirmed the boy’s convictions and sentences. In both those cases the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of the United States of America affirmed the young convicts’ sentences of death as valid and held that: (1) The imposition of the death penalty for crimes committed at age 16 or 17 was not one of the modes or acts of punishment that was considered cruel and unusual at the time that the Constitution’s Bill of Rights was adopted; (2) there was no modern national consensus forbidding the imposition of the death penalty for crimes committed at those ages, given that (a) a majority of the states that permitted capital punishment authorized it for crimes committed at age 16 or above, (b) the number of states which did not permit capital punishment at all was irrelevant to the specific question of the propriety of the death penalty for juveniles, (c) foreign countries’ sentencing practices not reflecting’ American conceptions of decency were irrelevant to such question, (d) the: provision of the Anti- Drug Abuse Act of 1988 limiting the death. penalty for CERTAM drug-related offenses to offenders aged 18 and over did not embody a judgment by Congress that no murder was famous enough to warrant the execution of younger. offenders, (e) even if there were no federal statute permitted the execution of persons under age 18, that Would not establish a national consensus forbidding such executions in the face of a substantial number of state statutes, to the contrary, and (f) statistics indicating that the death penalty is very rarely sought or imposed for offenses committed by persons under age 18 did not establish that prosecutors or juries found the imposition of the death penalty, categorically unacceptable in such cases, but. might mean only that they thought it should rarely be imposed; (3) there was no relevance in statutes which set 18 or more as the legal age for engaging in such activities as driving, drinking and voting;, (4) other evidence of a national consensus, such as public opinion polls and the views of interest groups and professional associations, was not sufficient for constitutional purposes and should properly be addressed to the citizenry; - WW. (5) the Supreme Court could riot apply its own “informed judgment” as to the desirability of permitting the death penalty for crimes by 16 and 17-year-olds; and. (6) the Supreme Court had never invalidated a punishment solely on the basis of a disproportion between that punishment and the convict’s blameworthiness. Inspired by the above-mentioned observations made by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan as well as by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): the death penalty for crimes by 16 and 17-year-olds; and. (6) the Supreme Court had never invalidated a punishment solely on the basis of a disproportion between that punishment and the convict’s blameworthiness. Inspired by the above-mentioned observations made by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan as well as by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of the United States of America we may remark here that it may be advisable to keep the deterrence of the capital. sentence intact even in case of young offenders while leaving the matter of sentencing in the hands of the courts so as to pass an appropriate order in that regard while keeping in view the circumstance sofa given case, including the factor regarding the offender’s age. It may not be out of place to mention here that although special concessions have been extended by the impugned Ordinance to a child in the matter of bail but even in respect of bail it has been provided by the proviso to subsection (7) of section 10 of the impugned Ordinance that bail may be refused to an offender by the Court “if there are reasonable grounds to believe that such child is.evolved in an offense which in its opinion is serious, heinous, gruesome, brutal, sensational in character or shocking to public morality, or he is a previous convict of an offense punishable with death or imprisonment for life”. It, therefore, defies reason that in a case of such nature the impugned Ordinance envisages refusal of bail during trial but at the same time it provides for withholding of the normal sentence and release on probation after conviction. It, thus, appears that the impugned Ordinance has been unthoughtful in this regard as well and all these critical aspects of the matter, including the accumulated wisdom gathered through consistent judicial pronouncements, had not been adverted to or considered before its promulgation. 26. We consider it necessary to reiterate here that the law in our country existing prior to introduction of the impugned Ordinance already substantially and satisfactorily took care of the objectives and purposes of the impugned Ordinance and, thus, there was hardly any pressing requirement or need for promulgating the impugned Ordinance at this stage and thereby to add unnecessary confusion and oddities in that regard. A survey of the pre-existing laws shows that the existing laws already provided for sympathetic and concessionary treatment of minor accused persons and offenders in the matters of capacity to commit a crime, bail and custody as is evident from the provisions of sections 82 and 83 of the Pakistan Penal Code and sections 29-B, 497 and 399 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The concept of Borstal Institutions and Reformatory Schools for young prisoners already stood recognized and1 put into practice by various legislative enactments. Even in the matter of sentencing the courts have generally been very particular in attending to the factor regarding age of the offender. In that backdrop production of the impugned Ordinance, and that too in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): Schools for young prisoners already stood recognized and1 put into practice by various legislative enactments. Even in the matter of sentencing the courts have generally been very particular in attending to the factor regarding age of the offender. In that backdrop production of the impugned Ordinance, and that too in the absence of any public debate or parliamentary discussion, has been found by us to be imprudent, to say the least, if not an exercise in superfluity at this stage. 27. On the authority of Lord'Reid in the case of Haughton v. Smith 1975 A.C. 476, 500 it is said that the law may sometimes be an ass, but it cannot be so SMME as that. The Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan had also observed in the case of Rashad ENSAN and others v. Bashir Ahmad and another [PLD 1989 SC 146] that “The law is sometimes called an ass but the Judge should, as far as it is possible, try not to become one”. Similarly in the case of MST. Aziz Begum v. Federation of Pakistan and others PLD 1990 SC 899 the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan had reiterated “the principle” that the “law may be blind, but the Judge is not”. The, infirmities, impracticalities. absurdities, obscurities and unreasonableness of the impugned Ordinance found by us above have convinced us that the said law 'does riot fit MTO and piece well with our Constitutional and legal system of dispensation of criminal justice and, thus, the same needs to be struck down in the larger interest of our society. In THS view of the matter notwithstanding any moral or legal obligation created by any international Declaration or Convention we cannot blindly or, blindfolded allow the impugned Ordinance to destroy the moral and legal fiber of our criminal justice system at this stage. According to the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1959) and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989) a child, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needs special safeguards and care, including appropriate legal protection. However, the said international instruments did not provide anything for a ‘child’ who-has already attained physical and mental maturity and who is capable of intentional commission of serious and famous crimes. Even otherwise it has not been shown before is as to how the provisions of any such international declaration or convention have a binding effect vis-à-vis the municipal law of our country. It is a settled principle of public international law that considered in themselves, and particularly in their inception, all declarations, conventions or even treaties WW. are, formally, only a source of obligation rather than a source of law. A statute is always, from its inception, law whereas a declaration, convention or treaty may reflect or lead to law but, particularly MN its inception, is not, as such, law. A source of international obligation cannot be allowed by us to, through its premature local application, become a source of our domestic

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): is always, from its inception, law whereas a declaration, convention or treaty may reflect or lead to law but, particularly MN its inception, is not, as such, law. A source of international obligation cannot be allowed by us to, through its premature local application, become a source of our domestic social doom. 28. It ought not to be ignored Or overlooked in this context that the. West has reached its present state and stage of criminal law and criminology after centuries of social and behavioral developments peculiar to its own culture and history and the impact and real results of its reforms in this regard are yet to be properly assessed and examined. We, thus, cannot blindly modulate, our own policies and approaches and emulate the Western standards MN this regard without appropriate social advancement and _ behavioral development in terms of our own social patterns and outlooks. In his book titled “The Young Offender’ (published by Penguin Books, Ltd. England in 1967) D. J. West had found that according to the published statistics the young offenders in England were mostly involved in crimes like petty theft, larceny, breaking and enter mg property, robbery, simple violence, sexual delinquency and to some extent fraud. In his words most of such reported crimes “were rather trivial’. He had found that: “violence constituted no more than ten percent of the total of offenses. Among these offenses of violence, no more than six percent led to serious jury or death. The circumstances of the offenses divided into three groups of roughly equal number: youngsters brawling amongst themselves, fights with the police in the course of arrests, and attacks made on others in the course of thefts. In addition, there were a few cases of family squabbles. In the bulk of offenses the violence consisted of punching or pushing aside, and the injury was trivial or technical’. He had gone on to observe that: “At the same time one must never lose sight of the fact that, though the majority of young offenders may not commit very’ serious crimes, a small minority are as dangerous as anyone can ever be, and are responsible for some of the most atrocious, and brutal crimes on the record. Robbery with violence is most frequent amongst young men in their late teens or very early twenties. In the case of murder, it is often pointed out that the majority of offenders are over thirty years of age and that most of them are ordinarily law-abiding citizens who have attacked one of their own family under the influence of insanity or serious mental stress.” He had added that: ‘Most of the offenses of juveniles lack the gravity and substance, or the scheming and planning, which the public associates with crime. Even when one examines the crimes of boys from approved schools, many of whom are confirmed recidivists, it appears that their range is mostly limited to Moor thefts and traffic offenses, and that serious violence, sexual assaults and professionally organized

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): the scheming and planning, which the public associates with crime. Even when one examines the crimes of boys from approved schools, many of whom are confirmed recidivists, it appears that their range is mostly limited to Moor thefts and traffic offenses, and that serious violence, sexual assaults and professionally organized crimes are most. uncommon. A somewhat older age group, the late teens and early twenties, includes some of the most dangerously violent. offenders in existence, but fortunately they are very rare, and have little in common with the general run of young thieves or sporadic hooligans. The over-all impression left behind from a cursory examination of the statistical trends is that though the numbers are enormous they mostly stand for minor offenses.” If England is to be taken as a representative sample of the Western society or standards then the above analysis by D. J. West highlights the fact that the criminal trends in the West sharply differ from those in our society. It has already been observed by us above that in our society it is not uncommon for young persons to be involved in serious and heinous crimes like murder, gang-rape, terrorism and trafficking in narcotics, etc. and the impugned Ordinance, through the concessions visualized by it in. the matters of bail, trial, sentence and probation, contains a serious potential for aggravating the situation in this regard besides providing incentives and impetus to older members of the society to prompt their young ones to commit such crimes. Today the youth in the West is, by and large, not involved in the serious crimes BMG committed by our youth and this trend in the West has evolved over a period of centuries. There were times when young persons in the West were prone to committing serious offenses, and they were also dealt with and sentenced appropriately and accordingly’. D. J. West had observed that: “On the scale of history, methods of disposal of convicted offenders of any age other than by death, flogging or imprisonment under highly deprived conditions are quite recent developments. The hanging of small children used to be “by no means unusual’ in England. In 1816, Samuel Reilly, in pleading unsuccessfully before the House of Commons for the abolition of hanging as. a penalty for shoplifting, mentioned the case of a ten-year-old boy at that very moment in Newgate Prison under sentence of death. In fact, since crime has always been, a youthful activity, most of those hanged in the days when thieves were able to execution were youngsters. The English Solicitor general, MN 1785, noted that nine out of ten offenders - hanged at that time were under twenty-one. In the first part of the nineteenth century, in England as in most other countries children and young persons, both those convicted. And those awaiting trial, were sent, to the same appalling prisons as adults, where no doubt they were quickly depraved and brutalized by the experience. In 1817, the Second Report of the House, of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): nineteenth century, in England as in most other countries children and young persons, both those convicted. And those awaiting trial, were sent, to the same appalling prisons as adults, where no doubt they were quickly depraved and brutalized by the experience. In 1817, the Second Report of the House, of Commons Committee on the State. of the Police in the Metropolis, reported that in the previous year the new prison at Clerkenwell had received 399. felons aged from nine to nineteen, and that young and old were mixed indiscriminately, regardless. of the nature or gravity of their offenses. The report went on to, describe how petty street pilferers, many of whom might be boys just starting a career of, crime, were ‘usually committed for a short time to prison, sometimes seriously flogged, and then, without a shilling in their pockets, turned loose upon the world more hardened in character than ever’. Sir Edmund Du Cane, writing of the same period, 1816, noted that of the 3000 prisoners in London aged under twenty a half were juveniles under seventeen.” In his book titled ‘The Law Relating To Children’ (published by Butterworth's, London in 1973) H. K. Bevan had, in relation to "orders that may be passed against juvenile offenders by criminal courts, observed as follows: “Whatever view earlier law or practice may have adopted concerning the punishment of juveniles and there are indications of some mitigation in their favor- certainly by the 17th century the principle of equality was firmly established, with no distinction BMG drawn between juvenile and adult offenders in the forms of punishment that could be inflicted. Depending upon the-penalties attaching to the particular offense committed, juveniles, like adults’, could be hanged, transported, imprisoned, subjected to various forms of corporal punishment or fined. In the 18th century cases of juveniles being sentenced to death were quite common, and sometimes the sentence was carried out. Nevertheless, there was a distinct reluctance to execute children, save for a period at the beginning of the 19th century when there was apparently some readiness to do so in order to check the practice of parents ordering their children to steal on the assumption that the latter would escape the penalty because of their age. This stricter attitude seems to have, been short-lived; yet, it was only with the passing of the Children Act 1908 that sentence of death was abolished in respect of persons under the age of 16. The steep rise in the number of juvenile offenders from 1800 onwards is, however, only partly explained by parental pressures. The main cause lay in the new social conditions created by the Industrial Revolution. Overpopulated urban areas soon became fertile breeding grounds for juvenile offenders, many of whom, especially NM London, frequented the notorious “flash houses”, which served as social centers for debauchery and the organization of criminal activities. That juvenile delinquency was one of the main social problems is evidenced by the formation in quick succession of two reforming bodies both of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): juvenile offenders, many of whom, especially NM London, frequented the notorious “flash houses”, which served as social centers for debauchery and the organization of criminal activities. That juvenile delinquency was one of the main social problems is evidenced by the formation in quick succession of two reforming bodies both of which devoted much of the work to inquiries into the reasons for its widespread existence. These were the Society to Inquire to Causes of Juvenile Delinquency, founded in 1815, and the Society for the Improvement of Prison Discipline and for the Reformation of Juvenile Offenders, founded in 1818. But the solution to the problem would not be found merely in inquiries of this kid. Reformers recognized also the need for mitigation of the severity of the criminal law and the introduction of separate methods for dealing with juvenile offenders. The immediate response of the legislature was modest. As we have seen, its relevant contribution to the substantive law was essentially to extend summary Jurisdiction over young offenders, but gradually much more began to be done with regard to the treatment of young offenders. It will be seen that some of the orders which a court may make today owe their origin to 19th. century legislation. (Emphasis has been supplied) It was in that backdrop that, according to D. J. West and H, K. Bevan, the process of reform started and progressed in England piece by piece and through such a progression of gradual and steady historical and.socko-legal developments the said process has reached its present stage. It may be said that children in the West have by now been, by and large, tamed and disciplined by centuries of social and legal guidance and instruction, and it would be naive to WW. believe that we can cover this distance of centuries through one quantum leap or to expect that our peculiar socko-legal culture-would undergo a’ drastic metamorphosis through one stroke of pen or through introduction of one Ordinance. Was it not Sir Francis Bacon who had observed mm his essay titled ‘Of Innovations’ that: “As the births of living creatures at first are L-shaped, so are all novations, which are the births of time. Yet, notwithstanding, as those that first bring honor into their family are commonly more worthy than the most that succeed, so the first precedent (if it is good) is seldom attained by imitation For 111, to man’s nature as it stands perverted, hath a natural Motion, strongest in continuance; but Good, as a forced motion, strongest at first. Surely every medicine is. a novation and he that will apply new remedies must expect new evils. For time; is the greatest innovator; and wisdom and counsel shall not alter them to the better, what shall be the end? It is true that what is settled by custom, though it is not good, yet at least it is fit; and ' those, things which have long gone together, are, as it were, confederate within themselves; whereas new things piece

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): alter them to the better, what shall be the end? It is true that what is settled by custom, though it is not good, yet at least it is fit; and ' those, things which have long gone together, are, as it were, confederate within themselves; whereas new things piece not so, well; but, though they help by their utility, yet they trouble by their inconformity. Besides, they are like strangers, more ' admired, and less favored: All this is true, if time stood still; which contrariwise move so round that a forward retention of custom is as turbulent a thing as an innovation; and they that reverence too many old times, are but a scorn to the new. It were good, therefore, that men in their innovations, would follow the example of time itself which indeed Monteith, greatly, but quietly, and by degrees scarce to be perceived; for otherwise, whatsoever is new is Unlooked for; and ever it mends some, and pairs other; and he that is Holden takes it as a fortune, and thanks the time and he that is hurt, for a wrong, and imputed it to the author. It is good also not to try experiments in States, except the necessity be urgent, or the utility evident; and well to beware, that it be the reformation that drawer on the change; and not the desire of the change that pretended the reformation: and lastly, that the novelty, though it is not rejected, yet be held for a suspect; and, as the Scripture saith, that “we make a stand upon the ancient way, and then look about us, and discover what is the straight and right way, and so to walk in TT’. 29. For what has been discussed above we have entertained no manner of doubt that most of the provisions of the impugned Ordinance, in the words of Bacon, “piece not so well’ with the Constitutional and legal dispensation of criminal justice in' our country and they also “trouble by their conformity” because, perhaps, it was not strictly the reformation that drew on the change but just the desire for change that had pretended the reformation. Our societal attitudes do not appear to be MPE enough at this stage for the desired change. A quantum leap may be possible mm the fields of science or technology, but the same is surely not achievable in social or legal trends or attitudes which take some time to: evolve. It appears that the impugned Ordinance has tried to achieve through a revolution an objective which was fit for evolution and measured growth. An imported romance for a young offender should not have been allowed to stretch the legal dispensation in our country to the limits of absurdity. How can we forget in this context that the concept of avoidance of phased-fil-arz is a cornerstone of Islamic system of dispensation of criminal justice. We are sanguine that if the impugned Ordinance had been preceded by a parliamentary or at

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 15?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 15 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2004-12-06): dispensation in our country to the limits of absurdity. How can we forget in this context that the concept of avoidance of phased-fil-arz is a cornerstone of Islamic system of dispensation of criminal justice. We are sanguine that if the impugned Ordinance had been preceded by a parliamentary or at least a public debate then the same would not have suffered from the maladies and infirmities noticed by us therein. 30. On the basis of the reasons recorded above this wait petition is allowed and the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 (Federal Ordinance No. XXJI of 2000) is hereby struck off the statute book on account of its BMG unreasonable, unconstitutional and impracticable. It, however, goes without saying that the Parliament may, if it so desires, 1 enact a fresh law mm this regard after attending to all the infirmities of the impugned Ordinance highlighted by us above. As a necessary consequence of the declaration made and the order passed by us above the Juvenile Courts established under the said Ordinance shall stand abolished forthwith and all the cases pending before all such Courts shall ipso facto stand transferred to the ordinary courts of competent jurisdiction. There shall be no order as to costs. 31. For the purpose of removal of possible doubt we consider that a clarification may be necessary. From the date of promulgation of the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 to the date of its annulment by us through the present judgment accused persons below the age of eighteen years involved in criminal cases: have enjoyed immunity from the sentence of death but now through annulment of the said Ordinance that immunity from the sentence of death has disappeared. By virtue of the provisions of Article T2(-1)(b) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 an accused person who has enjoyed such immunity from; the sentence of death at the time of commission of, an offense cannot subsequently, be sentenced to death. In view of this : constitutional position TT is clarified that an accused person involved in an offense committed between 'the date" of promulgation of the Juvenile justice System Ordnance, 2000 and the date of announcement of this judgment shall be well within his constitutional right to assert,and establish that he was less than eighteen years of age at the time of commission of the alleged offense and. then to claim immunity, from the. sentence of death. 32. Before parting with this judgment we would like to place on record our appreciation of the hard work put MN by the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned law officers and the valuable assistance rendered to us by the learned amici cure#&“P@k!egaldatabase.com

Question: What is case 2005 PLD 16 about?
Answer: Case 2005 PLD 16 was decided by PESHAWAR HIGH COURT on 2004-10-11. The case involved ABDUL KHALIQ (PETITIONER) VERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 14 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) - S. 42 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. VII, R.LLLAND S.9. The case was heard by SHAHZAD AKBAR KHAN, J..

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2005 PLD 16?
Answer: In case 2005 PLD 16, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 14 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) - S. 42 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. VII, R.LLLAND S.9. This case was heard in PESHAWAR HIGH COURT and decided on 2004-10-11.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2005 PLD 16?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2005 PLD 16 were: MALIK FAZAL-E-HUSSAIN FOR PETITIONER. ADAM KHAN JADOON FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SHAHZAD AKBAR KHAN, J..

Question: Who were the parties in case 2005 PLD 16?
Answer: The parties in case 2005 PLD 16 were: ABDUL KHALIQ (PETITIONER) VERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in PESHAWAR HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2005 PLD 16.
Answer: Abdul Khalid Away the civil revision petitioner has by way of this civil revision petition called in question the judgment and decree dated 11-4- 2001 passed by the learned District Judge, Harper whereby on acceptance of appeal of the respondents the suit of the petitioner was rejected in terms of Order 7, rule 11, C.P.C. 2. The short facts of the case are that the petitioner Abdul Khalid filed a declaratory suit in the Civil Court of Harper against Chairman Evacuee Trust Property assailing the Notice No.250 dated 12-5-1998 (as mentioned in the plaint) whereby a sum of Rs.69,136 was demanded as rent amount from the petitioner as the petitioner was a lessee of Plot bearing No.50-C situated in Harper. The respondent on their appearance made an application before the learned trial Court asking of the rejection of the plait on the ground that the civil Court had no jurisdiction over the matter. The application was, however, rejected by the learned trial Court on 28-4-2000. The respondent was, therefore, obliged to file an appeal before the learned District Judge. 3. After hearing the parties the learned District Judge came to the conclusion that in view of section 14 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act No.XIII of 1975 (hereafter called as the Act) the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts is barred. Owing to its relevancy section 14 is quoted bellow:- “14. Bar of jurisdiction.-Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Federal Government or an officer appointed, under this Act is empowered under this Act to determine, and no injunction, process or order shall be granted or issued by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act. ” The learned District Judge on the analysis of the relevant law and seeking guidance from the judgments reported as 1992 SCMR page 1313, 1996 SCMR 250 and 1999 MLD 2505, (Peshawar) allowed the appeal of the respondents and the plait was returned to the petitioner for its presentation before the competent forum. 4. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has vehemently argued that as the matter pertained to a dispute with regard to the enhancement of rent, therefore, it did not fall with the domain of section 14 ibid and the learned District Judge had landed in error in allowing the appeal of the respondents. He maintained that the Civil Court had the jurisdiction to decide the controversy between the parties. 5. On the other hand the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has argued that the mutant matter is patently governed by Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975) and section 14 thereof read with section 9 of C.P.C. oust the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts and the matter was exclusively governed by the Act stated above. He reiterated the judgments of Honorable Supreme Court reported as 1992 SCMR 1313 and also referred to 1995 SCMR 1748. He also made reference to clauses 8 and 9 of the agreement deed between the parties and argued that clause 8 provides that in case of any dispute the decision of the Chairman (figuring i the Act) shall be final) Similarly clause 9 provides, that lease shall be governed by the provisions of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975. 6. I have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties in the light of the record that has been gone through. The learned counsel for the petitioner although made hectic endeavor to take the matter out of the provision of section 14 referred above but am afraid his arguments do not carry and force. The matter is squarely governed by the Act and section 14 thereof clearly puts a bar on the jurisdiction of civil Court with regard to the matter enshrined therein which undoubtedly includes the instant controversy. Section 9 of Civil Procedure Code (Act V of 1908) confers general jurisdiction upon the civil Court to try all suits of civil nature and whenever the object of proceedings is the enforcement of civil rights a civil Court has jurisdiction to enter tam the suit unless its cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred. Section 9 of C.P.C. conferring general jurisdiction on the civil Courts also creates an exception for the suits the cognizance whereof is either expressly or impliedly barred. In the instant case section 14 ibid provides an express bar on the jurisdiction of civil Courts. Thus the reading of section 9 of C.P.C. and section 14 of the Act leaves no doubt in formulating a view that the jurisdiction of the civil Court in the instant matter is expressly barred. Apart from above when the question that I' am confronted with is exam med in the light of clause 9 of the agreement which has been executed by the parties, the answer would come in support of die above expressed view. Owing to its relevancy the said clause is quoted below:- ‘. That the lease shall be governed by the provisions of the Evacuee Trust Property (Management Disposal) Act, 1975 and the rules/regulations made thereunder from time to time.” 7. It is also an outstanding feature of the case that uncontrovertedly the petitioner had filed an appeal under section 16 of the Act before the Chairman and the same was dismissed against which though a revision petition could be filed in terms of section 17 of the Act, but the same was not availed. The very filing of appeal by the petitioner would lead to the conclusion that the petitioner himself yielded to the provisions of the Act and the matter was accepted to be within the domain thereof: Now at this stage even by his conduct the petitioner cannot raise the argument against the application of Act and plead for the amenability of the matter to the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts. The judgments that are cited by the learned counsel for the respondents also lend strong support to the case of the respondents. 8. In the ultimate analysis I am of the firm view that the judgment of the learned District Judge does not suffer from any infirmity or the jurisdictional defect within the contemplation of section 115, of C.P.C. Resultantly, this revision petition is dismissed with no order as to costs. Announced. Revision dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 16?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 16 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 2004-10-11): Abdul Khalid Away the civil revision petitioner has by way of this civil revision petition called in question the judgment and decree dated 11-4- 2001 passed by the learned District Judge, Harper whereby on acceptance of appeal of the respondents the suit of the petitioner was rejected in terms of Order 7, rule 11, C.P.C. 2. The short facts of the case are that the petitioner Abdul Khalid filed a declaratory suit in the Civil Court of Harper against Chairman Evacuee Trust Property assailing the Notice No.250 dated 12-5-1998 (as mentioned in the plaint) whereby a sum of Rs.69,136 was demanded as rent amount from the petitioner as the petitioner was a lessee of Plot bearing No.50-C situated in Harper. The respondent on their appearance made an application before the learned trial Court asking of the rejection of the plait on the ground that the civil Court had no jurisdiction over the matter. The application was, however, rejected by the learned trial Court on 28-4-2000. The respondent was, therefore, obliged to file an appeal before the learned District Judge. 3. After hearing the parties the learned District Judge came to the conclusion that in view of section 14 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act No.XIII of 1975 (hereafter called as the Act) the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts is barred. Owing to its relevancy section 14 is quoted bellow:- “14. Bar of jurisdiction.-Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Federal Government or an officer appointed, under this Act is empowered under this Act to determine, and no injunction, process or order shall be granted or issued by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act. ” The learned District Judge on the analysis of the relevant law and seeking guidance from the judgments reported as 1992 SCMR page 1313, 1996 SCMR 250 and 1999 MLD 2505, (Peshawar) allowed the appeal of the respondents and the plait was returned to the petitioner for its presentation before the competent forum. 4. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has vehemently argued that as the matter pertained to a dispute with regard to the enhancement of rent, therefore, it did not fall with the domain of section 14 ibid and the learned District Judge had landed in error in allowing the appeal of the respondents. He maintained that the Civil Court had the jurisdiction to decide the controversy between the parties. 5. On the other hand the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has argued that the mutant matter is patently governed by Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975) and section 14 thereof read with section 9 of C.P.C. oust the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts and the matter was exclusively governed by the Act stated above. He reiterated the judgments

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 16?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 16 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 2004-10-11): that the mutant matter is patently governed by Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975) and section 14 thereof read with section 9 of C.P.C. oust the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts and the matter was exclusively governed by the Act stated above. He reiterated the judgments of Honorable Supreme Court reported as 1992 SCMR 1313 and also referred to 1995 SCMR 1748. He also made reference to clauses 8 and 9 of the agreement deed between the parties and argued that clause 8 provides that in case of any dispute the decision of the Chairman (figuring i the Act) shall be final) Similarly clause 9 provides, that lease shall be governed by the provisions of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975. 6. I have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties in the light of the record that has been gone through. The learned counsel for the petitioner although made hectic endeavor to take the matter out of the provision of section 14 referred above but am afraid his arguments do not carry and force. The matter is squarely governed by the Act and section 14 thereof clearly puts a bar on the jurisdiction of civil Court with regard to the matter enshrined therein which undoubtedly includes the instant controversy. Section 9 of Civil Procedure Code (Act V of 1908) confers general jurisdiction upon the civil Court to try all suits of civil nature and whenever the object of proceedings is the enforcement of civil rights a civil Court has jurisdiction to enter tam the suit unless its cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred. Section 9 of C.P.C. conferring general jurisdiction on the civil Courts also creates an exception for the suits the cognizance whereof is either expressly or impliedly barred. In the instant case section 14 ibid provides an express bar on the jurisdiction of civil Courts. Thus the reading of section 9 of C.P.C. and section 14 of the Act leaves no doubt in formulating a view that the jurisdiction of the civil Court in the instant matter is expressly barred. Apart from above when the question that I' am confronted with is exam med in the light of clause 9 of the agreement which has been executed by the parties, the answer would come in support of die above expressed view. Owing to its relevancy the said clause is quoted below:- ‘. That the lease shall be governed by the provisions of the Evacuee Trust Property (Management Disposal) Act, 1975 and the rules/regulations made thereunder from time to time.” 7. It is also an outstanding feature of the case that uncontrovertedly the petitioner had filed an appeal under section 16 of the Act before the Chairman and the same was dismissed against which though a revision petition could be filed in terms of section 17 of the Act, but the same was not availed. The very filing of appeal by the petitioner would lead to the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2005 PLD 16?
Answer: From case 2005 PLD 16 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 2004-10-11): appeal under section 16 of the Act before the Chairman and the same was dismissed against which though a revision petition could be filed in terms of section 17 of the Act, but the same was not availed. The very filing of appeal by the petitioner would lead to the conclusion that the petitioner himself yielded to the provisions of the Act and the matter was accepted to be within the domain thereof: Now at this stage even by his conduct the petitioner cannot raise the argument against the application of Act and plead for the amenability of the matter to the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts. The judgments that are cited by the learned counsel for the respondents also lend strong support to the case of the respondents. 8. In the ultimate analysis I am of the firm view that the judgment of the learned District Judge does not suffer from any infirmity or the jurisdictional defect within the contemplation of section 115, of C.P.C. Resultantly, this revision petition is dismissed with no order as to costs. Announced. Revision dismissed.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 76 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 76 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1962-03-31. The case involved SULTAN AHMAD AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS NUR AHMAD (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include REHABILITATION) AND RESETTLEMENT SCHEME (PUNJAB) - PART ITI, PARAS. 46 AND 46 (A). The case was heard by NASIR AHMAD, MEMBER BOARD OF REVENUE WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 76?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 76, the court applied the following statutes: REHABILITATION) AND RESETTLEMENT SCHEME (PUNJAB) - PART ITI, PARAS. 46 AND 46 (A). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1962-03-31.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 76?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 76 were: HASAN ALI FOR APPELLANT RESPONDENT IN PERSON.. The judges presiding were: NASIR AHMAD, MEMBER BOARD OF REVENUE WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 76?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 76 were: SULTAN AHMAD AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS NUR AHMAD (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 76.
Answer: This case relates to the inheritance of a refugee night-holder who is alleged to have died in India before migration took place. The Collector and the learned Additional Commissioner both held that paragraph 46 of the Rehabilitation Resettlement Scheme did not apply to this case as the right-holder in the land had not migrated to Pakistan and was thus not a refugee and for that reason succession to his immovable property would be governed by Customary Law. This question has been gone into at considerable length by the learned Judges of the West Pakistan High Court in Umar Dara Ali v. Hushed Ali They were pleased to observe as follows “At first sight the argument has an appeal but when analyzed it has no force. If the land MN relation to which mutations of inheritance are sanctioned by the Rehabilitation Authorities under Resettlement Scheme were situated in Pakistan, then certainly the provisions of the Sharia Act or paragraphs 46 and 46 (a) of the Scheme could not be made applicable to them. That, however, is not the case for the estates left by the deceased right-holders are situated in India over which the Rehabilitation and the Revenue Authorities of Pakistan had no jurisdiction. It was, therefore, not intended to determine the rights of the heirs of deceased right-holders in the estates abandoned by them in India while deciding the impugned mutations. These mutations are in fact a measure to determine who shall be allotted land in Pakistan in lieu of the land abandoned by the deceased right-holders...” After discussing the various situations likely to arise the learned Judges held that the law of inheritance applicable to the estate of right-holder who had died before the enforcement of the Sharia Act would be the provisions of paragraphs 46 and 46 (a) of the Resettlement Scheme as amended up-to-date. Following this decision I would hold that the provision of these two paragraphs will govern succession in the present case. I would accordingly accept the revision petition set aside the orders passed by the officers below and direct that the mutation should be attested afresh in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 46 of Resettlement Scheme, s. b. Petition accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 76?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 76 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-03-31): This case relates to the inheritance of a refugee night-holder who is alleged to have died in India before migration took place. The Collector and the learned Additional Commissioner both held that paragraph 46 of the Rehabilitation Resettlement Scheme did not apply to this case as the right-holder in the land had not migrated to Pakistan and was thus not a refugee and for that reason succession to his immovable property would be governed by Customary Law. This question has been gone into at considerable length by the learned Judges of the West Pakistan High Court in Umar Dara Ali v. Hushed Ali They were pleased to observe as follows “At first sight the argument has an appeal but when analyzed it has no force. If the land MN relation to which mutations of inheritance are sanctioned by the Rehabilitation Authorities under Resettlement Scheme were situated in Pakistan, then certainly the provisions of the Sharia Act or paragraphs 46 and 46 (a) of the Scheme could not be made applicable to them. That, however, is not the case for the estates left by the deceased right-holders are situated in India over which the Rehabilitation and the Revenue Authorities of Pakistan had no jurisdiction. It was, therefore, not intended to determine the rights of the heirs of deceased right-holders in the estates abandoned by them in India while deciding the impugned mutations. These mutations are in fact a measure to determine who shall be allotted land in Pakistan in lieu of the land abandoned by the deceased right-holders...” After discussing the various situations likely to arise the learned Judges held that the law of inheritance applicable to the estate of right-holder who had died before the enforcement of the Sharia Act would be the provisions of paragraphs 46 and 46 (a) of the Resettlement Scheme as amended up-to-date. Following this decision I would hold that the provision of these two paragraphs will govern succession in the present case. I would accordingly accept the revision petition set aside the orders passed by the officers below and direct that the mutation should be attested afresh in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 46 of Resettlement Scheme, s. b. Petition accepted.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 352 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 352 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1962-02-08. The case involved DYAL SINGH COLLEGE TRUST SOCIETY THROUH IQBAL HUSSAIN, G ENERAL AT TORNEY OF THE TRUST PETITIONER VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. AND 41 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170. The case was heard by SHABIR AHMAD AND ABDUR RAHIM KHARAL.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 352, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. AND 41 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1962-02-08.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 352 were: MEHBUB ELAHI FOR PETITIONER. MAJOR ISHAQ MUHAMMAD KHAN, SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER (LEGAL) FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 2.M. ANWAR ADVOCATE-GENERAL AND ZAHIR ABBAS FOR RESPONDENT NO. 3.. The judges presiding were: SHABIR AHMAD AND ABDUR RAHIM KHARAL.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 352 were: DYAL SINGH COLLEGE TRUST SOCIETY THROUH IQBAL HUSSAIN, G ENERAL AT TORNEY OF THE TRUST PETITIONER VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 352.
Answer: JUDGMBNT Shabbir Ahmad, J. -This order will govern this writ petition and Writ Petition No. 65 of 1961 not only because the parties m both these cases are almost the same but also because the main questions that fall for determination in the two cases are almost identical. 2. The petitioner in both the writ petitions TS the Deal Singh College Trust Society and the respondents in Writ Petition No. 61 of 1861 are the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore, Government of Pakistan, through the Secretary, Ministry of Rehabilitation, and the Evacuee Property Trust Board, Government of Pakistan, through its Chairman, while the respondents in the other petition are the above-mentioned three persons and Messes Progressive Papers Ltd. Rattan Hand Road, Lahore. Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 was necessitated by the order passed, on the 15th of December 1960, by Maud Ahmad, J, in his capacity of Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, whereby it was declared that the Deal Singh College Trust was evacuee property and its properties BMG evacuee vested in the Evacuee Property Trust Board, Government of Pakistan. The writ petitions have been brought with a view to having the order of the Custodian in this behalf declared void and ineffectual. The order of the Custodian is directly in question in Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961, but as TT will reflect on the scheme of the Deal Singh College Trust and the Tribune Trust, which too like the Deal Singh College Trust was created by Raja Sir Deal Singh Majestic, a great philanthropist of bis time, attack was made on the order of the Custodian even MN the other case. 3. Before proceeding further, I would mention a few facts which are bound to have a direct bearing on the decision. By his will registered on the 14th of September 1898, Raja Sir Deal Singh Majestic created some charitable trusts of which mention at this stage need only be made of the Deal Singh College Trust and the Tribune Trust. He appointed some trustees and laid down a scheme for the working of the trusts. Both these trusts were being worked according to the will of their founder till the middle of the year 1947, but when, in the month of August 1947, British India was divided into two Dominions, namely, Pakistan and India, the non-Muslim trustees of the Deal Singh College Trust left this part of the Subcontinent of British India and went to reside in India. At the time of the partition of British India, the Secretary of the Trust was Mr. Anand Kumar who, before he left, appointed Sh. Abdul Had, who was then a Member of the Judicial Branch of the Punjab Civil Service, and Mr. Acid Ali, a professor in the Deal Singh College, Lahore, to carry on the work of the trust. Subsequently, the trustees of the Deal Singh College trust, in a meeting held in India, conferred on Sh. Abdul Had and Mr. Acid Ali certain powers with regard to the trust. Sheikh Abdul Had and Mr. Acid Ali continued managing the trust for some years but in the year 1959, the then Advocate-General of the Province instituted a suit under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure for removal of the two trustees and for appointment of other trustees and framing of a scheme. Attempts made by interested persons to have the suit shelved failed and on its being transferred to this Court for being heard by it in the exercise of its extraordinary original civil jurisdiction the suit was dealt with by Justice B. Z. Haikus who was then a Judge of this Court. The suit resulted in the appointment of nine trustees and the removal of Sh. Abdul Had and Mr. Acid Ali and the management passing into the hands of the trustees appointed under orders of this Court. The trustees appointed by the Court were managing the property when questions arose with regard to three plots of land situated on the Tibet Road, Lahore, whether they were the property of the Deal SMG College Trust or not. This question was raised before the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property Lahore, by the Deal Singh College Trust Society by lodging application under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, against Sheikh Hushed AH, Khan Muhammad Khan and Mr. Durrani, by which application the Trust prayed that It be declared that the property in possession of these three persons belonged to the Trust and was not evacuee property. The applications were resisted by Sheikh Hushed Al and Khan Muhammad Khan but not by Mr. Durant. The Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property came to the conclusion that the Society had failed to prove that the disputed plots belonged to the Trust, and he further held that the applications were barred by limitation. Against these orders the Deal Singh College Trust Society lodged appeals to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, and it was in these appeals that the Custodian of Evacuee Property passed the orders which the Society has prayed in Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 to be made inoperative and ineffectual. At the time when the impugned order was passed, the relevant law on the point that arises was contained MN section 7 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XIT of 1957), which section is in the following terms “(1) All evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed always to have vested in the Custodian with effect from the first day of March 1947, (2) Where any evacuee property which has vested in the Custodian or of which possession has been taken by the Custodian is property in trust for a public purpose of a religious or charitable nature, it shall be lawful for the Central Government, notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument of trust or any law for the time BMG in force, to appoint, by general or special order, new trustees in place of the evacuee trustees and the property shall remain vested in the Custodian or in his possession only until such time as the new trustees are SO appointed ; and pending the appointment of such new trustees the trust property and the come thereof shall be applied by the Custodian for fulfilling, as far as possible, the purpose of the trust. (3) Where any property in Pakistan belonging to a joint stock Company has vested in or been taken possession of by any person exercising the powers of a Custodian under any law in force immediately before the first day of January 1957, nothing contained in clause (3) of section 2 shall affect the operation of subsection, but the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, direct that the Custodian shall be divested or dispossessed of any such property in such manner and after such period as may be specified in the notification.”’ However, at the time when Justice Raikou disposed of the suit under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure on the 21st of February 1957, the law applicable to evacuee property was the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1956, the sixth section of which dealt with the matter. This sixth section read as follows “(1) All evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed always to have vested in the Custodian with effect from the first day of March 1947. (2) Where any evacuee property is properly held m trust for religious or charitable purposes, the property shall remain vested in the Custodian only till such time as fresh trustees are appointed in the manner provided by law, and pending the appointment of fresh trustees the trust property and the income thereof shall be applied by the Custodian for fulfilling, as far as possible, the purposes of the trust. (3) Where any property, in Pakistan belonging to a joint stock company has vested in or been taken possession of by any person exercising the powers of a Custodian under any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Ordinance, nothing contamed in clause (3) of section 2 shall affect the operation of subsection, but the Central Government may buy notification MN the official Gazette direct that the Custodian shall be divested or dispossessed of any such property in such manner and after such period as may be specified in the notification.” The Ordinance of 1956 had replaced the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949) which by its sixth section, made provisions regarding evacuee trust property, 4. Mr. Meh bub Elah, learned counsel for the Deal SMG College Trust Society, the petitioner in both the writ petitions, contended that the property of the Deal Singh College Trust, which was evacuee property, lost its character when Mr. Justice B. Z. Haikus, in exercise of the powers conferred on Civil Courts under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, appointed new trustees in place of the old ones, and, therefore, the find mg of the Custodian that the property of the Deal Singh College Trust was evacuee property was unsustainable in law. Learned counsel for the petitioner added that as the order of Justice Haikus was passed at a time when Ordinance of 1956 was in force, the fact that the Act of 1957, in its seventh section, contained a provision whereby the Central Government was authorized to appoint trustees for evacuee trust properties could not make the order of Justice Haikus effectual and the property of the Deal Singh College Trust, which had lost its evacuee character by reason of the appointment of trustees under orders of the Court, continued to retain its non-evacuee character and, consequently, could not be dealt with by the Central Government or by the Evacuee Properties Trust Board set up by Government. It appears to me that the approach of learned counsel for the petitioner to the main question that arises MN Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 is misconceived. The law is clear on the post that the decision of whether or not any property is evacuee property TS within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, and no Court can hold any property to be evacuee or non-evacuee especially if the Custodian has given a finding one way or the other. That being the law, it appears to me that the decision of the Custodian that the property in dispute was evacuee property cannot be questioned by this Court when acting In the exercise of its jurisdiction to issue a writ, which is the only jurisdiction which this Court has with regard to the orders of the Custodian regarding any property being evacuee in character or otherwise. Learned counsel for the petitioner overlooked the fact that there is a marked difference between powers of this Court when exercising appellate or revisional jurisdiction and when dealing with a case in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. A Court having appellate or revisional jurisdiction can set aside an order on almost any reasonable ground unless the exercise of appellate or revisional powers is limited by law only to certain specified grounds, but powers that can be exercised are different and limited in scope when the Court exercises powers to issue a writ. The writ that the petitioner prays for in Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 is clearly one of certiorari which does not primarily issue unless the Tribunal of special jurisdiction whose order is questioned has exercised a jurisdiction which it did not possess or has refused to exercise a jurisdiction which it possessed. While dealing, in the exercise of its powers of revision, with orders of Courts subordinate to it, the High Court can pass any order that it tanks fit if the Court below has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law or has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity, but I am Clearly of the view that when dealing with whether a writ of certiorari should issue or not. the Court has to confine itself to the consideration of whether or not the Tribunal whose order is under consideration has exceeded its jurisdiction or has declined to exercise a jurisdiction which it admittedly possessed. The question whether or not the Tribunal of special jurisdiction had acted illegally or with material irregularity in the exercise of its jurisdiction can hardly be a proper subject for consideration in a writ petition, though I might add that if by giving a wrong decision on a question of law the Tribunal of special jurisdiction has assumed or declined jurisdiction the case will be a proper one for exercise of writ jurisdiction. A wrong decision on a question of law unless it results in exercise of jurisdiction which does not exist or in a failure to exercise a jurisdiction which does exist cannot be treated to be purely a question of jurisdiction and there is much truth in the saying that a Tribunal which has the jurisdiction to decide a question has jurisdiction to decide TT rightly as well as wrongly. A wrong decision on a question of law, apart from the one which results in the exercise of jurisdiction which the Tribunal does not possess, or refused to exercise jurisdiction which the Tribunal possesses, cannot be deemed to be a question of jurisdiction when the question to be considered TS whether the power to issue a writ of certiorari should be exercised. 5. In view of what I have said above, It would appear to be unnecessary to examine the correctness or otherwise of the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner to the effect that as soon as trustees for the Deal Singh College were appointed by Justice B. Z. Haikus on the 21st of February 1957, its property ceased to be evacuee property for which contention support was sought from the fact that section 6 of the Ordinance of 1936 was to the effect that on appointment of trustees the property shall cease to vest in the Custodian. If the law were that only that property could be evacuee property which vested in the Custodian, the contention of Mr. Mah bub Elah would have had weight because subsection (2) of section 6 of the Evacuee Property Ordinance, 1956, said that evacuee trust properties will remain vested in the Custodian only till such time as trustees were appointed under the law, but as the law vested all evacuee properties in the Custodian and did not say that only that property shall be deemed to be evacuee property which was declared to have vested in the Custodian, the provision of law relied upon by Sheikh Mah bub Elah is not of that assistance to the petitioner as the learned counsel insisted that it was. 6. What I have said above will have made it clear that in my option Writ Petition No, 61 of 1961 has no merit. It was admitted by learned counsel for the petitioner, and in my opinion rightly, that if this Court could grant no relief with regard to the property which was the subject-matter of Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961, it could grant none with regard to property which was the subject-matter of WNT Petition No. 65 of 1961, and as I have held that the decision of the Custodian with regard to the property of the Deal Singh College Trust being evacuee property cannot be questioned by means of a wait petition, Writ Petition No. 65 of 1961 must like Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 fail in its entirety. I would, therefore, dismiss both the writ petitions but would pass no order as to cost in ADY of than. Abdul Rahim Khara1. J.-I agree. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 352 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1962-02-08): JUDGMBNT Shabbir Ahmad, J. -This order will govern this writ petition and Writ Petition No. 65 of 1961 not only because the parties m both these cases are almost the same but also because the main questions that fall for determination in the two cases are almost identical. 2. The petitioner in both the writ petitions TS the Deal Singh College Trust Society and the respondents in Writ Petition No. 61 of 1861 are the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore, Government of Pakistan, through the Secretary, Ministry of Rehabilitation, and the Evacuee Property Trust Board, Government of Pakistan, through its Chairman, while the respondents in the other petition are the above-mentioned three persons and Messes Progressive Papers Ltd. Rattan Hand Road, Lahore. Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 was necessitated by the order passed, on the 15th of December 1960, by Maud Ahmad, J, in his capacity of Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, whereby it was declared that the Deal Singh College Trust was evacuee property and its properties BMG evacuee vested in the Evacuee Property Trust Board, Government of Pakistan. The writ petitions have been brought with a view to having the order of the Custodian in this behalf declared void and ineffectual. The order of the Custodian is directly in question in Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961, but as TT will reflect on the scheme of the Deal Singh College Trust and the Tribune Trust, which too like the Deal Singh College Trust was created by Raja Sir Deal Singh Majestic, a great philanthropist of bis time, attack was made on the order of the Custodian even MN the other case. 3. Before proceeding further, I would mention a few facts which are bound to have a direct bearing on the decision. By his will registered on the 14th of September 1898, Raja Sir Deal Singh Majestic created some charitable trusts of which mention at this stage need only be made of the Deal Singh College Trust and the Tribune Trust. He appointed some trustees and laid down a scheme for the working of the trusts. Both these trusts were being worked according to the will of their founder till the middle of the year 1947, but when, in the month of August 1947, British India was divided into two Dominions, namely, Pakistan and India, the non-Muslim trustees of the Deal Singh College Trust left this part of the Subcontinent of British India and went to reside in India. At the time of the partition of British India, the Secretary of the Trust was Mr. Anand Kumar who, before he left, appointed Sh. Abdul Had, who was then a Member of the Judicial Branch of the Punjab Civil Service, and Mr. Acid Ali, a professor in the Deal Singh College, Lahore, to carry on the work of the trust. Subsequently, the trustees of the Deal Singh College trust, in a meeting held in India, conferred on Sh. Abdul Had and Mr. Acid Ali certain

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 352 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1962-02-08): of the Punjab Civil Service, and Mr. Acid Ali, a professor in the Deal Singh College, Lahore, to carry on the work of the trust. Subsequently, the trustees of the Deal Singh College trust, in a meeting held in India, conferred on Sh. Abdul Had and Mr. Acid Ali certain powers with regard to the trust. Sheikh Abdul Had and Mr. Acid Ali continued managing the trust for some years but in the year 1959, the then Advocate-General of the Province instituted a suit under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure for removal of the two trustees and for appointment of other trustees and framing of a scheme. Attempts made by interested persons to have the suit shelved failed and on its being transferred to this Court for being heard by it in the exercise of its extraordinary original civil jurisdiction the suit was dealt with by Justice B. Z. Haikus who was then a Judge of this Court. The suit resulted in the appointment of nine trustees and the removal of Sh. Abdul Had and Mr. Acid Ali and the management passing into the hands of the trustees appointed under orders of this Court. The trustees appointed by the Court were managing the property when questions arose with regard to three plots of land situated on the Tibet Road, Lahore, whether they were the property of the Deal SMG College Trust or not. This question was raised before the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property Lahore, by the Deal Singh College Trust Society by lodging application under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, against Sheikh Hushed AH, Khan Muhammad Khan and Mr. Durrani, by which application the Trust prayed that It be declared that the property in possession of these three persons belonged to the Trust and was not evacuee property. The applications were resisted by Sheikh Hushed Al and Khan Muhammad Khan but not by Mr. Durant. The Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property came to the conclusion that the Society had failed to prove that the disputed plots belonged to the Trust, and he further held that the applications were barred by limitation. Against these orders the Deal Singh College Trust Society lodged appeals to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, and it was in these appeals that the Custodian of Evacuee Property passed the orders which the Society has prayed in Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 to be made inoperative and ineffectual. At the time when the impugned order was passed, the relevant law on the point that arises was contained MN section 7 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XIT of 1957), which section is in the following terms “(1) All evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed always to have vested in the Custodian with effect from the first day of March 1947, (2) Where any evacuee property which has vested in the Custodian or of which possession has been taken by the Custodian

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 352 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1962-02-08): the following terms “(1) All evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed always to have vested in the Custodian with effect from the first day of March 1947, (2) Where any evacuee property which has vested in the Custodian or of which possession has been taken by the Custodian is property in trust for a public purpose of a religious or charitable nature, it shall be lawful for the Central Government, notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument of trust or any law for the time BMG in force, to appoint, by general or special order, new trustees in place of the evacuee trustees and the property shall remain vested in the Custodian or in his possession only until such time as the new trustees are SO appointed ; and pending the appointment of such new trustees the trust property and the come thereof shall be applied by the Custodian for fulfilling, as far as possible, the purpose of the trust. (3) Where any property in Pakistan belonging to a joint stock Company has vested in or been taken possession of by any person exercising the powers of a Custodian under any law in force immediately before the first day of January 1957, nothing contained in clause (3) of section 2 shall affect the operation of subsection, but the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, direct that the Custodian shall be divested or dispossessed of any such property in such manner and after such period as may be specified in the notification.”’ However, at the time when Justice Raikou disposed of the suit under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure on the 21st of February 1957, the law applicable to evacuee property was the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1956, the sixth section of which dealt with the matter. This sixth section read as follows “(1) All evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed always to have vested in the Custodian with effect from the first day of March 1947. (2) Where any evacuee property is properly held m trust for religious or charitable purposes, the property shall remain vested in the Custodian only till such time as fresh trustees are appointed in the manner provided by law, and pending the appointment of fresh trustees the trust property and the income thereof shall be applied by the Custodian for fulfilling, as far as possible, the purposes of the trust. (3) Where any property, in Pakistan belonging to a joint stock company has vested in or been taken possession of by any person exercising the powers of a Custodian under any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Ordinance, nothing contamed in clause (3) of section 2 shall affect the operation of subsection, but the Central Government may buy notification MN the official Gazette direct that the Custodian shall be divested or dispossessed of any such property in such manner and after such period as may be specified in the notification.” The

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 352 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1962-02-08): clause (3) of section 2 shall affect the operation of subsection, but the Central Government may buy notification MN the official Gazette direct that the Custodian shall be divested or dispossessed of any such property in such manner and after such period as may be specified in the notification.” The Ordinance of 1956 had replaced the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949) which by its sixth section, made provisions regarding evacuee trust property, 4. Mr. Meh bub Elah, learned counsel for the Deal SMG College Trust Society, the petitioner in both the writ petitions, contended that the property of the Deal Singh College Trust, which was evacuee property, lost its character when Mr. Justice B. Z. Haikus, in exercise of the powers conferred on Civil Courts under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, appointed new trustees in place of the old ones, and, therefore, the find mg of the Custodian that the property of the Deal Singh College Trust was evacuee property was unsustainable in law. Learned counsel for the petitioner added that as the order of Justice Haikus was passed at a time when Ordinance of 1956 was in force, the fact that the Act of 1957, in its seventh section, contained a provision whereby the Central Government was authorized to appoint trustees for evacuee trust properties could not make the order of Justice Haikus effectual and the property of the Deal Singh College Trust, which had lost its evacuee character by reason of the appointment of trustees under orders of the Court, continued to retain its non-evacuee character and, consequently, could not be dealt with by the Central Government or by the Evacuee Properties Trust Board set up by Government. It appears to me that the approach of learned counsel for the petitioner to the main question that arises MN Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 is misconceived. The law is clear on the post that the decision of whether or not any property is evacuee property TS within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, and no Court can hold any property to be evacuee or non-evacuee especially if the Custodian has given a finding one way or the other. That being the law, it appears to me that the decision of the Custodian that the property in dispute was evacuee property cannot be questioned by this Court when acting In the exercise of its jurisdiction to issue a writ, which is the only jurisdiction which this Court has with regard to the orders of the Custodian regarding any property being evacuee in character or otherwise. Learned counsel for the petitioner overlooked the fact that there is a marked difference between powers of this Court when exercising appellate or revisional jurisdiction and when dealing with a case in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. A Court having appellate or revisional jurisdiction can set aside an order on almost any reasonable ground unless the exercise of appellate or revisional powers is

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 352 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1962-02-08): between powers of this Court when exercising appellate or revisional jurisdiction and when dealing with a case in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. A Court having appellate or revisional jurisdiction can set aside an order on almost any reasonable ground unless the exercise of appellate or revisional powers is limited by law only to certain specified grounds, but powers that can be exercised are different and limited in scope when the Court exercises powers to issue a writ. The writ that the petitioner prays for in Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 is clearly one of certiorari which does not primarily issue unless the Tribunal of special jurisdiction whose order is questioned has exercised a jurisdiction which it did not possess or has refused to exercise a jurisdiction which it possessed. While dealing, in the exercise of its powers of revision, with orders of Courts subordinate to it, the High Court can pass any order that it tanks fit if the Court below has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law or has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity, but I am Clearly of the view that when dealing with whether a writ of certiorari should issue or not. the Court has to confine itself to the consideration of whether or not the Tribunal whose order is under consideration has exceeded its jurisdiction or has declined to exercise a jurisdiction which it admittedly possessed. The question whether or not the Tribunal of special jurisdiction had acted illegally or with material irregularity in the exercise of its jurisdiction can hardly be a proper subject for consideration in a writ petition, though I might add that if by giving a wrong decision on a question of law the Tribunal of special jurisdiction has assumed or declined jurisdiction the case will be a proper one for exercise of writ jurisdiction. A wrong decision on a question of law unless it results in exercise of jurisdiction which does not exist or in a failure to exercise a jurisdiction which does exist cannot be treated to be purely a question of jurisdiction and there is much truth in the saying that a Tribunal which has the jurisdiction to decide a question has jurisdiction to decide TT rightly as well as wrongly. A wrong decision on a question of law, apart from the one which results in the exercise of jurisdiction which the Tribunal does not possess, or refused to exercise jurisdiction which the Tribunal possesses, cannot be deemed to be a question of jurisdiction when the question to be considered TS whether the power to issue a writ of certiorari should be exercised. 5. In view of what I have said above, It would appear to be unnecessary to examine the correctness or otherwise of the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner to the effect that as soon as trustees for the Deal

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 352?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 352 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1962-02-08): to issue a writ of certiorari should be exercised. 5. In view of what I have said above, It would appear to be unnecessary to examine the correctness or otherwise of the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner to the effect that as soon as trustees for the Deal Singh College were appointed by Justice B. Z. Haikus on the 21st of February 1957, its property ceased to be evacuee property for which contention support was sought from the fact that section 6 of the Ordinance of 1936 was to the effect that on appointment of trustees the property shall cease to vest in the Custodian. If the law were that only that property could be evacuee property which vested in the Custodian, the contention of Mr. Mah bub Elah would have had weight because subsection (2) of section 6 of the Evacuee Property Ordinance, 1956, said that evacuee trust properties will remain vested in the Custodian only till such time as trustees were appointed under the law, but as the law vested all evacuee properties in the Custodian and did not say that only that property shall be deemed to be evacuee property which was declared to have vested in the Custodian, the provision of law relied upon by Sheikh Mah bub Elah is not of that assistance to the petitioner as the learned counsel insisted that it was. 6. What I have said above will have made it clear that in my option Writ Petition No, 61 of 1961 has no merit. It was admitted by learned counsel for the petitioner, and in my opinion rightly, that if this Court could grant no relief with regard to the property which was the subject-matter of Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961, it could grant none with regard to property which was the subject-matter of WNT Petition No. 65 of 1961, and as I have held that the decision of the Custodian with regard to the property of the Deal Singh College Trust being evacuee property cannot be questioned by means of a wait petition, Writ Petition No. 65 of 1961 must like Writ Petition No. 61 of 1961 fail in its entirety. I would, therefore, dismiss both the writ petitions but would pass no order as to cost in ADY of than. Abdul Rahim Khara1. J.-I agree. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 112 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 112 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1962-02-20. The case involved ISLAM UD DIN PETITIONER VERSUS MUHAMMAD SULAIMAN (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by NASIR AHMED AND A. M. KHAN LEGHARI, MEMBERS BOARD OF REVENUE WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 112?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 112, the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1962-02-20.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 112?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 112 were: KH. ABDUR RAHIM AND CH. GHULAM ALI ALVI FOR PETITIONER. AFTAB AHMED FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: NASIR AHMED AND A. M. KHAN LEGHARI, MEMBERS BOARD OF REVENUE WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 112?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 112 were: ISLAM UD DIN PETITIONER VERSUS MUHAMMAD SULAIMAN (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 112.
Answer: A. M. K. Safari-This is a revision from Collector, Multan’s order dated 16-5-1961, whereby he rejected Islam-up-Dm Vassal Bhutto petitioner’s appeal and confirmed the Collector’s selection of Muhammad Suleman Rajput respondent as Lambada in the evacuee Patti of Ram Dicta Mai, Koala Alias, Thesis Cochran. I give below the merits of the parties in terms of Land Revenue Rules : Petitioner 15-(a) Hereditary Claims : Respondent Was ex-Lambada and Sued Posh. 15-(b) Extent of property in the Estate at the time of Collector’s Order : 71–5 Acres 15-(c) Personal and family services : 63–5 Acres Petitioner scores heavily as apart from being e- Lambada and Sued Posh, is a nominated member of the Union Council, Raipur. In addition, he has been a temporary Lambada since 1948, and has 6 Commendation Certificates in support of his good work. J5-(d) Personal influence, character and freedom from indebtedness : The petitioner scores on the whole and has as such been recommended by all the lower Revenue Officers. 15-(e) Musters 9 Bhutto Vassal Families Musters 39 Rajput families owning 674 acres. Respondent scores ; he has the second majority community, since Baluchi families in the village number 58. Detailed arguments have been adduced by the senior counsel on behalf of the parties as to which of them should be considered to score under rule 15-(Z>). I had made it clear that I share the views hinted at in the Full Board ruling in P LD 1958 W P (Rev.) 109 and as adopted by my learned predecessor Mr. M. Z. Khan in P LD 1960 W. P. (Rev.) 66 that improvement in status after Collector’s order should now be taken into account. On this basis detailed reports were received from the Collector, Multan, in his memo. No. 55244- M/HVC, dated 7-10-1961, which revealed that the petitioner owned 64 acres in this Chalk up to the date of the Collector’s order; while the respondent owned 71-5 canals. However, it was further made clear that shortly before the Collector’s order dated 29th July 1960, 300 canals of land were transferred in the respondent’s favor by his real brothers Muhammad Ilyas and Muhammad Ismail. J have no doubt in my mind that the transfer was Bairam and was effected with a view to bolstering up the respondent’s claim to this Lombardi. Moreover, copies of Kara Gurdwara entries have been produced to show that the area with the respondent was largely ban jar Vadim and that 7 Anna alone was being paid as land revenue in respect of it. The respondent has claimed that he has re-claimed most of it now by the installation of tube well. But this is an occurrence after the Collector’s order. As such I must hold that the petitioner scores considerably over the respondent under Rule 15 (b) also. It will be evident from the foregoing that the petitioner scores heavily in four out of the five criteria laid down in Punjab Land Revenue Rule 15. It is clear from the Collector’s order that he has preferred the respondent on the ground that he is from the second majority community of Rajputs. The Commissioner has approved him (respondent) on this ground as also because : He could not find any proof that the. petitioner was an ex-Lambada and Sued Posh : (1) that the petitioner has 52 acres in the Patti against respondent’s 71 acres ; and (I'm) that on the whole the petitioner’s residence in village Ali Deist was doubtful. As for (0 above, the Collector had given a finding that the petitioner was ex-Lambada and Sued Posh and this fact is clear from his books and records and has not been challenged before me. As such no further proofs required. As for (1), it will be clear from my detailed analysis above that the Commissioner’s view that the respondent scores under rule 15 is incorrect. With regard to the question of residence, I cannot find any room for doubt that the petitioner’s residence in the village has been duly established. It has been shown as such in the petitioner’s Arms and Shooting License from 1951 to 1955. The Police Commendation Certificate dated 2-2-1958, shows him as resident of Koala Ali Deist, as also Tonsilar and Administrator, Cochran’s Commendation Certificate dated 27-10-1959. All these,which date long before the question of the Lombardi became an issue, together with the fact that the petitioner has been a temporary Lambada and has been recommended by all the Thesis Revenue Officers and the Revenue Assistant corroborate his residence in the village. The counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that the Commissioner’s quotation in his order from ground 7 of his client’s grounds of appeal is not altogether fair, in that whereas he quoted the portion of his Ground No. that because village Raipur is contiguous and adjacent to this village, even if his alleged residence in village Raipur is taken to be correct, it will be no legal bar to his appointment as Lambada, nor will it give any preference to the respondent over him as a confession but did not quote or refer to the following clear statement in that very ground : “That it is a fact that the appellant has permanent abode in the village Koala Ali Deist, where the appellant has a Era and a residential house. The appellant had given up his residence in village Raipur long ago in favor of his married son.”

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 112?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 112 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-20): A. M. K. Safari-This is a revision from Collector, Multan’s order dated 16-5-1961, whereby he rejected Islam-up-Dm Vassal Bhutto petitioner’s appeal and confirmed the Collector’s selection of Muhammad Suleman Rajput respondent as Lambada in the evacuee Patti of Ram Dicta Mai, Koala Alias, Thesis Cochran. I give below the merits of the parties in terms of Land Revenue Rules : Petitioner 15-(a) Hereditary Claims : Respondent Was ex-Lambada and Sued Posh. 15-(b) Extent of property in the Estate at the time of Collector’s Order : 71–5 Acres 15-(c) Personal and family services : 63–5 Acres Petitioner scores heavily as apart from being e- Lambada and Sued Posh, is a nominated member of the Union Council, Raipur. In addition, he has been a temporary Lambada since 1948, and has 6 Commendation Certificates in support of his good work. J5-(d) Personal influence, character and freedom from indebtedness : The petitioner scores on the whole and has as such been recommended by all the lower Revenue Officers. 15-(e) Musters 9 Bhutto Vassal Families Musters 39 Rajput families owning 674 acres. Respondent scores ; he has the second majority community, since Baluchi families in the village number 58. Detailed arguments have been adduced by the senior counsel on behalf of the parties as to which of them should be considered to score under rule 15-(Z>). I had made it clear that I share the views hinted at in the Full Board ruling in P LD 1958 W P (Rev.) 109 and as adopted by my learned predecessor Mr. M. Z. Khan in P LD 1960 W. P. (Rev.) 66 that improvement in status after Collector’s order should now be taken into account. On this basis detailed reports were received from the Collector, Multan, in his memo. No. 55244- M/HVC, dated 7-10-1961, which revealed that the petitioner owned 64 acres in this Chalk up to the date of the Collector’s order; while the respondent owned 71-5 canals. However, it was further made clear that shortly before the Collector’s order dated 29th July 1960, 300 canals of land were transferred in the respondent’s favor by his real brothers Muhammad Ilyas and Muhammad Ismail. J have no doubt in my mind that the transfer was Bairam and was effected with a view to bolstering up the respondent’s claim to this Lombardi. Moreover, copies of Kara Gurdwara entries have been produced to show that the area with the respondent was largely ban jar Vadim and that 7 Anna alone was being paid as land revenue in respect of it. The respondent has claimed that he has re-claimed most of it now by the installation of tube well. But this is an occurrence after the Collector’s order. As such I must hold that the petitioner scores considerably over the respondent under Rule 15 (b) also. It will be evident from the foregoing that the petitioner scores heavily in four out of the five criteria laid down in Punjab Land Revenue Rule 15. It is clear from the Collector’s order

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 112?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 112 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-20): I must hold that the petitioner scores considerably over the respondent under Rule 15 (b) also. It will be evident from the foregoing that the petitioner scores heavily in four out of the five criteria laid down in Punjab Land Revenue Rule 15. It is clear from the Collector’s order that he has preferred the respondent on the ground that he is from the second majority community of Rajputs. The Commissioner has approved him (respondent) on this ground as also because : He could not find any proof that the. petitioner was an ex-Lambada and Sued Posh : (1) that the petitioner has 52 acres in the Patti against respondent’s 71 acres ; and (I'm) that on the whole the petitioner’s residence in village Ali Deist was doubtful. As for (0 above, the Collector had given a finding that the petitioner was ex-Lambada and Sued Posh and this fact is clear from his books and records and has not been challenged before me. As such no further proofs required. As for (1), it will be clear from my detailed analysis above that the Commissioner’s view that the respondent scores under rule 15 is incorrect. With regard to the question of residence, I cannot find any room for doubt that the petitioner’s residence in the village has been duly established. It has been shown as such in the petitioner’s Arms and Shooting License from 1951 to 1955. The Police Commendation Certificate dated 2-2-1958, shows him as resident of Koala Ali Deist, as also Tonsilar and Administrator, Cochran’s Commendation Certificate dated 27-10-1959. All these,which date long before the question of the Lombardi became an issue, together with the fact that the petitioner has been a temporary Lambada and has been recommended by all the Thesis Revenue Officers and the Revenue Assistant corroborate his residence in the village. The counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that the Commissioner’s quotation in his order from ground 7 of his client’s grounds of appeal is not altogether fair, in that whereas he quoted the portion of his Ground No. that because village Raipur is contiguous and adjacent to this village, even if his alleged residence in village Raipur is taken to be correct, it will be no legal bar to his appointment as Lambada, nor will it give any preference to the respondent over him as a confession but did not quote or refer to the following clear statement in that very ground : “That it is a fact that the appellant has permanent abode in the village Koala Ali Deist, where the appellant has a Era and a residential house. The appellant had given up his residence in village Raipur long ago in favor of his married son.”

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 368 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 368 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1962-02-28. The case involved HAJI DAWOOD CO. (APPELLANT) VERSUS HAJI MUHAMMAD IQBAL AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XLI, R. TRANSFER OF PROPERTYACT (IV OF 1882) - S. 114 REGISTRATION ACT (XVI OF 1908) - SS. 17 AND 49 PROVISO KARACHI RENT RESTRICTION ACT (VIII OF 1953) - S. 10 (1) WEST PAKISTAN URBAN RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (VI OF 1959). The case was heard by MASUD AHMED AND WAHIDUDDIN AHMED.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 368, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XLI, R. TRANSFER OF PROPERTYACT (IV OF 1882) - S. 114 REGISTRATION ACT (XVI OF 1908) - SS. 17 AND 49 PROVISO KARACHI RENT RESTRICTION ACT (VIII OF 1953) - S. 10 (1) WEST PAKISTAN URBAN RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (VI OF 1959). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1962-02-28.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 368 were: MUNAWAR ABBAS FOR APPELLANT. IQBAL KAZI FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: MASUD AHMED AND WAHIDUDDIN AHMED.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 368 were: HAJI DAWOOD CO. (APPELLANT) VERSUS HAJI MUHAMMAD IQBAL AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 368.
Answer: Judgment Maud Ahmad, J.-This is a Letters Patent Appeal against a judgment of Single Judge, who has granted the respondents, Heidi Abdul Karim and Heidi Muhammad Shaft, a decree for Rs. 23,375, on account of rent for a period of 17 months, and also for ejectment of the appellants, Messes Heidi Heywood Co. from the premises in dispute. A decree for mesne profits, at the rate of Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM, from June 1959, until the date of delivery of possession has also been granted to the respondents, by same judgment. 2. The facts, briefly stated, are that on the 11th July 1950, a document which is described as receipt, but which, in fact is an agreement of lease, was executed by the appellants in favor of the Karachi Syndicate Ltd. who, at that time, owned the property in dispute. This document, which was signed by both parties but has not been registered, provided for the creation of tenancy in favor of the appellants for a period of five years, on a monthly rent of Rs. 1,250. A sum of Rs. 30,000 was paid as advance rent, which was to be adjusted against the rent payable, at the rate of Rs. 500 per ENSEM. One of the terms of this lease was that after expiry of the period of five years, if the appellants so desired, they could continue to occupy this property as tenants, on a rent of Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM. After this term of the lease expired on the with of July 1955, the appellants continued to occupy the property TN dispute as tenants and paid rent at the enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM, to the landlords. This property changed hands on the 14th February 1957, by reason of sale in favor of the respondents. After the sale, the appellants paid rent to the respondents, at the enhanced rate, until the 31st December 1957. Disputes started between the parties in the year 1958, and on'the 29th January of that year, a notice (BXH. 16) was served by the respondents, on the appellants, calling upon them to pay a sum of Rs. 8,250, on account of rent which was due from them and also intimating them that their tenancy shall stand terminated with effect from the 28th February 1958. This notice was replied to by the appellants on 30th April 1958, by means of their Advocate’s letter (Ex. 18) with which was enclosed a check for Rs. 6,875, and in which a promise was made that the rent would be paid regularly in the future, although according to them, the enhancement of rent was “wholly against law ”. On the 24th of April 1959, another notice (Ex. 29), was sent by the respondents’ counsel to the appellants, In which a demand for payment of Rs. 22,000, which was due as rent, was made, and the appellants were informed that they had “ forfeited their right to remain a tenant of the premises ” in dispute and should, therefore, hand over possession to them on the IST of June 1959. On the 14th July 1959, the appellant sent a letter (Ex. 21) to the respondents, along with a check for Rs. 5,000 as a w. part payment of rent. They also promised to pay Rs. 5,000, each month, until the arrears were cleared off This letter was replied to by the respondents by means of their Advocate’s letter, dated the 16th July 1959 (Ex. 26). The check for Rs. 5,000 sent by the appellants was returned to them, and they were told that if possession of the premises was not handed over to them, a suit would be filed. 3. The suit, out of which this appeal has arisen, was filed on the 20th July 1959. No mention was made in the plant of the tenancy which had been created by the predecessor- in-Interest of the respondents, and it was simply stated that the property in dispute had been let out on a monthly rent of Rs. 1,375, and that a sum of Rs. 23,375, on account of arrears of rent, for a period of seventeen months ending the 31st May 1959, was due from the appellants. 4. The appellants, in their written statement, which was filed on the 18th September 1959, did not deny the fact of the tenancy, and stated the circumstances under which the property In dispute had been leased out to them. Their defense, in short, was that not more than Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM, could be recovered as rent from them, and that as the increase in rent was illegal, and as they had always been ready and willing to pay the original rent of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM, their ejectment could not be ordered. It would be useful, at this stage, to reproduce a portion of the written statement, which was in the following words “ The true facts are that the defendants took the premises on lease from the previous owners thereof, viz, Karachi Syndicate Ltd. under a deed of lease dated 15-8-1950 on an agreement rent of Rs. 1,250 per month. The defendant paid to the lessor a sum of Rs. 30,000 as advance rent which was to be adjusted against future rents at the rate of Rs. 500 per month. On the expiry of the term of 5 years, the defendants continued to occupy the premises and paid rent at the enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 from 16-7-1950 to June 1957 to the previous owners. Thereafter the plaintiffs purchased the building from Karachi Syndicate and the defendants continued paying rent to the plaintiffs from July 1957 to 31-12-1957 at the same enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 per month. It is submitted that the above said agreement for payment of increased rent in consideration of the continuance of tenancy Js illegal and not binding on the defendants.“. w. the defendants have all along been ready and willing to pay rent at the rate of Rs. 1,250 per month. The plaintiffs refused to accept the rent at that rate and demanded rent with illegal increase. This is how the rents accumulated in spite of the read mess and willingness of the defendants to pay the same.” 5. The following issues, which arise out of the pleadings of the parties, were framed by the learned Single Judge (1) What is the rent of the premises in suit ? (2) Whether the agreement for increase in rent is illegal and not binding on the defendants ? If so, what is its effect ? (3) What is the amount of arrears against the defendants ? (4) Whether the defendant was not ready and willing to pay the rent ? (5) Whether the tenancy of the defendant has been determined by notice ? (6) Whether the notice is valid and improper ? If so, what is its effect ? (7) Whether the plaintiff i? entitled to a decree FPR possession ? (8) To what arrears of rent and mesne profits, if any, are the plaintiffs entitled ? 6. Only two witnesses, Heidi Muhammad Shaft, one of the two respondents, and Syed Bad shah Hussain Ravi, manager of the appellants, were examined at the trial. A number of documents were also produced, some of which have been referred to above. 7. On the first three Issues, the learned Single Judge found that the rent of the premises was Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM; that the increase in rent was not illegal and was binding on the appellants ; and that the latter owed a sum of Rs. 23,375, on account of the arrears of rent, for the period ending with the 31st of May 1958. On issue No. 4, the find mg was that the appellants were “ persistent defaulters ’” in the matter of payment of rent, and that they “were not ready and willing to pay the rent and were habitual defaulters.” On issue No. 7, the finding given was that although the appellants had deposited the whole of the rent due from them after this suit was filed, they had committed breach of one of the conditions of tenancy, and hence they were label to be ejected in accordance with the provisions of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. As a result of these findings, the respondents’ suit, as stated above, was decreed with costs. 8. The learned counsel for the appellants raised only the following four points before us (0 The agreement with regard to the Increase In rent from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375, per ENSEM, was void, in view of the provisions of section 9 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. (ff) It had not been proved that the appellants were not ready and willing to pay the rent due from them, and that as the whole of the rent was paid after the suit had been filed, no order for their ejectment could be passed. w. (IFF) The relief against forfeiture of tenancy should be granted to the appellants under section 114 of the Transfer of Property Act. (iv) After the appeal was filed, the Court passed an order, with the consent of the parties, and hence, by reason of that order, a fresh tenancy had been created. 9. So far as the last of the four points is concerned, after this appeal was filed, the appellants applied for stay of execution of the decree, and with the consent of the parties, the Court passed the following order on the 14th June 1960 “ By consent, the appellants to pay the decretal amount within the time allowed by the original Court, and he should continue to deposit in Court the monthly rent from month to month as the same accrues. On this condition the execution of the decree for ejectment is stayed.” This order was, presumably, passed under Order XLI, rule 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure and would remain in operation only during the pendency of the appeal. By no stretch of reasoning pan it is held that since the respondents agreed to have the execution of the decree stayed on certain terms, there was a novation of the contract and, hence, a new tenancy between the parties has been created. The contention raised by the appellants’ counsel being without force, is, hereby, overruled. A 10. So far as the third point is concerned, MN our option, section 114 of the Transfer of Property Act has no application to this case. That provision of law would be applicable only where the lease had been determined by forfeiture, on account of nonpayment of rent, and not where it had been determined by a notice to quit, as in the present case. The agreement to lease did not provide for the forfeiture of the tenancy on account of non-payment of rent, and although in the notice dated the 28th of April 1959, (Ex. 29) the word “ forfeiture ” has been used, in fact, there was no forfeiture of the lease and, hence, this Court cannot grant the appellants any relief under section 114 of the Transfer of Property Act. 11. Before the first of the four points raised by the appellants’ counsel is taken up, it would be useful to refer, briefly, to the scheme of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. This Act, as its preamble shows, was enacted for “ controlling the rents chargeable for such accommodation and for preventing eviction in certain cases ‘ Fair rent ’ has been defined In clause (2) of section 2 of the Act, and various standards, for its fixation, have been laid down in this clause. Under section of the Act, the Controller is empowered to entertain applications for determining fair rent. He can also take such action, on his own motion. In both cases, the Controller cannot determine fair rent after the lapse of a period of four months next after the date on which the premises are first occupied. Once fair rent has been determined, section 7 of the Act prohibits payment of any rent in excess of fair rent, and any agreement to that effect is null and void. Further, any sum paid in excess of fair rent can be refunded to the person by whom it was paid. Section 8 of the Act, which is a sort of exception to section 7, provides for an increase of rent on account of payment of Municipal rates, taxes, etc. Next comes section 9, which prohibits a landlord, tenant or occupant from charging any fine, premium, etc. in addition to the rent as a consideration for the grant, renewal or continuance of a tenancy. Any payment, so made, can be recovered by the person by whom it was made. Subsection (1) of section 9, which is relevant for the purpose of deciding the question of the legality of enhanced rent, is worded as follows “ No landlord, tenant, occupant or any person acting on their behalf shall, in consideration of the grant, renewal or continuance of a tenancy of any premises, require the payment of any fine, premium, Part or Thai or any other like sum in addition to the rent.’” Next comes section 10, which prevents the eviction of a tenant, except under certain circumstances. As this section has an important bearing on the decision of the second question raised by the appellants’ counsel, it would be useful to reproduce TT. The first two subsections read as under “‘ (1) Save as hereinafter provided, no order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made by any Court so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay the rent payable under this Act and performs the other conditions of the tenancy. (2) Nothing In subsection (1) shall apply where the landlord has obtained a certificate from the Controller certify mg- (a) that the tenant has committed any act contrary to the provisions of clause (0) or clause (p) of section 108 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, or has been guilty of conduct which is a nuisance or an annoyance to adjoining or neighboring occupiers, or (b) that the tenant has sublet the premises without the permission of the landlord, or (c) that the premises are reasonably and in good faith required by the landlord- (1) for the erection or reconstruction of a building, or (») for his own use or for the use of any person for whose benefit the premises are held, or (d) that the tenant has Informed any conditions of the tenure on which the premises are held by the landlord.” 12. The validity of the respondents’ claim for rent, at the rate of Rs. 1,375, per ENSEM, is challenged by the appellants on the ground that the increase in rent from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375, p.m. was made in consideration of renewal of the lease and that this claim is hit by subsection (1) of section 9 of the Act and, therefore, not more than Rs. 1:250 p.m. could be recovered from the appellants. The learned counsel for the respondents, in reply contended, firstly, that section 9 is controlled by section 7 of the Act, and only any rent in excess of far rent is recoverable, and secondly, that this provision of law does not prohibit the increase of rent; it only prohibits the recovery of “ any fine, premium, Part or Thai, or any other like sum in addition to the rent.” He further contended that as the document, dated the 11th July 1950, had not been registered in accordance with law and as by means of it tenancy for a period of more than one year was created, it could not be used in evidence for the purpose of showing that any increase in the rent was made. 13. So far as the last mentioned contention is concerned, the same, in our opinion, has no force. It is, no doubt, true that this document, which has been described to be a receipt is, in fact, a lease deed, and required compulsory registration under section 17 of the Registration Act. In spite of non-registration, c this document can be used for a collateral purpose, under the proviso of section 49 of the Registration Act and can be looked at for the purpose of determine whether an increase in rent was made, and if so, for what reason. Moreover, one of the respond’ dents, who appeared as a witness, did not dare to deny the allegation which had been made by the appellants in the written statement, with regard to the circumstances under which the lease was granted and then renewed. Further Syed Badge Hussain Ravi, who appeared as a witness for the appellants at the trial deposed that the rent was increased from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM “ on the expiry,of the lease period which was five years”. This statement stands unrebutted, and even if the lease deed (Ex. 28) is held to be admissible for the purpose of show mg the circumstances under which the lease was granted, in the presence of the unrebutted testimony of the appellants’ witness, it had to be held that there was in fact, an increase in the rent from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM, after the first period of lease had expired. 14. As to the contention that section 9 is controlled by section 7 of the Act, the same, MN our opinion, is without any force. Both these provisions of law are independent of each other, and the mere fact that if “fair rent” is not determined under section 7 of the Act, would not mean that a landlord is entitled to charge any amount of rent from the tenant when renewing, or continuing, a tenancy. If the intention of the Legislature had been that section 9 of the Act would apply only when fair rent of any property has been determined under section 7 of the Act, instead of using the expression “rent” in section 9, the expression “fair rent” would have been used. As this was not done, we are of the opinion, that “rent”? within the meaning of section 9 does not mean “fair rent’, and even if fair rent of any property has not been determined, a person can take benefit of the provisions of section 9 of the Act, provided all the conditions laid down therein are fulfilled. D 15. The second contention of the respondent’s counsel, namely, that this provision of law prohibits the payment of any fine, prem mm, Part or Smithies, or any other like sum, in addition to the rent, but does not prohibit the payment of any rent even if the same be more than the rent previously paid, is also, m our opinion, without any force. If this contention be accepted, it would mean that although a person may not be entitled to charge any fine, premium, Part or Mickie, he would be at liberty to charge any amount periodically describing it as rent, although that rent may be much more than that paid before the lease was renewed, or continued. This, in our opinion, could not be the intention of the Legislature, and the expression “rent’”’ mentioned mm section 9 of the Act can only mean the rent which was paid at the time when the lease was granted and before TT was renewed or continued. If the appellants had agreed from the very beginning to pay Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM, as rent of the property’ in dispute, and if they had not taken any steps, within the period of four months mentioned in section of the Act, for having fair rent of the property determined, they could have had no case, and the rent agreed to be paid by them could be recovered by the respondents. The position here is entirely different, because when the lease was first granted, the rent agreed to be paid was Rs. 1,250, per ENSEM, and it was only at the time when the appellants exercised the option of having the lease renewed that the rent was increased from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375, per ENSEM. As the increase MN rent was made in consideration of renewal or continuance of the lease, the case, in our opinion, is hit by section 9(1) of the Act, and although the increased amount is also shown to be “rent”, it is not recoverable by the appellants. In coming to this conclusion, we are fortified by the fact that subsection (J) of section 9 of this Act saves agreements with regard to residential premises which had been entered into prior to the 1st of December 1941, and those with regard toothed premises which were entered into prior to the 1st of December 1942. If the mention of the Legislature had been to save all agreements which had been executed prior to the coming into force of this Act, they would have worded subsection (3) differently, and not limited the savings clause only to certain agreements. As the agreement for lease entered into between the appellants and the respondents’ predecessors-in- interest had not been executed prior to 1st of December 1942, it is not saved by this provision of law and, hence, only the rent which was originally agreed to be paid by the appellants can be recovered from them. 16. The learned counsel for the respondents, in this connection, referred to a case decided by the Court of Appeal, Sharp Brothers <6 Knight v. Chant The facts of this case are that in the year 1907, the defendant took on lease some tenement at a rent of 9s. 6d. a week. In the month of March 1915, the rent was raised from 9s. 6d. to 10s. a week. On the 23rd December 1915, the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act, 1915 came into force. Subsection (2) of section of that Act, which prohibited payment of any fine, etc. was in the following words : “(2) A person shall not in consideration of the grant, renewal or continuance of a tenancy of any dwell mg-house to which this Act applies, require the payment of any fine, premium, or other like sum in addition to the rent, and where any such payment has been made in respect of any such dwelling-house after the twenty-fifth day of November 1915, then the amount shall be recoverable by the tenant, by whom it was made from the landlord. ”. The tenant continued to pay rent at the enhanced rate of 10s. a week until the 31st January 1916, 1e, for a period of about five weeks after the Act had come into force. The landlord, however, did not hold out any threat to the tenant that FHE divot pay the increased rent, he would be evicted. The tenant, on coming to know of the provisions of this Act, demanded the return of the rent which had been paid in excess of the rate originally payable. The Court held that although, to some extent, the provisions of the Rent Act were retrospective, there was nothing illegal about the agreement to pay enhanced rent, because at the relevant time this law was not in existence, and as there was no provision in the Act that increased rent shall not be received and the Act only made the increase ‘irrecoverable’ by distress or otherwise, the amount paid by the tenant in excess could not be recovered by him from the landlord. In our opinion, the views expressed in this case have no application to the facts of the present case for two reasons: firstly, in the reported case it was not held that the increase in rent was made as a consideration for the continuance of the tenancy; secondly, what that Court held was that the rent paid in excess of the anginal rate was not recoverable by distress or otherwise, and as the tenant had voluntarily made that payment he could not recover the same from the landlord. In the present case, the tenants, namely, the appellants, were given the option to have the tenancy renewed only if they agreed to pay rent at the enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM. It 1s, therefore, obvious that the increase in rent was made in consideration of the renewal or continuance of the tenancy and hence it is hit by section 9 (1) of the Act. 17. Coming now to the second post, the finding of the learned Single Judge to the effect that the appellants were “persistent defaulters”, was not seriously challenged by the appellants’ counsel. From the short history of this case, which has been reproduced in an earlier part of this judgment, it would appear that no rent for the period after the 31st of December 1957, was paid by the appellants. By the 29th of January 1958 a sum of Rs. 8,250 had become due from them, on account of arrears of rent, and by the 24th of April 1959, this amount had increased to Rs. 22,000, although, in the meantime, a check for Rs. 6,875 had been sent by them to the landlords. The plea raised by the appellants, in paragraph 3 of the written statement, was that they fell into arrears because although they were prepared to pay rent at the rate of Rs. 1,250, per ENSEM, the respondents did not accept rent at that rate. There is nothing, however, in any of the letters addressed by the appellants to the respondents to show that, at any stage, they offered to pay the whole of the rent due from them, at the original rate of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM; on the other hand, a reference to the letter of the 14th of July 1959 (Ex. 21) would show that the appellants were short of money and were not in a position to pay the WF ole of the rent which had become due from them. The learned Single Judge was, therefore, right in coming to the conclusion that the appellants had not been reach and willing to pay the rent as soon as the same had become due. This finding of fact, however, is not sufficient to dispose of the point raised by the appellants’ counsel, because his contention was that the deciding date, for the purpose of payment of rent, is the date when the Court is called upon to pass an order for recovery of possession, and is not the date when the rent had become due. According to the learned counsel, if before such an order is passed, a tenant pays, or is ready and willing to pay, the rent due from him, he cannot be evicted from the property in his occupation and that previous defaults, if any, in the payment of rent, or in his “readiness and willingness” has no effect on the case. The learned counsel contended further that if the intention of the Legislature had been that any previous default committed by the tenant, in w. payment of the rent, would deprive him of the benefit of subsection (1) of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, stead of USCG the present tense in this provision of law and saying “‘pays or is ready and willing to pay the rent payable” the Legislature would have used the past tense and would have said “has not paid or was not ready and willing to pay the rent payable” or employed some other such language, and as this was not done the intention seems to be quite clear that any previous default committed by the tenant in the payment of rent or ta his readiness or willingness to pay the rent would not deprive him of the benefit of this provision of law. 18. To support these contentions the learned counsel for the appellants referred to S. K. Shaw Brothers v. By Raj Krishna and another in which it was held that: “Where a tenant offers to pay all the rent due from him before the date of the eviction order, he is not in arrear and there is no non-payment of rent. Eviction order, if passed in such circumstances, will be in excess of the special jurisdiction conferred by the Act on the Controller.” In this case the relevant law was contained mm section 11 of the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act of 1947. Subsection (1) of this section prevented the eviction of a tenant on the expiration of the period of tenancy, or for non-payment of rent, or for breach of any of the conditions of tenancy. Subsection (2) of this section which empowered the Controller to order eviction of a tenant, on the application of a landlord, was In the following words : “A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant under subsection (1) shall apply to the Controller for a direction in that behalf If the Controller, after giving the tenant a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the application, is satisfied that the tenant is liable to be evicted under the provisions of subsection he shall make an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession of the building and if the Controller is not so satisfied, he shall make an order rejecting the application.” This provision of law did not specify the circumstances under which a tenant was liable to be evicted and in deciding this question the Court came to the conclusion that the Legislature, undoubtedly, had intended to give effect to the express provisions of section 13 of the Bihar House Rent Control Order, 1942, when enacting section 11 of the Act of 1947. The first mentioned provision of law was in the following words : “No order for recovery of possession of any house shall be made so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay rent to the full extent allowable by this Order and performs the conditions of the tenancy.” The words italicized by us above are similar to those employed in subsection (1) of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act 1953, and, if the reasoning of their Lordships is accepted as correct, it would mean that a tenant who pays rent or is ready and will mg to pay rent before an order for eviction is passed, cannot be evicted from the property in his occupation. The relevant section of the Bihar House Rent Control Order, 1942, had not been made a part of the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1947, but on the basis of the language employed in the Order of 1942, it was held that the tenant could not be evicted, because he had paid all the rent due from him before the Controller was called upon to pass the order of eviction. 19. The second authority relied upon by the learned counsel Is reported as I. J. Cohen v. S. E. Hostinger The facts of this case are that the relevant statute (Calcutta Rent Act, 1920) gave to a mere monthly tenant considerable fixity of tenure upon a condition, namely, that he was a rent pay mg-tenant and was not a defaulting-tenant. Section 11 of the Act laid down that: “No order or decree for the recovery of possession shall be made so long as the tenant pays rent to the full extent allowable by this Act and performs the conditions of the tenancy.” This provision of law was, however, qualified by a subsequent clause which laid down that no tenant shall be entitled to the benefit of this section : “Unless he pays the rent due by him to the full extent allowable by this Act within the time fixed In the contract with his landlord, or, MN the absence of any such contract, by the 15th day of the month next following.” It was held that as the tenant was in arrear and had not paid rent In time he was not entitled to the benefit of the provisions of section 11 of the Act. This decision was based on the ground that the relevant law had fixed the period within which the tenant was required to pay THS rent due from him, and it was only then that he could claim the benefit of the section which prevented his eviction. Although in the relevant clause which has been reproduced above, the present tense had been used, the language employed indicated clearly that any default committed by the tenant In the palm®"* of rent, when it became due, disqualified him from seeking the benefit of the section. It was, therefore, not surprising that eviction of the tenant from the property occupied by him was held to be justified. The views expressed in this case are relevant only for the purpose of showing that if the Intention of the Legislature, in the present case, had been that any default committed by the tenant, In the payment of rent, should deprive him of the benefit of the eviction clause, the Legislature would have either used the past tense in the relevant clause, or would have worded it differently, as was done in the Calcutta case, and since as neither the past tense has been used mm section 10(1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, nor the language w. indicates that the previous default, if any, committed by the tenant, would deprive him of the benefit of this provision of law, his eviction can be ordered only if he does not pay, or is not ready or willing to pay the rent due from him, at the time when the Court is called upon to pass an order of eviction. 20. The learned counsel for the respondents contended that the appellants could take benefit of the provisions of section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, only if they had paid or were ready and willing to pay the rent due from them, as soon as TT became payable, and since they persistently made default in the payment of rent they are able to be evicted from the property In their possession. He contended further that the payment of rent made after the suit had been filed against the appellants could not prevent their eviction. To support these contentions the learned counsel referred to Maharajas Magana v. Nathubhai Vitals Ismail Dada Bhavani v. Bai Zuleikhabai (2) and Alcohol Adam Sheikh Jumanji v. Mohandas Jeenabhoy (3) and an unreported judgment of the Sind Chief Court, in Execution Application No. 518 of 1946 decided on the 7th January 1947. In the first mentioned case, which was dealt with by a Single Judge, the question requiring decision was whether payment of arrears of rent before a suit for ejectment was filed was a condition precedent to claim the protection under the Bombay Rent (War Restrictions) Act, 1918. Section 9(1) of the said Act, which was similar to section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, was in the following words : “No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay rent to the full extent allowable by this Act and performs the conditions of the tenancy.” Relying on Nevis v. Carman it was held that IFA tenant has made any default in paying the rent and was in arrears the Court can make an order for recovery of possession, even if he brings arrears of rent into the Court. In the other three cases, referred to above, on the basis of this very decision, similar views were expressed. As the decision in Maharajas’s case was based primarily on the reasoning employed in Nevis v. Carman it would be necessary to examine this case fully, for finding out whether the views expressed their were correctly understood by the learned Single Judge who decided Maharajas's case and whether those views are applicable to the facts of the present case. The facts of this case were that the defendant was a tenant of a dwelling house, within the meaning of Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act, 1915, and had not paid the w. rent due under the tenancy agreement. Upon being served with a writ for recovery of possession of the premises he tendered the rent in arrears. The plaintiff's case was that the tenancy was duly determined by notice to quit expired on the 25th December 1919, and also by reason of non-payment of the quarterly rent. The writ in the action was issued on the 3rd February 1920. The defense was that the rent due on the 8th February 1920, was tendered to the agent of the plaintiff who refused to take it. It was claimed that by reason of the provisions of the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Acts, 1915 to 1919, the landlord was entitled to an order for possession of the premises. The relevant section of this Act, namely, 1(3), was in the following words : “No order for the recovery of possession of a dwelling house to which this Act applies for the ejectment of a tenant therefrom shall be made so long as the tenant continues to pay rent at the agreed rate as modified by this Act and performs the other conditions of the tenancy.” The Court held that because the tenant was in arrears the landlord was entitled to an order for recovery of possession. (1) AIR 1923 BOM. 387 (2) AI R 1944 Bam. 181 (3) AIR 1929 Sind 13 (4) (1920) XXXVI T LR 396 The following observations at pages 396 and 397 of the reported judgment are very significant: "It seemed to him (his Lordship) that if the defendant wanted to put himself within the protection of the Acts he should, on receiving the notice, have paid his arrears of rent forthwith, and he would have paid rent for the last quarter duly according to the agreement. But he CI not pay the balance of his June rent till much later, and he did not pay his September rent till December 29; that is not until after the tenancy had expired by effluxion of time in pursuance of the notice. Then he did not tender the December rent until after the writ in the action had been served. Was it possible to say that, in these circumstances, he had continued to pay his rent, and perform the other conditions of the tenancy, so as to bring himself within the protection of section (3) of this Act ?” As under the relevant provision of law the tenant was given protection against the eviction only so long as he “continues to pay the rent’, it was not surprising that the Court came to the conclusion that the tenant was not protected, as he had not so “continued to pay rent.” Although the Legislature had not used the past tense in the relevant provision of law the employment of the word “continues” made it absolutely clear that only a tenant who paid the rent regularly was to be given protection and not a tenant who offered the rent after he had committed default and an action had been brought against him. w. 21. The position In the Bombay case was entirely different, because the word “continues” did not find any place in the relevant section and, with all due respect to the learned Judge who decided that case, the employment of the present tense in the section was not without significance. If the intention of the Legislature had been that any default committed by the tenant, in the payment of rent, as soon as it became due, would have the result of depriving him of the protection afforded by this law against eviction, the relevant section would have been differently worded and either the Legislature would have used the past tense, or would have, at least, made it clear by using words like “continues” that a tenant who did not pay the rent regularly would not be afforded any protection. This aspect of the matter was brought to the notice of the learned Judge, who rejected the contention by making the following observations “Mr. Campbell contends that there is a distinction between section 9 (1) of the Bombay Act and the English section in that the English section uses the words “continues to pay” the rent, instead of the word “pays” which is used MN the Indian section. But I do not think that the words “continues to pay” import any distinction. Whether the words are “continues to pay’ or “‘pays,” the real question is whether they refer to the time anterior to the film of the suit or the time subsequent thereto. I think that in both the English and the Indian sections the words “continues to pay’ and the word “pays”, respectively, refer to the time anterior to the film of the suit.” 22. With all due respect to the learned Judge, we are unable to accept his reasoning and are of opinion that there is a world of difference between the words “continues to pay” and “pays”; the first medicate some kind of continuity of action, while the second indicates something which is to be done at a particular time. In the present case, the words “pays or is ready and willing to pay” refer, in our opinion, to the date when the Court is called upon to pass an order for recovery of possession and do not refer to any anterior period and, hence, if at that time the tenant pays the rent due from him, or is ready and willing to pay it the Court cannot pass an order for his eviction. 23. It may here be pointed out that section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, is an exact copy of section 9 (1) of the Sind Rent Restriction Act, 1947, which, in its turn, was based on section 10 (1) of the Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1941. In all these provisions of law the words used are “so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay the rent.’’ The Punjab Act of 1941 had been repealed by a similar Act of 1943, and the latter by another Act which came into force with effect from the 14th April 1947, 1e. about a fortnight before the Sind Act of 1947 was promulgated. The framers of the last mentioned Act, however, failed to take note of the fact that the Punjab Act of 1941 had been dreys.call modified when, in that Province, the Act of 1947 was promulgated. Section 13 of that Act, which replaced section 10 of the earlier Act was altogether differently worded. This provision of law was in the following words: “13(1) A tenant in possession of a building or rented land shall not be evicted therefrom in execution of a decree passed before or after the commencement of this Act or otherwise, and whether before or after the termination of the tenancy, except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2) A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant shall apply to the Controller for a direction in that behalf If the Controller, after given the tenant a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the application, is satisfied that- (1) the tenant has not paid or tendered the rent due by him m respect of the building or rented land, within fifteen days after the expiry of the time fixed in the agreement of tenancy with his landlord, or, in the absence of any such agreement, by the last day of the month next following that for which the rent is the Controller may make an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession of the building or rented land and if the Controller is not so satisfied he shall make an order rejecting the application: Provided that the Controller may give the tenant a reasonable time for putting the landlord in possession of the building or rented land and may extend such time so as not to exceed four months in the aggregate.” This provision of law differed from section 10 (1) of the Act of 1941 in several respects: Firstly, the words “the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay” were replaced by the words “the tenant has not paid or tendered the rent due by him’. In other words the present tense was replaced by the past tense. Secondly, the provision regarding “readiness and willingness” was omitted, instead an obligation was placed on the tenant to tender the rent when it became due. Thirdly, a definite period was prescribed during which the rent was to be so paid or tendered. The Act of 1947 was replaced by other enactments; the last of them BMG Ordinance VI of 1959. There was, however, no basic change so far as the phraseology of section 13 was concerned and this section, NBA modified form, is still on the Statute Book. It appears to us that the framers of the Act of 1947 realized the difficulty which the landlords experienced in the matter of eviction of those tenants who were defaulters, and who, after proceedings for ejectment were instituted against them, tendered the rent due from them, with a view to prevent their eviction. The Legislature, therefore, with a view to keep an even balance w. between landlords and tenants modified this provision of law and, while still giving protection to honest tenants, protected also the landlords from unscrupulous tenants by providing that if the rent due by them was not paid within the specified period they would be liable to be ejected. Inspire of this change of law, which took place in the Province from where the language of section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, was borrowed, no such change was made so far as Karachi was concerned, which continued to be governed by the law which was based on the Sind Act of 1947. The framers of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, could not have been unaware of the change of law which had taken place in the former Punjab Province and if they also were of the same opinion and intended to take away the protection which that law gave to tenants they would have amended section 10 (1) accordingly. As this was not done, It would not be unreasonable to presume that they were satisfied with the law as it was, although that law gave complete protection to those tenants who paid the whole of the rent due from them, or were ready and willing to pay that rent, before the Court was called upon to pass an order of eviction. 24. Before ending this discussion it would be necessary to refer the three other authorities relied upon by the respondents’ counsel. These are Brewer v. Jacobs (1) ; Bird v. Village (2) and Descent v. Fellow In the first mentioned case the plaintiff had let out a dwelling house to the defendant for five years. At the expiration of the term, the defendant remained in possession as a statutory tenant. He, subsequently, became in arrear and also committed a breach of the covenant. The plaintiff issued summons for possession on grounds of nonpayment of rent and breach of terms of the tenancy. Subsequent to these summons, but before the trial, the defendant paid the rent due from him into the Court. The matter came up, in appeal, to the King’s Bench, and it was held that the defendant was entitled to remain as statutory tenant on condition of observing the conditions of the tenancy which he had broken and, (1) (1923) K B 528 (2) (1947) 2 All B LR 7 (3) (1951)2 KB858 therefore, the County Court Judge was right in not exercising the discretion in his favor. The relevant law, in this case also, was the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act, 1915, and, as stated earlier, that Act protected those tenants only who continued to pay rent. The order passed by the Court was, therefore, fully justified. 25. The facts of the next case were that the statutory tenant of a dwelling house had held as tenant from year to year. The rent was payable quarterly, on the usual quarter dates, but the w. landlord had been in the habit of allowing the tenant to make payments a month or so after the due dates. The tenant failed to pay the rent due on the 25th March 1946 and tendered it to the landlord’s solicitors on the 16th May, on which the landlord sent the particulars of the claim to the County Court. The solicitors, on instructions, refused to accept the payment, and on May 21, 1946, the plaint was entered in the County Court books. It was conceded that May 21 was the date of the commencement of the proceedings. It was held that where a tender of rent was made after the due date, but before the commencement of proceedings for possession, such tender prevented rent being “lawfully due” from the tenant to the landlord, within the meaning of para, (a) of Schedule to the Act of 1933, unless time has been made the essence of the contract. The relevant paragraph of the Schedule was in the following words “A Court shall, for the purposes of section 3 of this Act, have power to make or give an order or judgment for the recovery of possession of any dwelling house to which the principal Acts apply or for the ejectment of tenant therefrom without proof of suitable alternative accommodation (where the Court considers it reasonable so to do) if any rent lawfully due from the tenant has not been paid, or any other obligation of the tenancy (whether under the contract of tenancy or under the principal Acts), so far as the obligation is consistent with the provisions of the principal Acts, has been broken or not performed.” No doubt, in accordance with the provisions of section (3) of the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act 1915, as amended by the Act of 1933, which has been reproduced above, the tenant was entitled to protection against eviction only if he “continued to pay rent” at the agreed rate, but as according to the relevant paragraph of the Schedule the rent so due had been paid before the Court was called upon to pass an order of eviction, the Court rightly held that no rent was “lawfully due” on the last mentioned date. This authority, therefore, is also of no help to the respondents, because the language of relevant section was different from that of section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. 26. In the last of the three cases the County Court Judge made an order for possession of the premises, within the Rent Restriction Act, on the ground of non-payment of rent, which was a year in arrear. The arrears were paid MTO the Court before the judgment, but the tenant was guilty of non-payment of rent, having had to be summoned repeatedly. It was held that the Court had jurisdiction, under Schedule I of the Rent and Mortgage Interest Restrictions (Amendment) Act, 1933, to make an order for possession when the rent was unpaid and had considered it reasonable so to do and that although, in the ordinary case, payment of the arrears into the Court would make it unreasonable to make an order for possession, in the present case, having regard to the tenants’ record there was evidence on which the Judge could conclude that it was reasonable to make an order. The views expressed in this case also are of no assistance to the respondents, because the post for consideration was whether it was reasonable or not to pass an order of eviction in exercise of the powers conferred by the Schedule I of the Act of 1915, as amended by the Act, 1933. The Court held the order of eviction to be reasonable because of the persistent default committed by the tenant. It may be pointed out that under the relevant law it was obligatory for the tenant to “continue to pay rent” regularly and in case of default the Court was empowered to order his eviction, if TT thought that such an order would be a reasonable one. The question as to whether the tenant had committed default in the payment of rent, or not, was not in issue, because, admittedly, he had not paid the rent in accordance with the relevant provisions of law and for the provisions of the Schedule, which was asserted by the amending Act of 1933, his eviction would have followed as a matter of course. 27. For reasons given above, we are of option that as the appellants had paid the whole of the rent due from them in the Court, in obedience of the orders passed by the learned Single Judge, they were entitled to seek protection under section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, and, hence the learned Judge was not justified in passing a decree for their ejectment. We, therefore, accept this appeal and, setting aside the judgment and decree of the learned Single Judge, grant the respondents a decree for Rs. 17,562-8- 0, with proportionate cost, against the appellants, on account of rent, at the rate of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM, for the period from the IST January 1958 to the 31st May 1959, after adjusting a sum of Rs. 3,687-8-0 which had been paid by the appellants in excess to the respondents. We also grant the respondents a decree for a sum of Rs. 2,083-5-3, with proportionate cost, on account of rent for the period from the IST June 1959, to the 20th July 1959, at the rate of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM. The respondents’ suit for ejectment of the appellants is, hereby, dismissed. The appellants will get costs of this appeal from the respondents. The decretal amount shall be realized from the money lying in deposit in the Court and if that money has already been received by the respondents, they shall refund to the appellants the excess amount, if any, realized by them. 28 Before ending, we think it necessary to point out that it is time that the law relating to eviction of tenants and fixation of rent of residential and non-residential premises in force in w. the rest of the Province of West Pakistan should be made applicable to Karachi also. The position, at present, is that several] proceedings, in different Courts, are taken in Karachi by landlords! to evict the tenants. First of all the Rent Controller is approached with an application under subsection (2) of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, for obtaining a certificate. Armed with such a certificate the landlord files a suit in the Court of Small Causes at Karachi, under section 18 of the Karachi Small Causes Court Act, 1926 for obtain a decree for possession. If the landlord succeeds in such a suit and the order becomes final in revision, the tenant files a suit under section 24 of the Karachi Small Causes Court Act, 1926, to claim compensation for the threatened trespass. If he succeeds in that suit, all the proceedings taken by the landlord become unfructuous, with the result that the landlord either foregoes his night to have the tenant evicted, or tries to avail of some other remedy for redress of his grievance. In all such cases several proceedings, in various Courts, are taken, which result in protracted litigation between the two parties. All this waste of time, energy and labor can be avoided If the West Pakistan Urban (Rent Restriction) Ordinance, 1959, is applied to Karachi, as it Is, or m a modified form. A copy of this judgment should, therefore, be forwarded to the Law Department for necessary action. H' Appeal accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): Judgment Maud Ahmad, J.-This is a Letters Patent Appeal against a judgment of Single Judge, who has granted the respondents, Heidi Abdul Karim and Heidi Muhammad Shaft, a decree for Rs. 23,375, on account of rent for a period of 17 months, and also for ejectment of the appellants, Messes Heidi Heywood Co. from the premises in dispute. A decree for mesne profits, at the rate of Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM, from June 1959, until the date of delivery of possession has also been granted to the respondents, by same judgment. 2. The facts, briefly stated, are that on the 11th July 1950, a document which is described as receipt, but which, in fact is an agreement of lease, was executed by the appellants in favor of the Karachi Syndicate Ltd. who, at that time, owned the property in dispute. This document, which was signed by both parties but has not been registered, provided for the creation of tenancy in favor of the appellants for a period of five years, on a monthly rent of Rs. 1,250. A sum of Rs. 30,000 was paid as advance rent, which was to be adjusted against the rent payable, at the rate of Rs. 500 per ENSEM. One of the terms of this lease was that after expiry of the period of five years, if the appellants so desired, they could continue to occupy this property as tenants, on a rent of Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM. After this term of the lease expired on the with of July 1955, the appellants continued to occupy the property TN dispute as tenants and paid rent at the enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM, to the landlords. This property changed hands on the 14th February 1957, by reason of sale in favor of the respondents. After the sale, the appellants paid rent to the respondents, at the enhanced rate, until the 31st December 1957. Disputes started between the parties in the year 1958, and on'the 29th January of that year, a notice (BXH. 16) was served by the respondents, on the appellants, calling upon them to pay a sum of Rs. 8,250, on account of rent which was due from them and also intimating them that their tenancy shall stand terminated with effect from the 28th February 1958. This notice was replied to by the appellants on 30th April 1958, by means of their Advocate’s letter (Ex. 18) with which was enclosed a check for Rs. 6,875, and in which a promise was made that the rent would be paid regularly in the future, although according to them, the enhancement of rent was “wholly against law ”. On the 24th of April 1959, another notice (Ex. 29), was sent by the respondents’ counsel to the appellants, In which a demand for payment of Rs. 22,000, which was due as rent, was made, and the appellants were informed that they had “ forfeited their right to remain a tenant of the premises ” in dispute and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): (Ex. 29), was sent by the respondents’ counsel to the appellants, In which a demand for payment of Rs. 22,000, which was due as rent, was made, and the appellants were informed that they had “ forfeited their right to remain a tenant of the premises ” in dispute and should, therefore, hand over possession to them on the IST of June 1959. On the 14th July 1959, the appellant sent a letter (Ex. 21) to the respondents, along with a check for Rs. 5,000 as a w. part payment of rent. They also promised to pay Rs. 5,000, each month, until the arrears were cleared off This letter was replied to by the respondents by means of their Advocate’s letter, dated the 16th July 1959 (Ex. 26). The check for Rs. 5,000 sent by the appellants was returned to them, and they were told that if possession of the premises was not handed over to them, a suit would be filed. 3. The suit, out of which this appeal has arisen, was filed on the 20th July 1959. No mention was made in the plant of the tenancy which had been created by the predecessor- in-Interest of the respondents, and it was simply stated that the property in dispute had been let out on a monthly rent of Rs. 1,375, and that a sum of Rs. 23,375, on account of arrears of rent, for a period of seventeen months ending the 31st May 1959, was due from the appellants. 4. The appellants, in their written statement, which was filed on the 18th September 1959, did not deny the fact of the tenancy, and stated the circumstances under which the property In dispute had been leased out to them. Their defense, in short, was that not more than Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM, could be recovered as rent from them, and that as the increase in rent was illegal, and as they had always been ready and willing to pay the original rent of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM, their ejectment could not be ordered. It would be useful, at this stage, to reproduce a portion of the written statement, which was in the following words “ The true facts are that the defendants took the premises on lease from the previous owners thereof, viz, Karachi Syndicate Ltd. under a deed of lease dated 15-8-1950 on an agreement rent of Rs. 1,250 per month. The defendant paid to the lessor a sum of Rs. 30,000 as advance rent which was to be adjusted against future rents at the rate of Rs. 500 per month. On the expiry of the term of 5 years, the defendants continued to occupy the premises and paid rent at the enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 from 16-7-1950 to June 1957 to the previous owners. Thereafter the plaintiffs purchased the building from Karachi Syndicate and the defendants continued paying rent to the plaintiffs from July 1957 to 31-12-1957 at the same enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 per month.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): rent at the enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 from 16-7-1950 to June 1957 to the previous owners. Thereafter the plaintiffs purchased the building from Karachi Syndicate and the defendants continued paying rent to the plaintiffs from July 1957 to 31-12-1957 at the same enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 per month. It is submitted that the above said agreement for payment of increased rent in consideration of the continuance of tenancy Js illegal and not binding on the defendants.“. w. the defendants have all along been ready and willing to pay rent at the rate of Rs. 1,250 per month. The plaintiffs refused to accept the rent at that rate and demanded rent with illegal increase. This is how the rents accumulated in spite of the read mess and willingness of the defendants to pay the same.” 5. The following issues, which arise out of the pleadings of the parties, were framed by the learned Single Judge (1) What is the rent of the premises in suit ? (2) Whether the agreement for increase in rent is illegal and not binding on the defendants ? If so, what is its effect ? (3) What is the amount of arrears against the defendants ? (4) Whether the defendant was not ready and willing to pay the rent ? (5) Whether the tenancy of the defendant has been determined by notice ? (6) Whether the notice is valid and improper ? If so, what is its effect ? (7) Whether the plaintiff i? entitled to a decree FPR possession ? (8) To what arrears of rent and mesne profits, if any, are the plaintiffs entitled ? 6. Only two witnesses, Heidi Muhammad Shaft, one of the two respondents, and Syed Bad shah Hussain Ravi, manager of the appellants, were examined at the trial. A number of documents were also produced, some of which have been referred to above. 7. On the first three Issues, the learned Single Judge found that the rent of the premises was Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM; that the increase in rent was not illegal and was binding on the appellants ; and that the latter owed a sum of Rs. 23,375, on account of the arrears of rent, for the period ending with the 31st of May 1958. On issue No. 4, the find mg was that the appellants were “ persistent defaulters ’” in the matter of payment of rent, and that they “were not ready and willing to pay the rent and were habitual defaulters.” On issue No. 7, the finding given was that although the appellants had deposited the whole of the rent due from them after this suit was filed, they had committed breach of one of the conditions of tenancy, and hence they were label to be ejected in accordance with the provisions of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. As a result of these findings, the respondents’ suit, as stated above, was decreed with costs. 8. The learned counsel for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): one of the conditions of tenancy, and hence they were label to be ejected in accordance with the provisions of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. As a result of these findings, the respondents’ suit, as stated above, was decreed with costs. 8. The learned counsel for the appellants raised only the following four points before us (0 The agreement with regard to the Increase In rent from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375, per ENSEM, was void, in view of the provisions of section 9 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. (ff) It had not been proved that the appellants were not ready and willing to pay the rent due from them, and that as the whole of the rent was paid after the suit had been filed, no order for their ejectment could be passed. w. (IFF) The relief against forfeiture of tenancy should be granted to the appellants under section 114 of the Transfer of Property Act. (iv) After the appeal was filed, the Court passed an order, with the consent of the parties, and hence, by reason of that order, a fresh tenancy had been created. 9. So far as the last of the four points is concerned, after this appeal was filed, the appellants applied for stay of execution of the decree, and with the consent of the parties, the Court passed the following order on the 14th June 1960 “ By consent, the appellants to pay the decretal amount within the time allowed by the original Court, and he should continue to deposit in Court the monthly rent from month to month as the same accrues. On this condition the execution of the decree for ejectment is stayed.” This order was, presumably, passed under Order XLI, rule 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure and would remain in operation only during the pendency of the appeal. By no stretch of reasoning pan it is held that since the respondents agreed to have the execution of the decree stayed on certain terms, there was a novation of the contract and, hence, a new tenancy between the parties has been created. The contention raised by the appellants’ counsel being without force, is, hereby, overruled. A 10. So far as the third point is concerned, MN our option, section 114 of the Transfer of Property Act has no application to this case. That provision of law would be applicable only where the lease had been determined by forfeiture, on account of nonpayment of rent, and not where it had been determined by a notice to quit, as in the present case. The agreement to lease did not provide for the forfeiture of the tenancy on account of non-payment of rent, and although in the notice dated the 28th of April 1959, (Ex. 29) the word “ forfeiture ” has been used, in fact, there was no forfeiture of the lease and, hence, this Court cannot grant the appellants any relief under section 114 of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): on account of non-payment of rent, and although in the notice dated the 28th of April 1959, (Ex. 29) the word “ forfeiture ” has been used, in fact, there was no forfeiture of the lease and, hence, this Court cannot grant the appellants any relief under section 114 of the Transfer of Property Act. 11. Before the first of the four points raised by the appellants’ counsel is taken up, it would be useful to refer, briefly, to the scheme of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. This Act, as its preamble shows, was enacted for “ controlling the rents chargeable for such accommodation and for preventing eviction in certain cases ‘ Fair rent ’ has been defined In clause (2) of section 2 of the Act, and various standards, for its fixation, have been laid down in this clause. Under section of the Act, the Controller is empowered to entertain applications for determining fair rent. He can also take such action, on his own motion. In both cases, the Controller cannot determine fair rent after the lapse of a period of four months next after the date on which the premises are first occupied. Once fair rent has been determined, section 7 of the Act prohibits payment of any rent in excess of fair rent, and any agreement to that effect is null and void. Further, any sum paid in excess of fair rent can be refunded to the person by whom it was paid. Section 8 of the Act, which is a sort of exception to section 7, provides for an increase of rent on account of payment of Municipal rates, taxes, etc. Next comes section 9, which prohibits a landlord, tenant or occupant from charging any fine, premium, etc. in addition to the rent as a consideration for the grant, renewal or continuance of a tenancy. Any payment, so made, can be recovered by the person by whom it was made. Subsection (1) of section 9, which is relevant for the purpose of deciding the question of the legality of enhanced rent, is worded as follows “ No landlord, tenant, occupant or any person acting on their behalf shall, in consideration of the grant, renewal or continuance of a tenancy of any premises, require the payment of any fine, premium, Part or Thai or any other like sum in addition to the rent.’” Next comes section 10, which prevents the eviction of a tenant, except under certain circumstances. As this section has an important bearing on the decision of the second question raised by the appellants’ counsel, it would be useful to reproduce TT. The first two subsections read as under “‘ (1) Save as hereinafter provided, no order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made by any Court so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay the rent payable under this Act and performs the other conditions of the tenancy. (2) Nothing In subsection (1) shall

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): provided, no order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made by any Court so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay the rent payable under this Act and performs the other conditions of the tenancy. (2) Nothing In subsection (1) shall apply where the landlord has obtained a certificate from the Controller certify mg- (a) that the tenant has committed any act contrary to the provisions of clause (0) or clause (p) of section 108 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, or has been guilty of conduct which is a nuisance or an annoyance to adjoining or neighboring occupiers, or (b) that the tenant has sublet the premises without the permission of the landlord, or (c) that the premises are reasonably and in good faith required by the landlord- (1) for the erection or reconstruction of a building, or (») for his own use or for the use of any person for whose benefit the premises are held, or (d) that the tenant has Informed any conditions of the tenure on which the premises are held by the landlord.” 12. The validity of the respondents’ claim for rent, at the rate of Rs. 1,375, per ENSEM, is challenged by the appellants on the ground that the increase in rent from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375, p.m. was made in consideration of renewal of the lease and that this claim is hit by subsection (1) of section 9 of the Act and, therefore, not more than Rs. 1:250 p.m. could be recovered from the appellants. The learned counsel for the respondents, in reply contended, firstly, that section 9 is controlled by section 7 of the Act, and only any rent in excess of far rent is recoverable, and secondly, that this provision of law does not prohibit the increase of rent; it only prohibits the recovery of “ any fine, premium, Part or Thai, or any other like sum in addition to the rent.” He further contended that as the document, dated the 11th July 1950, had not been registered in accordance with law and as by means of it tenancy for a period of more than one year was created, it could not be used in evidence for the purpose of showing that any increase in the rent was made. 13. So far as the last mentioned contention is concerned, the same, in our opinion, has no force. It is, no doubt, true that this document, which has been described to be a receipt is, in fact, a lease deed, and required compulsory registration under section 17 of the Registration Act. In spite of non-registration, c this document can be used for a collateral purpose, under the proviso of section 49 of the Registration Act and can be looked at for the purpose of determine whether an increase in rent was made, and if so, for what reason. Moreover, one of the respond’ dents, who appeared as a witness, did

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): used for a collateral purpose, under the proviso of section 49 of the Registration Act and can be looked at for the purpose of determine whether an increase in rent was made, and if so, for what reason. Moreover, one of the respond’ dents, who appeared as a witness, did not dare to deny the allegation which had been made by the appellants in the written statement, with regard to the circumstances under which the lease was granted and then renewed. Further Syed Badge Hussain Ravi, who appeared as a witness for the appellants at the trial deposed that the rent was increased from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM “ on the expiry,of the lease period which was five years”. This statement stands unrebutted, and even if the lease deed (Ex. 28) is held to be admissible for the purpose of show mg the circumstances under which the lease was granted, in the presence of the unrebutted testimony of the appellants’ witness, it had to be held that there was in fact, an increase in the rent from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM, after the first period of lease had expired. 14. As to the contention that section 9 is controlled by section 7 of the Act, the same, MN our opinion, is without any force. Both these provisions of law are independent of each other, and the mere fact that if “fair rent” is not determined under section 7 of the Act, would not mean that a landlord is entitled to charge any amount of rent from the tenant when renewing, or continuing, a tenancy. If the intention of the Legislature had been that section 9 of the Act would apply only when fair rent of any property has been determined under section 7 of the Act, instead of using the expression “rent” in section 9, the expression “fair rent” would have been used. As this was not done, we are of the opinion, that “rent”? within the meaning of section 9 does not mean “fair rent’, and even if fair rent of any property has not been determined, a person can take benefit of the provisions of section 9 of the Act, provided all the conditions laid down therein are fulfilled. D 15. The second contention of the respondent’s counsel, namely, that this provision of law prohibits the payment of any fine, prem mm, Part or Smithies, or any other like sum, in addition to the rent, but does not prohibit the payment of any rent even if the same be more than the rent previously paid, is also, m our opinion, without any force. If this contention be accepted, it would mean that although a person may not be entitled to charge any fine, premium, Part or Mickie, he would be at liberty to charge any amount periodically describing it as rent, although that rent may be much more than that paid before the lease was renewed, or continued. This, in our opinion,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): although a person may not be entitled to charge any fine, premium, Part or Mickie, he would be at liberty to charge any amount periodically describing it as rent, although that rent may be much more than that paid before the lease was renewed, or continued. This, in our opinion, could not be the intention of the Legislature, and the expression “rent’”’ mentioned mm section 9 of the Act can only mean the rent which was paid at the time when the lease was granted and before TT was renewed or continued. If the appellants had agreed from the very beginning to pay Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM, as rent of the property’ in dispute, and if they had not taken any steps, within the period of four months mentioned in section of the Act, for having fair rent of the property determined, they could have had no case, and the rent agreed to be paid by them could be recovered by the respondents. The position here is entirely different, because when the lease was first granted, the rent agreed to be paid was Rs. 1,250, per ENSEM, and it was only at the time when the appellants exercised the option of having the lease renewed that the rent was increased from Rs. 1,250 to Rs. 1,375, per ENSEM. As the increase MN rent was made in consideration of renewal or continuance of the lease, the case, in our opinion, is hit by section 9(1) of the Act, and although the increased amount is also shown to be “rent”, it is not recoverable by the appellants. In coming to this conclusion, we are fortified by the fact that subsection (J) of section 9 of this Act saves agreements with regard to residential premises which had been entered into prior to the 1st of December 1941, and those with regard toothed premises which were entered into prior to the 1st of December 1942. If the mention of the Legislature had been to save all agreements which had been executed prior to the coming into force of this Act, they would have worded subsection (3) differently, and not limited the savings clause only to certain agreements. As the agreement for lease entered into between the appellants and the respondents’ predecessors-in- interest had not been executed prior to 1st of December 1942, it is not saved by this provision of law and, hence, only the rent which was originally agreed to be paid by the appellants can be recovered from them. 16. The learned counsel for the respondents, in this connection, referred to a case decided by the Court of Appeal, Sharp Brothers <6 Knight v. Chant The facts of this case are that in the year 1907, the defendant took on lease some tenement at a rent of 9s. 6d. a week. In the month of March 1915, the rent was raised from 9s. 6d. to 10s. a week. On the 23rd December 1915, the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): in the year 1907, the defendant took on lease some tenement at a rent of 9s. 6d. a week. In the month of March 1915, the rent was raised from 9s. 6d. to 10s. a week. On the 23rd December 1915, the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act, 1915 came into force. Subsection (2) of section of that Act, which prohibited payment of any fine, etc. was in the following words : “(2) A person shall not in consideration of the grant, renewal or continuance of a tenancy of any dwell mg-house to which this Act applies, require the payment of any fine, premium, or other like sum in addition to the rent, and where any such payment has been made in respect of any such dwelling-house after the twenty-fifth day of November 1915, then the amount shall be recoverable by the tenant, by whom it was made from the landlord. ”. The tenant continued to pay rent at the enhanced rate of 10s. a week until the 31st January 1916, 1e, for a period of about five weeks after the Act had come into force. The landlord, however, did not hold out any threat to the tenant that FHE divot pay the increased rent, he would be evicted. The tenant, on coming to know of the provisions of this Act, demanded the return of the rent which had been paid in excess of the rate originally payable. The Court held that although, to some extent, the provisions of the Rent Act were retrospective, there was nothing illegal about the agreement to pay enhanced rent, because at the relevant time this law was not in existence, and as there was no provision in the Act that increased rent shall not be received and the Act only made the increase ‘irrecoverable’ by distress or otherwise, the amount paid by the tenant in excess could not be recovered by him from the landlord. In our opinion, the views expressed in this case have no application to the facts of the present case for two reasons: firstly, in the reported case it was not held that the increase in rent was made as a consideration for the continuance of the tenancy; secondly, what that Court held was that the rent paid in excess of the anginal rate was not recoverable by distress or otherwise, and as the tenant had voluntarily made that payment he could not recover the same from the landlord. In the present case, the tenants, namely, the appellants, were given the option to have the tenancy renewed only if they agreed to pay rent at the enhanced rate of Rs. 1,375 per ENSEM. It 1s, therefore, obvious that the increase in rent was made in consideration of the renewal or continuance of the tenancy and hence it is hit by section 9 (1) of the Act. 17. Coming now to the second post, the finding of the learned Single Judge to the effect that the appellants were

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): that the increase in rent was made in consideration of the renewal or continuance of the tenancy and hence it is hit by section 9 (1) of the Act. 17. Coming now to the second post, the finding of the learned Single Judge to the effect that the appellants were “persistent defaulters”, was not seriously challenged by the appellants’ counsel. From the short history of this case, which has been reproduced in an earlier part of this judgment, it would appear that no rent for the period after the 31st of December 1957, was paid by the appellants. By the 29th of January 1958 a sum of Rs. 8,250 had become due from them, on account of arrears of rent, and by the 24th of April 1959, this amount had increased to Rs. 22,000, although, in the meantime, a check for Rs. 6,875 had been sent by them to the landlords. The plea raised by the appellants, in paragraph 3 of the written statement, was that they fell into arrears because although they were prepared to pay rent at the rate of Rs. 1,250, per ENSEM, the respondents did not accept rent at that rate. There is nothing, however, in any of the letters addressed by the appellants to the respondents to show that, at any stage, they offered to pay the whole of the rent due from them, at the original rate of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM; on the other hand, a reference to the letter of the 14th of July 1959 (Ex. 21) would show that the appellants were short of money and were not in a position to pay the WF ole of the rent which had become due from them. The learned Single Judge was, therefore, right in coming to the conclusion that the appellants had not been reach and willing to pay the rent as soon as the same had become due. This finding of fact, however, is not sufficient to dispose of the point raised by the appellants’ counsel, because his contention was that the deciding date, for the purpose of payment of rent, is the date when the Court is called upon to pass an order for recovery of possession, and is not the date when the rent had become due. According to the learned counsel, if before such an order is passed, a tenant pays, or is ready and willing to pay, the rent due from him, he cannot be evicted from the property in his occupation and that previous defaults, if any, in the payment of rent, or in his “readiness and willingness” has no effect on the case. The learned counsel contended further that if the intention of the Legislature had been that any previous default committed by the tenant, in w. payment of the rent, would deprive him of the benefit of subsection (1) of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, stead of USCG the present tense in this provision of law and saying “‘pays or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): had been that any previous default committed by the tenant, in w. payment of the rent, would deprive him of the benefit of subsection (1) of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, stead of USCG the present tense in this provision of law and saying “‘pays or is ready and willing to pay the rent payable” the Legislature would have used the past tense and would have said “has not paid or was not ready and willing to pay the rent payable” or employed some other such language, and as this was not done the intention seems to be quite clear that any previous default committed by the tenant in the payment of rent or ta his readiness or willingness to pay the rent would not deprive him of the benefit of this provision of law. 18. To support these contentions the learned counsel for the appellants referred to S. K. Shaw Brothers v. By Raj Krishna and another in which it was held that: “Where a tenant offers to pay all the rent due from him before the date of the eviction order, he is not in arrear and there is no non-payment of rent. Eviction order, if passed in such circumstances, will be in excess of the special jurisdiction conferred by the Act on the Controller.” In this case the relevant law was contained mm section 11 of the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act of 1947. Subsection (1) of this section prevented the eviction of a tenant on the expiration of the period of tenancy, or for non-payment of rent, or for breach of any of the conditions of tenancy. Subsection (2) of this section which empowered the Controller to order eviction of a tenant, on the application of a landlord, was In the following words : “A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant under subsection (1) shall apply to the Controller for a direction in that behalf If the Controller, after giving the tenant a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the application, is satisfied that the tenant is liable to be evicted under the provisions of subsection he shall make an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession of the building and if the Controller is not so satisfied, he shall make an order rejecting the application.” This provision of law did not specify the circumstances under which a tenant was liable to be evicted and in deciding this question the Court came to the conclusion that the Legislature, undoubtedly, had intended to give effect to the express provisions of section 13 of the Bihar House Rent Control Order, 1942, when enacting section 11 of the Act of 1947. The first mentioned provision of law was in the following words : “No order for recovery of possession of any house shall be made so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay rent to the full extent allowable by this Order and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): Act of 1947. The first mentioned provision of law was in the following words : “No order for recovery of possession of any house shall be made so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay rent to the full extent allowable by this Order and performs the conditions of the tenancy.” The words italicized by us above are similar to those employed in subsection (1) of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act 1953, and, if the reasoning of their Lordships is accepted as correct, it would mean that a tenant who pays rent or is ready and will mg to pay rent before an order for eviction is passed, cannot be evicted from the property in his occupation. The relevant section of the Bihar House Rent Control Order, 1942, had not been made a part of the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1947, but on the basis of the language employed in the Order of 1942, it was held that the tenant could not be evicted, because he had paid all the rent due from him before the Controller was called upon to pass the order of eviction. 19. The second authority relied upon by the learned counsel Is reported as I. J. Cohen v. S. E. Hostinger The facts of this case are that the relevant statute (Calcutta Rent Act, 1920) gave to a mere monthly tenant considerable fixity of tenure upon a condition, namely, that he was a rent pay mg-tenant and was not a defaulting-tenant. Section 11 of the Act laid down that: “No order or decree for the recovery of possession shall be made so long as the tenant pays rent to the full extent allowable by this Act and performs the conditions of the tenancy.” This provision of law was, however, qualified by a subsequent clause which laid down that no tenant shall be entitled to the benefit of this section : “Unless he pays the rent due by him to the full extent allowable by this Act within the time fixed In the contract with his landlord, or, MN the absence of any such contract, by the 15th day of the month next following.” It was held that as the tenant was in arrear and had not paid rent In time he was not entitled to the benefit of the provisions of section 11 of the Act. This decision was based on the ground that the relevant law had fixed the period within which the tenant was required to pay THS rent due from him, and it was only then that he could claim the benefit of the section which prevented his eviction. Although in the relevant clause which has been reproduced above, the present tense had been used, the language employed indicated clearly that any default committed by the tenant In the palm®"* of rent, when it became due, disqualified him from seeking the benefit of the section. It was, therefore, not surprising

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): in the relevant clause which has been reproduced above, the present tense had been used, the language employed indicated clearly that any default committed by the tenant In the palm®"* of rent, when it became due, disqualified him from seeking the benefit of the section. It was, therefore, not surprising that eviction of the tenant from the property occupied by him was held to be justified. The views expressed in this case are relevant only for the purpose of showing that if the Intention of the Legislature, in the present case, had been that any default committed by the tenant, In the payment of rent, should deprive him of the benefit of the eviction clause, the Legislature would have either used the past tense in the relevant clause, or would have worded it differently, as was done in the Calcutta case, and since as neither the past tense has been used mm section 10(1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, nor the language w. indicates that the previous default, if any, committed by the tenant, would deprive him of the benefit of this provision of law, his eviction can be ordered only if he does not pay, or is not ready or willing to pay the rent due from him, at the time when the Court is called upon to pass an order of eviction. 20. The learned counsel for the respondents contended that the appellants could take benefit of the provisions of section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, only if they had paid or were ready and willing to pay the rent due from them, as soon as TT became payable, and since they persistently made default in the payment of rent they are able to be evicted from the property In their possession. He contended further that the payment of rent made after the suit had been filed against the appellants could not prevent their eviction. To support these contentions the learned counsel referred to Maharajas Magana v. Nathubhai Vitals Ismail Dada Bhavani v. Bai Zuleikhabai (2) and Alcohol Adam Sheikh Jumanji v. Mohandas Jeenabhoy (3) and an unreported judgment of the Sind Chief Court, in Execution Application No. 518 of 1946 decided on the 7th January 1947. In the first mentioned case, which was dealt with by a Single Judge, the question requiring decision was whether payment of arrears of rent before a suit for ejectment was filed was a condition precedent to claim the protection under the Bombay Rent (War Restrictions) Act, 1918. Section 9(1) of the said Act, which was similar to section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, was in the following words : “No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay rent to the full extent allowable by this Act and performs the conditions of the tenancy.” Relying on Nevis v. Carman it was held that IFA

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay rent to the full extent allowable by this Act and performs the conditions of the tenancy.” Relying on Nevis v. Carman it was held that IFA tenant has made any default in paying the rent and was in arrears the Court can make an order for recovery of possession, even if he brings arrears of rent into the Court. In the other three cases, referred to above, on the basis of this very decision, similar views were expressed. As the decision in Maharajas’s case was based primarily on the reasoning employed in Nevis v. Carman it would be necessary to examine this case fully, for finding out whether the views expressed their were correctly understood by the learned Single Judge who decided Maharajas's case and whether those views are applicable to the facts of the present case. The facts of this case were that the defendant was a tenant of a dwelling house, within the meaning of Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act, 1915, and had not paid the w. rent due under the tenancy agreement. Upon being served with a writ for recovery of possession of the premises he tendered the rent in arrears. The plaintiff's case was that the tenancy was duly determined by notice to quit expired on the 25th December 1919, and also by reason of non-payment of the quarterly rent. The writ in the action was issued on the 3rd February 1920. The defense was that the rent due on the 8th February 1920, was tendered to the agent of the plaintiff who refused to take it. It was claimed that by reason of the provisions of the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Acts, 1915 to 1919, the landlord was entitled to an order for possession of the premises. The relevant section of this Act, namely, 1(3), was in the following words : “No order for the recovery of possession of a dwelling house to which this Act applies for the ejectment of a tenant therefrom shall be made so long as the tenant continues to pay rent at the agreed rate as modified by this Act and performs the other conditions of the tenancy.” The Court held that because the tenant was in arrears the landlord was entitled to an order for recovery of possession. (1) AIR 1923 BOM. 387 (2) AI R 1944 Bam. 181 (3) AIR 1929 Sind 13 (4) (1920) XXXVI T LR 396 The following observations at pages 396 and 397 of the reported judgment are very significant: "It seemed to him (his Lordship) that if the defendant wanted to put himself within the protection of the Acts he should, on receiving the notice, have paid his arrears of rent forthwith, and he would have paid rent for the last quarter duly according to the agreement. But he CI not

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): to him (his Lordship) that if the defendant wanted to put himself within the protection of the Acts he should, on receiving the notice, have paid his arrears of rent forthwith, and he would have paid rent for the last quarter duly according to the agreement. But he CI not pay the balance of his June rent till much later, and he did not pay his September rent till December 29; that is not until after the tenancy had expired by effluxion of time in pursuance of the notice. Then he did not tender the December rent until after the writ in the action had been served. Was it possible to say that, in these circumstances, he had continued to pay his rent, and perform the other conditions of the tenancy, so as to bring himself within the protection of section (3) of this Act ?” As under the relevant provision of law the tenant was given protection against the eviction only so long as he “continues to pay the rent’, it was not surprising that the Court came to the conclusion that the tenant was not protected, as he had not so “continued to pay rent.” Although the Legislature had not used the past tense in the relevant provision of law the employment of the word “continues” made it absolutely clear that only a tenant who paid the rent regularly was to be given protection and not a tenant who offered the rent after he had committed default and an action had been brought against him. w. 21. The position In the Bombay case was entirely different, because the word “continues” did not find any place in the relevant section and, with all due respect to the learned Judge who decided that case, the employment of the present tense in the section was not without significance. If the intention of the Legislature had been that any default committed by the tenant, in the payment of rent, as soon as it became due, would have the result of depriving him of the protection afforded by this law against eviction, the relevant section would have been differently worded and either the Legislature would have used the past tense, or would have, at least, made it clear by using words like “continues” that a tenant who did not pay the rent regularly would not be afforded any protection. This aspect of the matter was brought to the notice of the learned Judge, who rejected the contention by making the following observations “Mr. Campbell contends that there is a distinction between section 9 (1) of the Bombay Act and the English section in that the English section uses the words “continues to pay” the rent, instead of the word “pays” which is used MN the Indian section. But I do not think that the words “continues to pay” import any distinction. Whether the words are “continues to pay’ or “‘pays,” the real question is whether they refer to the time anterior to the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): the rent, instead of the word “pays” which is used MN the Indian section. But I do not think that the words “continues to pay” import any distinction. Whether the words are “continues to pay’ or “‘pays,” the real question is whether they refer to the time anterior to the film of the suit or the time subsequent thereto. I think that in both the English and the Indian sections the words “continues to pay’ and the word “pays”, respectively, refer to the time anterior to the film of the suit.” 22. With all due respect to the learned Judge, we are unable to accept his reasoning and are of opinion that there is a world of difference between the words “continues to pay” and “pays”; the first medicate some kind of continuity of action, while the second indicates something which is to be done at a particular time. In the present case, the words “pays or is ready and willing to pay” refer, in our opinion, to the date when the Court is called upon to pass an order for recovery of possession and do not refer to any anterior period and, hence, if at that time the tenant pays the rent due from him, or is ready and willing to pay it the Court cannot pass an order for his eviction. 23. It may here be pointed out that section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, is an exact copy of section 9 (1) of the Sind Rent Restriction Act, 1947, which, in its turn, was based on section 10 (1) of the Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1941. In all these provisions of law the words used are “so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay the rent.’’ The Punjab Act of 1941 had been repealed by a similar Act of 1943, and the latter by another Act which came into force with effect from the 14th April 1947, 1e. about a fortnight before the Sind Act of 1947 was promulgated. The framers of the last mentioned Act, however, failed to take note of the fact that the Punjab Act of 1941 had been dreys.call modified when, in that Province, the Act of 1947 was promulgated. Section 13 of that Act, which replaced section 10 of the earlier Act was altogether differently worded. This provision of law was in the following words: “13(1) A tenant in possession of a building or rented land shall not be evicted therefrom in execution of a decree passed before or after the commencement of this Act or otherwise, and whether before or after the termination of the tenancy, except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2) A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant shall apply to the Controller for a direction in that behalf If the Controller, after given the tenant a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the application, is satisfied that- (1) the tenant has not paid or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): provisions of this section. (2) A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant shall apply to the Controller for a direction in that behalf If the Controller, after given the tenant a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the application, is satisfied that- (1) the tenant has not paid or tendered the rent due by him m respect of the building or rented land, within fifteen days after the expiry of the time fixed in the agreement of tenancy with his landlord, or, in the absence of any such agreement, by the last day of the month next following that for which the rent is the Controller may make an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession of the building or rented land and if the Controller is not so satisfied he shall make an order rejecting the application: Provided that the Controller may give the tenant a reasonable time for putting the landlord in possession of the building or rented land and may extend such time so as not to exceed four months in the aggregate.” This provision of law differed from section 10 (1) of the Act of 1941 in several respects: Firstly, the words “the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay” were replaced by the words “the tenant has not paid or tendered the rent due by him’. In other words the present tense was replaced by the past tense. Secondly, the provision regarding “readiness and willingness” was omitted, instead an obligation was placed on the tenant to tender the rent when it became due. Thirdly, a definite period was prescribed during which the rent was to be so paid or tendered. The Act of 1947 was replaced by other enactments; the last of them BMG Ordinance VI of 1959. There was, however, no basic change so far as the phraseology of section 13 was concerned and this section, NBA modified form, is still on the Statute Book. It appears to us that the framers of the Act of 1947 realized the difficulty which the landlords experienced in the matter of eviction of those tenants who were defaulters, and who, after proceedings for ejectment were instituted against them, tendered the rent due from them, with a view to prevent their eviction. The Legislature, therefore, with a view to keep an even balance w. between landlords and tenants modified this provision of law and, while still giving protection to honest tenants, protected also the landlords from unscrupulous tenants by providing that if the rent due by them was not paid within the specified period they would be liable to be ejected. Inspire of this change of law, which took place in the Province from where the language of section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, was borrowed, no such change was made so far as Karachi was concerned, which continued to be governed by the law which was based on the Sind Act of 1947. The framers of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): Province from where the language of section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, was borrowed, no such change was made so far as Karachi was concerned, which continued to be governed by the law which was based on the Sind Act of 1947. The framers of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, could not have been unaware of the change of law which had taken place in the former Punjab Province and if they also were of the same opinion and intended to take away the protection which that law gave to tenants they would have amended section 10 (1) accordingly. As this was not done, It would not be unreasonable to presume that they were satisfied with the law as it was, although that law gave complete protection to those tenants who paid the whole of the rent due from them, or were ready and willing to pay that rent, before the Court was called upon to pass an order of eviction. 24. Before ending this discussion it would be necessary to refer the three other authorities relied upon by the respondents’ counsel. These are Brewer v. Jacobs (1) ; Bird v. Village (2) and Descent v. Fellow In the first mentioned case the plaintiff had let out a dwelling house to the defendant for five years. At the expiration of the term, the defendant remained in possession as a statutory tenant. He, subsequently, became in arrear and also committed a breach of the covenant. The plaintiff issued summons for possession on grounds of nonpayment of rent and breach of terms of the tenancy. Subsequent to these summons, but before the trial, the defendant paid the rent due from him into the Court. The matter came up, in appeal, to the King’s Bench, and it was held that the defendant was entitled to remain as statutory tenant on condition of observing the conditions of the tenancy which he had broken and, (1) (1923) K B 528 (2) (1947) 2 All B LR 7 (3) (1951)2 KB858 therefore, the County Court Judge was right in not exercising the discretion in his favor. The relevant law, in this case also, was the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act, 1915, and, as stated earlier, that Act protected those tenants only who continued to pay rent. The order passed by the Court was, therefore, fully justified. 25. The facts of the next case were that the statutory tenant of a dwelling house had held as tenant from year to year. The rent was payable quarterly, on the usual quarter dates, but the w. landlord had been in the habit of allowing the tenant to make payments a month or so after the due dates. The tenant failed to pay the rent due on the 25th March 1946 and tendered it to the landlord’s solicitors on the 16th May, on which the landlord sent the particulars of the claim to the County Court. The solicitors, on instructions, refused

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): month or so after the due dates. The tenant failed to pay the rent due on the 25th March 1946 and tendered it to the landlord’s solicitors on the 16th May, on which the landlord sent the particulars of the claim to the County Court. The solicitors, on instructions, refused to accept the payment, and on May 21, 1946, the plaint was entered in the County Court books. It was conceded that May 21 was the date of the commencement of the proceedings. It was held that where a tender of rent was made after the due date, but before the commencement of proceedings for possession, such tender prevented rent being “lawfully due” from the tenant to the landlord, within the meaning of para, (a) of Schedule to the Act of 1933, unless time has been made the essence of the contract. The relevant paragraph of the Schedule was in the following words “A Court shall, for the purposes of section 3 of this Act, have power to make or give an order or judgment for the recovery of possession of any dwelling house to which the principal Acts apply or for the ejectment of tenant therefrom without proof of suitable alternative accommodation (where the Court considers it reasonable so to do) if any rent lawfully due from the tenant has not been paid, or any other obligation of the tenancy (whether under the contract of tenancy or under the principal Acts), so far as the obligation is consistent with the provisions of the principal Acts, has been broken or not performed.” No doubt, in accordance with the provisions of section (3) of the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act 1915, as amended by the Act of 1933, which has been reproduced above, the tenant was entitled to protection against eviction only if he “continued to pay rent” at the agreed rate, but as according to the relevant paragraph of the Schedule the rent so due had been paid before the Court was called upon to pass an order of eviction, the Court rightly held that no rent was “lawfully due” on the last mentioned date. This authority, therefore, is also of no help to the respondents, because the language of relevant section was different from that of section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953. 26. In the last of the three cases the County Court Judge made an order for possession of the premises, within the Rent Restriction Act, on the ground of non-payment of rent, which was a year in arrear. The arrears were paid MTO the Court before the judgment, but the tenant was guilty of non-payment of rent, having had to be summoned repeatedly. It was held that the Court had jurisdiction, under Schedule I of the Rent and Mortgage Interest Restrictions (Amendment) Act, 1933, to make an order for possession when the rent was unpaid and had considered it reasonable so to do and that although, in the ordinary

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): to be summoned repeatedly. It was held that the Court had jurisdiction, under Schedule I of the Rent and Mortgage Interest Restrictions (Amendment) Act, 1933, to make an order for possession when the rent was unpaid and had considered it reasonable so to do and that although, in the ordinary case, payment of the arrears into the Court would make it unreasonable to make an order for possession, in the present case, having regard to the tenants’ record there was evidence on which the Judge could conclude that it was reasonable to make an order. The views expressed in this case also are of no assistance to the respondents, because the post for consideration was whether it was reasonable or not to pass an order of eviction in exercise of the powers conferred by the Schedule I of the Act of 1915, as amended by the Act, 1933. The Court held the order of eviction to be reasonable because of the persistent default committed by the tenant. It may be pointed out that under the relevant law it was obligatory for the tenant to “continue to pay rent” regularly and in case of default the Court was empowered to order his eviction, if TT thought that such an order would be a reasonable one. The question as to whether the tenant had committed default in the payment of rent, or not, was not in issue, because, admittedly, he had not paid the rent in accordance with the relevant provisions of law and for the provisions of the Schedule, which was asserted by the amending Act of 1933, his eviction would have followed as a matter of course. 27. For reasons given above, we are of option that as the appellants had paid the whole of the rent due from them in the Court, in obedience of the orders passed by the learned Single Judge, they were entitled to seek protection under section 10 (1) of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, and, hence the learned Judge was not justified in passing a decree for their ejectment. We, therefore, accept this appeal and, setting aside the judgment and decree of the learned Single Judge, grant the respondents a decree for Rs. 17,562-8- 0, with proportionate cost, against the appellants, on account of rent, at the rate of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM, for the period from the IST January 1958 to the 31st May 1959, after adjusting a sum of Rs. 3,687-8-0 which had been paid by the appellants in excess to the respondents. We also grant the respondents a decree for a sum of Rs. 2,083-5-3, with proportionate cost, on account of rent for the period from the IST June 1959, to the 20th July 1959, at the rate of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM. The respondents’ suit for ejectment of the appellants is, hereby, dismissed. The appellants will get costs of this appeal from the respondents. The decretal amount shall be realized from the money lying in deposit in the Court

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 368?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 368 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-28): to the 20th July 1959, at the rate of Rs. 1,250 per ENSEM. The respondents’ suit for ejectment of the appellants is, hereby, dismissed. The appellants will get costs of this appeal from the respondents. The decretal amount shall be realized from the money lying in deposit in the Court and if that money has already been received by the respondents, they shall refund to the appellants the excess amount, if any, realized by them. 28 Before ending, we think it necessary to point out that it is time that the law relating to eviction of tenants and fixation of rent of residential and non-residential premises in force in w. the rest of the Province of West Pakistan should be made applicable to Karachi also. The position, at present, is that several] proceedings, in different Courts, are taken in Karachi by landlords! to evict the tenants. First of all the Rent Controller is approached with an application under subsection (2) of section 10 of the Karachi Rent Restriction Act, 1953, for obtaining a certificate. Armed with such a certificate the landlord files a suit in the Court of Small Causes at Karachi, under section 18 of the Karachi Small Causes Court Act, 1926 for obtain a decree for possession. If the landlord succeeds in such a suit and the order becomes final in revision, the tenant files a suit under section 24 of the Karachi Small Causes Court Act, 1926, to claim compensation for the threatened trespass. If he succeeds in that suit, all the proceedings taken by the landlord become unfructuous, with the result that the landlord either foregoes his night to have the tenant evicted, or tries to avail of some other remedy for redress of his grievance. In all such cases several proceedings, in various Courts, are taken, which result in protracted litigation between the two parties. All this waste of time, energy and labor can be avoided If the West Pakistan Urban (Rent Restriction) Ordinance, 1959, is applied to Karachi, as it Is, or m a modified form. A copy of this judgment should, therefore, be forwarded to the Law Department for necessary action. H' Appeal accepted.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 780 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 780 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1962-05-04. The case involved MUHAMMAD SIDDIQ (PETITIONER) VERSUS CHANDUMALAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 24, S. 22 (3) PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 18 PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S.24. The case was heard by INAMULLAH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 780?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 780, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 24, S. 22 (3) PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 18 PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S.24. This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1962-05-04.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 780?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 780 were: MUHAMMAD AKRAM FOR PETITIONER. S. M. RAZA FOR RESPONDENT.MUHAMMAD ALI SAYEED FOR INTERVENOR.. The judges presiding were: INAMULLAH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 780?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 780 were: MUHAMMAD SIDDIQ (PETITIONER) VERSUS CHANDUMALAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 780.
Answer: Judgment The petitioner prayed for the issue of a writ of certiorari against the orders passed by the respondents 5, 6 and 7 cancelling his allotment order and ordering his ejectment. The facts necessary for the disposal of this petition shortly put are these:. The petitioner is a displaced person from Altar State. He was allotted about 80 acres of land on 8th October 1949, in Hyderabad District. The Respondents 1, 2, 3 and have been declared as non-evacuees by the Custodian. On BMG declared non-evacuees they applied for the restoration of their land in possession of the petitioner. Mr. Justice Mascot, the then Custodian of Evacuee Property, on 23rd November 1960, observed : “TT TS but proper that the said allotments be cancelled and the petitioner’s property be restored to them.” A writ petition was filed against this order. A Division Bench of this Court in Writ Petition No. of 1961 observed as under : “The grievance of the petitioners is that the learned Custodian after declared the property in dispute as nonevacuee could not recommend for the cancellation of their allotment. It is correct that under section 24 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, an allotment is saved, the observation is in the nature of recommendation and not binding on the Rehabilitation Authorities. We do not consider this as a fit ground to interfere in the writ jurisdiction because the rehabilitation authorities must consider the case of the petitioner before canceling their allotment and decide the case on merits.” This order was passed on 6th January 1961. In the meantime it appears that at the stance of the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi, Hyderabad and Khairpur Divisions proceeding was started for restoration of the property to the respondents. The petitioner was given show cause notice by the Assistant Rehabilitation Mukhtiarkar, Haley Sub-Division at Hyderabad as to why his allotment order be not cancelled and the possession of the land restored to the respondents. The petitioner appeared before the learned Assistant Rehabilitation Muktiarkar, Haley. After hearing the parties the Assistant Rehabilitation Mukhtiarkar ordered that the petitioner should hand over possession of the disputed land to the respondents within a week. The petitioner filed the present writ petition against this order. 2. The parties before me are the non-evacuee landlords and the intervenor who claims the disputed land on the basis of a lease deed executed by the Hindu landlords. They are represented by Mr. Raza and Mr. Saeed respectively. 3. The only contention that has been raised on behalf of the learned Advocate for the petitioner is that the allotment in favor of the petitioner is protected by section 24 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII of 1957) hereinafter called Act XII of 1957. 4. Mr. Abram, the learned Advocate for the petitioner, stated that if his client is given the standing crop he would not further like to contest this petition. It has been agreed by the learned Advocates of the parties that if the crop has not already been removed by the lessee it may be taken away by the petitioner who is cultivating the land through Paris. It was stated by Mr. Saeed on behalf of the intervenor that his client has already'removed the crop. On the other hand, Mr. Abram has submitted that it has not been removed. This settlement between the parties is sufficient to dispose of this petition. T have however heard the learned Advocates on the application of section 24 of Act XII of 1957 and the point involved is also of some importance I would like to express my views on this question. 5. In order to appreciate the contention of the learned Advocates for the parties it would be useful to reproduce section 24 of Act XII of 1957. It reads as under: “24. No order made by the Custodian under the provisions of subsection (3) of section 22 or of clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 23 in respect of property which is subject to an allotment under the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, shall affect any allotment order to which the property is so subject.” 6. Under subsection (3) of section 22 the Custodian can on an application by the evacuee hold that the property treated by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property is not an evacuee property. Under clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 23 of Act XII of 1957 the Custodian may restore evacuee property to an evacuee after an order from the Central Government. Under section 24, reproduced above, it would appear that the allotment is protected, in either of the two cases namely where the property is declared to be non-evacuee property and where the evacuee property under the orders of The Central Government is to be restored to an evacuee by the Custodian. In the present case clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 23 of Act XII of 1957 has no application. The property is not being restored under the orders of the Central Government. In this case the property has been declared to be non-evacuee within the meaning of subsection (3) of section 22 of Act XI] of 1957. The question, therefore, is whether the order of restoration by the Rehabilitation Department after the cancellation of the allotment order is legal in view of section 24 of the Act. I have come to the conclusion that in the circumstances of the present case the order of restoration passed by the Assistant Rehabilitation Mukhtiarkar dated the 20th December 1961 is a legal one. 7. A perusal of section 24 of the Act would show that in order to apply subsection (3) of section 22 two things are necessary namely : (1) that the property must be subject to an allotment order ; and (2) that the allotment order must be under the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956. In the present case the petitioner has produced before me at the time of argument a form, the heading of which is “Allotment for Individual Far' lies”. It is signed by a Welfare Officer and also, either by the Mukhtiarkar or the Deputy Collector which is not clear. It has been conceded by Mr. Abram, the learned Advocate for the petitioner, that this allotment dated the 8th October 1949, was extended up to 1955 under a general circular. There is nothing before me on the record’to show that it had been extended thereafter, [t would, therefore, follow that TT cannot be said that the disputed land in possession of the petitioner was subject to an allotment within the meaning of section 24 of Act XJJ of 1957. 8. In the second place, as I have already stated, it is not only necessary that the allotment should subsist, but it is also necessary that it should be under the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956. There is a distinction between the allotment made under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 and the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act (XLII of 1956). Under section 18 of Act XII of 1957 a Rehabilitation Authority may for the purposes of the rehabilitation of displaced persons or social or economic rehabilitation in Pakistan allot to any person any evacuee property or property of which the Custodian has taken possession under section 13. While under section 6 of Act XLII of 1956 the Central Government may buy order authorize a Rehabilitation Commissioner to pool such evacuee property as may be specified, and to allot the same to persons resident in Pakistan, whether refugees or not, and upon such order being made, the Commissioner shall have all such powers, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, as may be necessary to enable him to prepare a scheme for pooling such property and allotting it as aforesaid. The object of the two Acts is somewhat different. Under Act XII of 1957 the underlying object is administration of evacuee property m Pakistan, while the object of Act XLII of 1956 1s orderly settlement of persons who have taken refuge in Pakistan. Under subsection (2) of section 18 of Act XII of 1957 every allotment of evacuee property made between the first day of March 1947, and the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under subsection (1) of section 18. The allotment in favor of the petitioner therefore at best can be taken to have been made under Act XII of 1957 and not under Act XLII of 1956. Subsection (1) of section of Act XLII of 1956 requires notice. It reads as under : “The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and the rules made thereunder, and shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other enactment or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such enactment.” Though the provisions of section of Act XLII of 1956 are in addition to the provisions of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957 it does not mean that the allotment made under Act XII of 1957 should be taken to have been made under Act XLII of 1956. An allotment under section 6 of Act XLII of 1956 is made after the Central Government has ordered a Rehabilitation Commissioner to pool evacuee property, while under section 18 of Act XII of 1957 no such order is. necessary and any evacuee property can be allotted. The underlying object under section 24 of Act XII of 1957 appears to be to give protection only to that allotment which has been made of property, which has under the orders of the Central Government, been pooled by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. 9. Another very important question is whether a Rehabilitation Authority can eject the holder of an allotment order, even though it may be under Act XLII of 1956. In this connection subsection (2) (a) and (b) of section 7 requires consideration. They read as under : “(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by the preceding subsection but subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, a Rehabilitation Authority may-Subject to the provisions of Chapters II and III and sections 22 and 24 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 take over and assume control of any abandoned lands, buildings, business and undertakings ; eject summarily with the use of such force as may be necessary any person in possession of any abandoned land, building, business or undertaking whose possession thereof has not been authorized by the Rehabilitation Authority, or, to whom such land, building, business or undertaking has been allotted (whether the stock-in-trade or machinery involved in the business or undertaking has been sold to him or not) but who has failed to observe any of the conditions of the allotment, or who has subsequently been found in the opinion of the Rehabilitation Authority to be an unsuitable person to hold the property so allotted, or any person in possession of any property, which, after it has been allotted to him as evacuee property, has lost the character of being such property either by a declaration or by the operation of any other law for the time being in force.” A clear distinction exists between subsection (2) (a) and (b) of section 7 of Act XLII of 1956. Under subsection (2) (a) the Rehabilitation Authority cannot take over and assume control of any abandoned land, buildings, business and undertakings which is subject to an allotment order. Taking over and assuming control TS quite distinguishable from ejectment. In fact subsection (2) (b) itself provides that a Rehabilitation Authority may eject summarily any person in possession of any property which after it has been allotted to him as evacuee property has lost the character of being such property either by declaration or by operation of any other law for the time BMG in force. Section 24 of Act XII of 1957 does not afford any protection against a Rehabilitation Authority proceeding to eject summarily a person in possession of property which has been declared to be non-evacuee. All that section 24 of Act XII of 1957 lays down is that the mere declaration that a person’s property is not an evacuee property will not affect an allotment order. It does not however bar the power of the Rehabilitation Authority under subsection (2) (b) of section 7 of Act XLII of 1956 to summarily eject a person in possession of property under an allotment order. D 10. For the reasons given above, I would dismiss the petition but would make no order as to costs. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 780?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 780 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-05-04): Judgment The petitioner prayed for the issue of a writ of certiorari against the orders passed by the respondents 5, 6 and 7 cancelling his allotment order and ordering his ejectment. The facts necessary for the disposal of this petition shortly put are these:. The petitioner is a displaced person from Altar State. He was allotted about 80 acres of land on 8th October 1949, in Hyderabad District. The Respondents 1, 2, 3 and have been declared as non-evacuees by the Custodian. On BMG declared non-evacuees they applied for the restoration of their land in possession of the petitioner. Mr. Justice Mascot, the then Custodian of Evacuee Property, on 23rd November 1960, observed : “TT TS but proper that the said allotments be cancelled and the petitioner’s property be restored to them.” A writ petition was filed against this order. A Division Bench of this Court in Writ Petition No. of 1961 observed as under : “The grievance of the petitioners is that the learned Custodian after declared the property in dispute as nonevacuee could not recommend for the cancellation of their allotment. It is correct that under section 24 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, an allotment is saved, the observation is in the nature of recommendation and not binding on the Rehabilitation Authorities. We do not consider this as a fit ground to interfere in the writ jurisdiction because the rehabilitation authorities must consider the case of the petitioner before canceling their allotment and decide the case on merits.” This order was passed on 6th January 1961. In the meantime it appears that at the stance of the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi, Hyderabad and Khairpur Divisions proceeding was started for restoration of the property to the respondents. The petitioner was given show cause notice by the Assistant Rehabilitation Mukhtiarkar, Haley Sub-Division at Hyderabad as to why his allotment order be not cancelled and the possession of the land restored to the respondents. The petitioner appeared before the learned Assistant Rehabilitation Muktiarkar, Haley. After hearing the parties the Assistant Rehabilitation Mukhtiarkar ordered that the petitioner should hand over possession of the disputed land to the respondents within a week. The petitioner filed the present writ petition against this order. 2. The parties before me are the non-evacuee landlords and the intervenor who claims the disputed land on the basis of a lease deed executed by the Hindu landlords. They are represented by Mr. Raza and Mr. Saeed respectively. 3. The only contention that has been raised on behalf of the learned Advocate for the petitioner is that the allotment in favor of the petitioner is protected by section 24 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII of 1957) hereinafter called Act XII of 1957. 4. Mr. Abram, the learned Advocate for the petitioner, stated that if his client is given the standing crop he would not further like to contest this petition. It has been agreed by the learned Advocates of the parties that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 780?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 780 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-05-04): 1957 (XII of 1957) hereinafter called Act XII of 1957. 4. Mr. Abram, the learned Advocate for the petitioner, stated that if his client is given the standing crop he would not further like to contest this petition. It has been agreed by the learned Advocates of the parties that if the crop has not already been removed by the lessee it may be taken away by the petitioner who is cultivating the land through Paris. It was stated by Mr. Saeed on behalf of the intervenor that his client has already'removed the crop. On the other hand, Mr. Abram has submitted that it has not been removed. This settlement between the parties is sufficient to dispose of this petition. T have however heard the learned Advocates on the application of section 24 of Act XII of 1957 and the point involved is also of some importance I would like to express my views on this question. 5. In order to appreciate the contention of the learned Advocates for the parties it would be useful to reproduce section 24 of Act XII of 1957. It reads as under: “24. No order made by the Custodian under the provisions of subsection (3) of section 22 or of clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 23 in respect of property which is subject to an allotment under the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, shall affect any allotment order to which the property is so subject.” 6. Under subsection (3) of section 22 the Custodian can on an application by the evacuee hold that the property treated by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property is not an evacuee property. Under clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 23 of Act XII of 1957 the Custodian may restore evacuee property to an evacuee after an order from the Central Government. Under section 24, reproduced above, it would appear that the allotment is protected, in either of the two cases namely where the property is declared to be non-evacuee property and where the evacuee property under the orders of The Central Government is to be restored to an evacuee by the Custodian. In the present case clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 23 of Act XII of 1957 has no application. The property is not being restored under the orders of the Central Government. In this case the property has been declared to be non-evacuee within the meaning of subsection (3) of section 22 of Act XI] of 1957. The question, therefore, is whether the order of restoration by the Rehabilitation Department after the cancellation of the allotment order is legal in view of section 24 of the Act. I have come to the conclusion that in the circumstances of the present case the order of restoration passed by the Assistant Rehabilitation Mukhtiarkar dated the 20th December 1961 is a legal one. 7. A perusal of section 24 of the Act would show that in order to apply subsection (3) of section 22

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 780?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 780 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-05-04): the conclusion that in the circumstances of the present case the order of restoration passed by the Assistant Rehabilitation Mukhtiarkar dated the 20th December 1961 is a legal one. 7. A perusal of section 24 of the Act would show that in order to apply subsection (3) of section 22 two things are necessary namely : (1) that the property must be subject to an allotment order ; and (2) that the allotment order must be under the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956. In the present case the petitioner has produced before me at the time of argument a form, the heading of which is “Allotment for Individual Far' lies”. It is signed by a Welfare Officer and also, either by the Mukhtiarkar or the Deputy Collector which is not clear. It has been conceded by Mr. Abram, the learned Advocate for the petitioner, that this allotment dated the 8th October 1949, was extended up to 1955 under a general circular. There is nothing before me on the record’to show that it had been extended thereafter, [t would, therefore, follow that TT cannot be said that the disputed land in possession of the petitioner was subject to an allotment within the meaning of section 24 of Act XJJ of 1957. 8. In the second place, as I have already stated, it is not only necessary that the allotment should subsist, but it is also necessary that it should be under the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956. There is a distinction between the allotment made under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 and the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act (XLII of 1956). Under section 18 of Act XII of 1957 a Rehabilitation Authority may for the purposes of the rehabilitation of displaced persons or social or economic rehabilitation in Pakistan allot to any person any evacuee property or property of which the Custodian has taken possession under section 13. While under section 6 of Act XLII of 1956 the Central Government may buy order authorize a Rehabilitation Commissioner to pool such evacuee property as may be specified, and to allot the same to persons resident in Pakistan, whether refugees or not, and upon such order being made, the Commissioner shall have all such powers, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, as may be necessary to enable him to prepare a scheme for pooling such property and allotting it as aforesaid. The object of the two Acts is somewhat different. Under Act XII of 1957 the underlying object is administration of evacuee property m Pakistan, while the object of Act XLII of 1956 1s orderly settlement of persons who have taken refuge in Pakistan. Under subsection (2) of section 18 of Act XII of 1957 every allotment of evacuee property made between the first day of March 1947, and the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under subsection (1) of section 18. The allotment in favor of the petitioner therefore at best can be taken to have been

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 780?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 780 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-05-04): of 1957 every allotment of evacuee property made between the first day of March 1947, and the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under subsection (1) of section 18. The allotment in favor of the petitioner therefore at best can be taken to have been made under Act XII of 1957 and not under Act XLII of 1956. Subsection (1) of section of Act XLII of 1956 requires notice. It reads as under : “The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and the rules made thereunder, and shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other enactment or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such enactment.” Though the provisions of section of Act XLII of 1956 are in addition to the provisions of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957 it does not mean that the allotment made under Act XII of 1957 should be taken to have been made under Act XLII of 1956. An allotment under section 6 of Act XLII of 1956 is made after the Central Government has ordered a Rehabilitation Commissioner to pool evacuee property, while under section 18 of Act XII of 1957 no such order is. necessary and any evacuee property can be allotted. The underlying object under section 24 of Act XII of 1957 appears to be to give protection only to that allotment which has been made of property, which has under the orders of the Central Government, been pooled by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. 9. Another very important question is whether a Rehabilitation Authority can eject the holder of an allotment order, even though it may be under Act XLII of 1956. In this connection subsection (2) (a) and (b) of section 7 requires consideration. They read as under : “(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by the preceding subsection but subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, a Rehabilitation Authority may-Subject to the provisions of Chapters II and III and sections 22 and 24 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 take over and assume control of any abandoned lands, buildings, business and undertakings ; eject summarily with the use of such force as may be necessary any person in possession of any abandoned land, building, business or undertaking whose possession thereof has not been authorized by the Rehabilitation Authority, or, to whom such land, building, business or undertaking has been allotted (whether the stock-in-trade or machinery involved in the business or undertaking has been sold to him or not) but who has failed to observe any of the conditions of the allotment, or who has subsequently been found in the opinion of the Rehabilitation Authority to be an unsuitable person to hold the property so allotted, or any person in possession of any property, which, after

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 780?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 780 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-05-04): him or not) but who has failed to observe any of the conditions of the allotment, or who has subsequently been found in the opinion of the Rehabilitation Authority to be an unsuitable person to hold the property so allotted, or any person in possession of any property, which, after it has been allotted to him as evacuee property, has lost the character of being such property either by a declaration or by the operation of any other law for the time being in force.” A clear distinction exists between subsection (2) (a) and (b) of section 7 of Act XLII of 1956. Under subsection (2) (a) the Rehabilitation Authority cannot take over and assume control of any abandoned land, buildings, business and undertakings which is subject to an allotment order. Taking over and assuming control TS quite distinguishable from ejectment. In fact subsection (2) (b) itself provides that a Rehabilitation Authority may eject summarily any person in possession of any property which after it has been allotted to him as evacuee property has lost the character of being such property either by declaration or by operation of any other law for the time BMG in force. Section 24 of Act XII of 1957 does not afford any protection against a Rehabilitation Authority proceeding to eject summarily a person in possession of property which has been declared to be non-evacuee. All that section 24 of Act XII of 1957 lays down is that the mere declaration that a person’s property is not an evacuee property will not affect an allotment order. It does not however bar the power of the Rehabilitation Authority under subsection (2) (b) of section 7 of Act XLII of 1956 to summarily eject a person in possession of property under an allotment order. D 10. For the reasons given above, I would dismiss the petition but would make no order as to costs. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 41 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 41 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1961-01-23. The case involved SARDAR MUHAMMAD KHAN (PETITIONER) VERSUS MST. KARAM ELAHI (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include MUTATION GIFT WEST PUNJAB MUSLIM PERSONAL LAW (SHARIAT) APPLICATION ACT (IX OF 1948) - S. 3. The case was heard by NASIR AHMED MEMBER BOARD OF REVENUE WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 41?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 41, the court applied the following statutes: MUTATION GIFT WEST PUNJAB MUSLIM PERSONAL LAW (SHARIAT) APPLICATION ACT (IX OF 1948) - S. 3. This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1961-01-23.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 41?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 41 were: MUHAMMAD IQBAL CHEEMA FOR PETITIONER. MUHAMMAD ANWAR BHUTTAR FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: NASIR AHMED MEMBER BOARD OF REVENUE WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 41?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 41 were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD KHAN (PETITIONER) VERSUS MST. KARAM ELAHI (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 41.
Answer: This case relates to the succession of MST. AHSA Bibi who held a life interest in the land in dispute after the death of her husband, Her Muhammad in 1946. Her Muhammad had left one son Vardar Muhammad, the petitioner and three widows, Lai Bibi, AHSA Bibi and WW. RAM Elah who were step-mothers of Vardar Muhammad, I need not go Into the history of litigation regarding succession between the step-mothers and the son ; suffice it to say that the three widows remained In possession of certain areas with a life interest. MST. Lai Bibi died In 1954 and both the parties have given me to understand that succession in respect of the area held by her did open out in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the Muslim Personal Law Sharia Application Act, but the entire property was mutated in favor of the son. MST. AHSA Bibi died a short-time afterward but before her death she had gifted away all the property held by her to her granddaughter. Another fact to be considered is that the widows remained MN possession of areas considerably in excess of what was finally compromised upon in civil litigation which ended in 1944. The compromise decree was thus not acted upon, and no steps were taken to make TT affective by the son Vardar Muhammad. Now that MST. AHSA Bibi has died Mutation No. 39 has been entered (sic) can sanction giving effect to the decree in the revenue records. This action of the Revenue Officer concerned was obviously wrong as the decree was no longer operative and one of the parties to the decree MST. AHSA Bibi was no longer alive. The Collector was, therefore, justified in permitting a review of this mutation. The second question for consideration TS in respect of the gift made by MST. AHSA Bibi in favor of her granddaughter 1e. daughter’s daughter MST. Karma Elah1 It Is a fact that MST. AHSA Bibi had only a life interest in the disputed land and the consensus of rulings has been that a widow with a ITF merest cannot gift away the property for good to the detriment of the real heirs and the gift would merely be a transfer, for whatever purposes it may be, to last till the lifetime of the widow. The third point that has been urged is that if the view adopted by the Revenue Officers is accepted, succession to the property held by Her Muhammad would be governed by two laws, the law of custom which were prevalent at the time of his death and the Sharia which Is operative now and this would result in an analogous position. Further that it would be incorrect to presume retrospective effect for any legislation. A reference to section 3 of the Sharia Act however clarifies the position. No distinction is drawn in this section that it would be applicable only to the property held by these widows who succeed as sole heirs, and would not govern cases in which a part of the property goes to other heirs under the Customary Law. As regards retrospective effect: the section is again clear that in respect of property which is held by a female under the Customary Law succession shall open out to all persons who would have been entitled to inherit the property at the time of the death of the last full owner as if Sharia were applicable at that time. The intention of the legislature to which no reference is necessary under the law is quite clear, 1e. at least in respect of those properties' succession to which has not been finally decided and determined, the Sharia should be made applicable. As a result of the above discussion I would reject this revision petition. The order passed by the Collector directing that succession to the property held by the widow should be in accord with the Sharia is quite correct. I would further direct that the papers regarding succession to the land held by MST. Lai Bibi should be sent for. That case will be taken up by me on 14-2-1961. Notice to the effect is given by me to the petitioner. Petition rejected

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 41?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 41 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-01-23): This case relates to the succession of MST. AHSA Bibi who held a life interest in the land in dispute after the death of her husband, Her Muhammad in 1946. Her Muhammad had left one son Vardar Muhammad, the petitioner and three widows, Lai Bibi, AHSA Bibi and WW. RAM Elah who were step-mothers of Vardar Muhammad, I need not go Into the history of litigation regarding succession between the step-mothers and the son ; suffice it to say that the three widows remained In possession of certain areas with a life interest. MST. Lai Bibi died In 1954 and both the parties have given me to understand that succession in respect of the area held by her did open out in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the Muslim Personal Law Sharia Application Act, but the entire property was mutated in favor of the son. MST. AHSA Bibi died a short-time afterward but before her death she had gifted away all the property held by her to her granddaughter. Another fact to be considered is that the widows remained MN possession of areas considerably in excess of what was finally compromised upon in civil litigation which ended in 1944. The compromise decree was thus not acted upon, and no steps were taken to make TT affective by the son Vardar Muhammad. Now that MST. AHSA Bibi has died Mutation No. 39 has been entered (sic) can sanction giving effect to the decree in the revenue records. This action of the Revenue Officer concerned was obviously wrong as the decree was no longer operative and one of the parties to the decree MST. AHSA Bibi was no longer alive. The Collector was, therefore, justified in permitting a review of this mutation. The second question for consideration TS in respect of the gift made by MST. AHSA Bibi in favor of her granddaughter 1e. daughter’s daughter MST. Karma Elah1 It Is a fact that MST. AHSA Bibi had only a life interest in the disputed land and the consensus of rulings has been that a widow with a ITF merest cannot gift away the property for good to the detriment of the real heirs and the gift would merely be a transfer, for whatever purposes it may be, to last till the lifetime of the widow. The third point that has been urged is that if the view adopted by the Revenue Officers is accepted, succession to the property held by Her Muhammad would be governed by two laws, the law of custom which were prevalent at the time of his death and the Sharia which Is operative now and this would result in an analogous position. Further that it would be incorrect to presume retrospective effect for any legislation. A reference to section 3 of the Sharia Act however clarifies the position. No distinction is drawn in this section that it would be applicable only to the property held by these widows who succeed as sole heirs, and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 41?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 41 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-01-23): it would be incorrect to presume retrospective effect for any legislation. A reference to section 3 of the Sharia Act however clarifies the position. No distinction is drawn in this section that it would be applicable only to the property held by these widows who succeed as sole heirs, and would not govern cases in which a part of the property goes to other heirs under the Customary Law. As regards retrospective effect: the section is again clear that in respect of property which is held by a female under the Customary Law succession shall open out to all persons who would have been entitled to inherit the property at the time of the death of the last full owner as if Sharia were applicable at that time. The intention of the legislature to which no reference is necessary under the law is quite clear, 1e. at least in respect of those properties' succession to which has not been finally decided and determined, the Sharia should be made applicable. As a result of the above discussion I would reject this revision petition. The order passed by the Collector directing that succession to the property held by the widow should be in accord with the Sharia is quite correct. I would further direct that the papers regarding succession to the land held by MST. Lai Bibi should be sent for. That case will be taken up by me on 14-2-1961. Notice to the effect is given by me to the petitioner. Petition rejected

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 312 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 312 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1962-02-07. The case involved MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, KARACHI (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. (3) (6), AND 22 (7) (B) TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - S. 53-A. The case was heard by INAMULLAH AND ANWARUL HAQ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 312?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 312, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. (3) (6), AND 22 (7) (B) TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - S. 53-A. This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1962-02-07.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 312?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 312 were: H. A. RIZVI FOR PETITIONER. SYEED A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: INAMULLAH AND ANWARUL HAQ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 312?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 312 were: MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, KARACHI (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 312.
Answer: Judgment Anwar Had, J.-The two petitioners Muhammad and ISSN are brothers. They have applied to this Court for the issuance of a writ of mandamus or any other suitable writ to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan at Karachi, directing him to declare as non-evacuee certain piece of land measuring 5 acres 37 funds and situated in Del Male Goth Heidi Demon Tampa Kansas. They allege that they have been in possession of this land for over 20 years in pursuance of an agreement of sale entered into between them and a Hindu named Seth Bahamas Chatham on the 12th of August 1935. The sale price was fixed at Rs. 615, out of which they paid Rs. 485 to the Hindu owner. The owner died at Karachi on the 16th of March 1937 and, therefore, the sale-deed could not be executed. However, the petitioners continued in possession of the land undisturbed until the 20th of June 1955, when an Assistant Custodian of Evacuee Property passed an order treating this property as hidden evacuee property, and directing the petitioners to render account to the Rehabilitation Authority for ail the benefits derived by them from this land. 2. The petitioners went up in appeal and revision to have this order set aside, but did not succeed. However, they were advised by the learned Custodian, by his order dated 1-1- 60, that they should present an application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 for a declaration about the non-evacuee nature of their interest in the property. Accordingly they presented the necessary application on the 21st of February 1960, praying for a declaration that the land in question was not evacuee property. 3. This application was heard by Mr. Ir shad Ali Khan, Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property at Karachi, and was dismissed by him on the 12th of April 1960. A perusal of the order passed by him shows that the petitioners produced before him receipts showing the payment to the non-Muslim owner of a sum of Rs. 485, thus leaving a balance of Rs. 130 out of the agreed sale price. They did not take any legal steps for the specific performance of the agreement in order to complete the sale transaction on the payment of the balance of the consideration money, nor did they approach the Revenue Authorities for mutating the land in the favor. The learned Additional Custodian came to the conclusion that the transaction remained incomplete and did not transfer any proprietary rights to the petitioners, and that the application was time-barred, not having been presented before the Custodian within 60 days of the promulgation of the Evacuee Property Rules of 1950. 4. The petitioners went up in revision to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, who upheld the decision of the Additional Custodian by his order dated the 22nd of June 1960. The learned Custodian observed that the application was filed by the petitioners after a lapse of 25 years, and no reasonable explanation was given for this long delay. He also added that before the petitioners could be declared to be the owners of the land in dispute they had to file a suit for specific performance of the alleged agreement, but their suit had become barred by time in the year 1941. 5. Mr. H. A. Ravi, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended before us that the initial order of the Assistant Custodian treating the property as evacuee, suffers from an error patent on the face of it, for the reason that the Hindu owner of the land died as long ago as the 16th of March 1937, and he could not therefore have become an evacuee in 1947 by migrating to India. There is substance in this contention, as it is clear that a person who died 10 years before the Partition of India could not have become an evacuee with the meaning of that term as defined in section 2 (2) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. But the matter does not end there. In the first place, TT is pointed out by Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh, the learned counsel appearing for the Custodian, that there is no averment on the part of the petitioners that the Hindu owner did not leave behind any heirs who may have migrated to India due to 1947 disturbances. In the second place, it is clear from the facts stated by the petitioners themselves that they did not acquire proprietary title in the land in question, as full consideration had not been paid by them and no sale-deed was executed by the vendor in their favor. The result, therefore, is that the petitioners could not get a declaration that the land was non-evacuee. 6. There is, however, the further question of the effect of section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act, which has not been considered by the learned Custodian while dismissing the claim of the petitioners. It is clear, on the facts stated by the learned Additional Custodian, that there was an agreement to sell between the petitioners and the Hindu owner of the land, that in part performance of this contract the petitioners took possession of the property and have continued in that possession up-to-date, and that they had done an act in furtherance of the contract by paying Rs. 485 towards the sale price. It is also clear that they are willing to pay the remaining sale price as well. Under these circumstances, the transferor or any person claim mg under him stands debarred from enforcing against the transferees and persons claiming under them any right in respect of this property, other than the right expressly provided by the terms of the contract. In other words, it appears to us that the Hindu owner, If alive in 1947, or his heirs, could not, in respect of this property, enforce any right against the petitioners, except the right to receive the balance of the sale price. Such being the case, the question arises whether the Custodian can be regarded to be in any better position than the evacuee whose rights have vested in him by operation of law. 7. Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh has contended before us that section 5 of Act XII of 1957 over-rides all other provisions of law which may be inconsistent with this Act, and that under section 10 the petitioners are to be deemed to hold the property on behalf of the Custodian after the 28th day of February 1947. Finally, he has referred us to section 12 of the Act which gives power to the Custodian to take possession of evacuee property by force, if necessary. The argument of the learned counsel for the Custodian is that the Hindu owner retained the proprietary title in the land, although under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act he was debarred from enforcing any rights against the petitioners through a Civil Court, but the Custodian, having independent powers of taking over possession of evacuee property, suffers under no such disability ; and he can, therefore, throw out the petitioners by force, if necessary, at any time. 8. We are of the view that this is not the correct position in law. The term “evacuee property” is defined in clause (3) of section 2 of Act XII of 1957 in the following words : “ ‘Evacuee Property’ means any property in which an evacuee has any night or merest (whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or in any other capacity). ” The term “property” is defined in clause (5) as meaning property of any kind, and including any right or interest in such property and any debt or actionable claim, but not mere right to sue. It will thus be seen that the term “property” as used in Act XII of 1957 is not limited in its meaning to property in the physical sense, but also includes any right or merest m such property. This being the case, the property which would vest in the Custodian in any particular case would be the bundle of rights and interests which the evacuee concerned enjoyed on the IST day of March 1947. The intention of the evacuee legislation is clearly to provide for the administration of evacuee property, and not for the improvement and enlargement of the rights of evacuees. In the present case, the only right which the evacuee heirs of the vendor possess in the land in question was the right to receive the balance of the sale price, and not the night to dispossess the petitioners. It is only this right that must be deemed to have vested in the Custodian under section 7 of the Act and no more. Viewed in this light there is no conflict between section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act and the relevant provisions of Act XII of 1957. A 9. A similar view was taken by a former Custodian, the late Mr. Justice A. M. Jan, in Rehabilitation Authority v. G. M. Abdul Aziz when he observed that- “the Custodian in this case was a person claiming under the transferor and as such was debarred from enforcing any right against the transferee in respect of the property of which the transferee had taken or continued in possession other than the right expressly provided by the terms of the contract. The only right expressly provided by the terms of the contract is that the vendor shall be entitled to receive the balance of the price for the sale.” Mr. Shaikh made an attempt to distinguish that case from the present one before us by arguing that the law applicable in the Punjab at that time was different, but a perusal of the judgment of the learned Custodian in that case shows that the proposition deduced by him was not dependent on the provisions of the particular evacuee law applicable MN that case. We are in respectful agreement with the views expressed by the late Mr. Justice A. M. Jan. 10. The position thus clearly emerges that in the present case the right or interest or the evacuee is of a limited nature and the petitioners have a right to remain on the property as contemplated by section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act. It seems to us that such an interest m the property is not outside the purview of section 22 of Act XII of 1957, and in fact seems to be included in clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 22 of the Act. This will become clear from a perusal of the language used in the section itself which may be reproduced here for facility of reference : “22. Claims by interested persons.-(1) Any person claiming any right or merest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian on the ground that- (a) the property is not evacuee property, or (b) his interest in the property has not been affected by the provisions of this Act.” 11. Unfortunately, however, in this case the petitioners made an application in terms of clause (a) only of subsection (1) of section 22 of the Act, praying for a declaration that the land is not evacuee property. In view of the fact that the proprietary title still vested in the heirs of the Hindu owner such a declaration could not obviously be granted to the petitioners. There was, however, no bar to a declaration being granted to the petitioners ill terms of clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 22 of the Act regarding their right to remain on the property under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act. A reference to subsection (3) of section 22 shows that it is in the discretion of the Custodian to allow the application “wholly or in part on such terms and conditions as he thinks fit to impose.” 12. For all these reasons, we have come to the conclusion that, while no case is made out for our interference by issuing a writ of certiorari to quash the impugned order, there does seem to exist justification for a review of the impugned order by the learned Custodian himself} so as to grant the petitioners the limited declaration contemplated by clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 22 of Act XII of 1957. With these observations we would dismiss the petition, but leave the parties to bear their own costs. _ Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 312?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 312 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-07): Judgment Anwar Had, J.-The two petitioners Muhammad and ISSN are brothers. They have applied to this Court for the issuance of a writ of mandamus or any other suitable writ to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan at Karachi, directing him to declare as non-evacuee certain piece of land measuring 5 acres 37 funds and situated in Del Male Goth Heidi Demon Tampa Kansas. They allege that they have been in possession of this land for over 20 years in pursuance of an agreement of sale entered into between them and a Hindu named Seth Bahamas Chatham on the 12th of August 1935. The sale price was fixed at Rs. 615, out of which they paid Rs. 485 to the Hindu owner. The owner died at Karachi on the 16th of March 1937 and, therefore, the sale-deed could not be executed. However, the petitioners continued in possession of the land undisturbed until the 20th of June 1955, when an Assistant Custodian of Evacuee Property passed an order treating this property as hidden evacuee property, and directing the petitioners to render account to the Rehabilitation Authority for ail the benefits derived by them from this land. 2. The petitioners went up in appeal and revision to have this order set aside, but did not succeed. However, they were advised by the learned Custodian, by his order dated 1-1- 60, that they should present an application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 for a declaration about the non-evacuee nature of their interest in the property. Accordingly they presented the necessary application on the 21st of February 1960, praying for a declaration that the land in question was not evacuee property. 3. This application was heard by Mr. Ir shad Ali Khan, Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property at Karachi, and was dismissed by him on the 12th of April 1960. A perusal of the order passed by him shows that the petitioners produced before him receipts showing the payment to the non-Muslim owner of a sum of Rs. 485, thus leaving a balance of Rs. 130 out of the agreed sale price. They did not take any legal steps for the specific performance of the agreement in order to complete the sale transaction on the payment of the balance of the consideration money, nor did they approach the Revenue Authorities for mutating the land in the favor. The learned Additional Custodian came to the conclusion that the transaction remained incomplete and did not transfer any proprietary rights to the petitioners, and that the application was time-barred, not having been presented before the Custodian within 60 days of the promulgation of the Evacuee Property Rules of 1950. 4. The petitioners went up in revision to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, who upheld the decision of the Additional Custodian by his order dated the 22nd of June 1960. The learned Custodian observed that the application was filed by the petitioners after a lapse of 25 years, and no reasonable explanation was given

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 312?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 312 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-07): up in revision to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, who upheld the decision of the Additional Custodian by his order dated the 22nd of June 1960. The learned Custodian observed that the application was filed by the petitioners after a lapse of 25 years, and no reasonable explanation was given for this long delay. He also added that before the petitioners could be declared to be the owners of the land in dispute they had to file a suit for specific performance of the alleged agreement, but their suit had become barred by time in the year 1941. 5. Mr. H. A. Ravi, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended before us that the initial order of the Assistant Custodian treating the property as evacuee, suffers from an error patent on the face of it, for the reason that the Hindu owner of the land died as long ago as the 16th of March 1937, and he could not therefore have become an evacuee in 1947 by migrating to India. There is substance in this contention, as it is clear that a person who died 10 years before the Partition of India could not have become an evacuee with the meaning of that term as defined in section 2 (2) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. But the matter does not end there. In the first place, TT is pointed out by Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh, the learned counsel appearing for the Custodian, that there is no averment on the part of the petitioners that the Hindu owner did not leave behind any heirs who may have migrated to India due to 1947 disturbances. In the second place, it is clear from the facts stated by the petitioners themselves that they did not acquire proprietary title in the land in question, as full consideration had not been paid by them and no sale-deed was executed by the vendor in their favor. The result, therefore, is that the petitioners could not get a declaration that the land was non-evacuee. 6. There is, however, the further question of the effect of section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act, which has not been considered by the learned Custodian while dismissing the claim of the petitioners. It is clear, on the facts stated by the learned Additional Custodian, that there was an agreement to sell between the petitioners and the Hindu owner of the land, that in part performance of this contract the petitioners took possession of the property and have continued in that possession up-to-date, and that they had done an act in furtherance of the contract by paying Rs. 485 towards the sale price. It is also clear that they are willing to pay the remaining sale price as well. Under these circumstances, the transferor or any person claim mg under him stands debarred from enforcing against the transferees and persons claiming under them any right in respect of this property, other than the right expressly provided

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 312?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 312 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-07): clear that they are willing to pay the remaining sale price as well. Under these circumstances, the transferor or any person claim mg under him stands debarred from enforcing against the transferees and persons claiming under them any right in respect of this property, other than the right expressly provided by the terms of the contract. In other words, it appears to us that the Hindu owner, If alive in 1947, or his heirs, could not, in respect of this property, enforce any right against the petitioners, except the right to receive the balance of the sale price. Such being the case, the question arises whether the Custodian can be regarded to be in any better position than the evacuee whose rights have vested in him by operation of law. 7. Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh has contended before us that section 5 of Act XII of 1957 over-rides all other provisions of law which may be inconsistent with this Act, and that under section 10 the petitioners are to be deemed to hold the property on behalf of the Custodian after the 28th day of February 1947. Finally, he has referred us to section 12 of the Act which gives power to the Custodian to take possession of evacuee property by force, if necessary. The argument of the learned counsel for the Custodian is that the Hindu owner retained the proprietary title in the land, although under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act he was debarred from enforcing any rights against the petitioners through a Civil Court, but the Custodian, having independent powers of taking over possession of evacuee property, suffers under no such disability ; and he can, therefore, throw out the petitioners by force, if necessary, at any time. 8. We are of the view that this is not the correct position in law. The term “evacuee property” is defined in clause (3) of section 2 of Act XII of 1957 in the following words : “ ‘Evacuee Property’ means any property in which an evacuee has any night or merest (whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or in any other capacity). ” The term “property” is defined in clause (5) as meaning property of any kind, and including any right or interest in such property and any debt or actionable claim, but not mere right to sue. It will thus be seen that the term “property” as used in Act XII of 1957 is not limited in its meaning to property in the physical sense, but also includes any right or merest m such property. This being the case, the property which would vest in the Custodian in any particular case would be the bundle of rights and interests which the evacuee concerned enjoyed on the IST day of March 1947. The intention of the evacuee legislation is clearly to provide for the administration of evacuee property, and not for the improvement and enlargement of the rights of evacuees. In the present

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 312?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 312 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-07): be the bundle of rights and interests which the evacuee concerned enjoyed on the IST day of March 1947. The intention of the evacuee legislation is clearly to provide for the administration of evacuee property, and not for the improvement and enlargement of the rights of evacuees. In the present case, the only right which the evacuee heirs of the vendor possess in the land in question was the right to receive the balance of the sale price, and not the night to dispossess the petitioners. It is only this right that must be deemed to have vested in the Custodian under section 7 of the Act and no more. Viewed in this light there is no conflict between section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act and the relevant provisions of Act XII of 1957. A 9. A similar view was taken by a former Custodian, the late Mr. Justice A. M. Jan, in Rehabilitation Authority v. G. M. Abdul Aziz when he observed that- “the Custodian in this case was a person claiming under the transferor and as such was debarred from enforcing any right against the transferee in respect of the property of which the transferee had taken or continued in possession other than the right expressly provided by the terms of the contract. The only right expressly provided by the terms of the contract is that the vendor shall be entitled to receive the balance of the price for the sale.” Mr. Shaikh made an attempt to distinguish that case from the present one before us by arguing that the law applicable in the Punjab at that time was different, but a perusal of the judgment of the learned Custodian in that case shows that the proposition deduced by him was not dependent on the provisions of the particular evacuee law applicable MN that case. We are in respectful agreement with the views expressed by the late Mr. Justice A. M. Jan. 10. The position thus clearly emerges that in the present case the right or interest or the evacuee is of a limited nature and the petitioners have a right to remain on the property as contemplated by section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act. It seems to us that such an interest m the property is not outside the purview of section 22 of Act XII of 1957, and in fact seems to be included in clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 22 of the Act. This will become clear from a perusal of the language used in the section itself which may be reproduced here for facility of reference : “22. Claims by interested persons.-(1) Any person claiming any right or merest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian on the ground that- (a) the property is not evacuee property, or (b) his interest in the property has not been affected by the provisions of this Act.”

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 312?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 312 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1962-02-07): merest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian on the ground that- (a) the property is not evacuee property, or (b) his interest in the property has not been affected by the provisions of this Act.” 11. Unfortunately, however, in this case the petitioners made an application in terms of clause (a) only of subsection (1) of section 22 of the Act, praying for a declaration that the land is not evacuee property. In view of the fact that the proprietary title still vested in the heirs of the Hindu owner such a declaration could not obviously be granted to the petitioners. There was, however, no bar to a declaration being granted to the petitioners ill terms of clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 22 of the Act regarding their right to remain on the property under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act. A reference to subsection (3) of section 22 shows that it is in the discretion of the Custodian to allow the application “wholly or in part on such terms and conditions as he thinks fit to impose.” 12. For all these reasons, we have come to the conclusion that, while no case is made out for our interference by issuing a writ of certiorari to quash the impugned order, there does seem to exist justification for a review of the impugned order by the learned Custodian himself} so as to grant the petitioners the limited declaration contemplated by clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 22 of Act XII of 1957. With these observations we would dismiss the petition, but leave the parties to bear their own costs. _ Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 462 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 462 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1961-12-04. The case involved GHOUS BUX KHAN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, KARACHI AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20 (3) (B) 7) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170. The case was heard by INAMULLAH AND A. S. FARUQUI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 462?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 462, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20 (3) (B) 7) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170. This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1961-12-04.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 462?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 462 were: S. A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.HALEEM FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.. The judges presiding were: INAMULLAH AND A. S. FARUQUI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 462?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 462 were: GHOUS BUX KHAN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, KARACHI AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 462.
Answer: Judgment Baroque, J.-The facts relevant for the consideration of this writ petition may be shortly stated : By a registered sale deed dated 4th June 1"49, the petitioners purchased certain agricultural land from a Hindu for a consideration of Rs. 29,975-10. They applied to the Deputy Custodian, Sukkur for the confirmation of this transaction under section 16 of the Ordinance XV of 1949- This application was made somewhere in the year 1950, but as the income-tax clearance certificate of the vendor had not been obtained the matter was postponed from time to time and on 9th September 1958 the Deputy Custodian rejected this application on the ground that considerable time had been allowed to the petitioners to produce the certificate Which he had failed to do. On that day nobody was present on behalf of the petitioners. The petitioners preferred an appeal against this order to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) who rejected it on the ground that ample time for obtaining the Income-tax clearance certificate had been given and that he was not prepared to give any more time for it. The petitioners then took this matter to the Custodian of Evacuee Property by a revision petition under section 43 (4) of Act XII of 1957. 2. The learned Custodian in his order dated 27th July 1960, observed that the objection about the non-production of the income-tax clearance certificate no longer applied because a certificate by that time had been obtained and produced. With regard to the absence of the petitioners on the date of hearing he observed that this can be overlooked, because in spite of such absence the order of the Deputy Custodian could still be challenged on merits. He, however, went on to observe that though the sale was brought about by a registered document yet out of the agreed price of Rs, 29, only a sum of Rs. 1,0CO had been paid before the Sub-Registrar at the time of the registration. He then observed that though in the sale deed itself the vendor had admitted the receipt of payment of the balance of the consideration on different dates before the execution of the sale deed, it was difficult to accept this because if the petitioners had enough money and if they were willing to pay it to the transferor the proper course to them was to make the payment in the presence of the Sub-Registrar at the time of registration. On this ground alone he dismissed the revision petition, because he was of the opinion that no useful purpose would be served by sending the case back to the Deputy Custodian for decision on merits. The validity of this order of the Custodian has been challenged in this writ petition. 3. We have heard the Advocates of the parties, and we are of the opinion that this writ petition must succeed. The learned Custodian having condoned the delay in the production of the momenta clearance certificate and having also overlooked the absence of the petitioners or their counsel before the Deputy Custodian on the date on which the petition for confirmation was dismissed should have sent the case back to the Deputy Custodian for the consideration of the application for confirmation on merits. Admittedly he recorded no evidence, nor did he call upon the petitioners to prove the payment of the sale consideration besides the sum of Rs. 1,000 paid before the Registrar by further evidence apart from the mere admission of the vendor in the sale deed. In fact, he did not hold any inquiry and the petitioners were given no opportunity to substantiate their case that they had paid the agreed price. The course adopted by the learned Custodian clearly violates the principle of natural justice. He was dealing with this matter m the exercise of his revisional jurisdiction and, having condoned the delay and the default upon which ground alone the petition had been rejected by the Deputy Custodian, he could not then proceed to decide the matter without giving an opportunity to the petitioners to prove that they had in fact paid the whole of the consideration. 11 may have been possible for the petitioners to prove by cogent evidence, apart from the recitals of the sale deed, that the consideration bad was paid. This opportunity was denied to them. 4. We, therefore, allow this writ petition and quash the order of the learned Custodian dated 27th July 1960. The case will now go back to the Custodian. We make no order as to costs. - Petition allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 462?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 462 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-12-04): Judgment Baroque, J.-The facts relevant for the consideration of this writ petition may be shortly stated : By a registered sale deed dated 4th June 1"49, the petitioners purchased certain agricultural land from a Hindu for a consideration of Rs. 29,975-10. They applied to the Deputy Custodian, Sukkur for the confirmation of this transaction under section 16 of the Ordinance XV of 1949- This application was made somewhere in the year 1950, but as the income-tax clearance certificate of the vendor had not been obtained the matter was postponed from time to time and on 9th September 1958 the Deputy Custodian rejected this application on the ground that considerable time had been allowed to the petitioners to produce the certificate Which he had failed to do. On that day nobody was present on behalf of the petitioners. The petitioners preferred an appeal against this order to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) who rejected it on the ground that ample time for obtaining the Income-tax clearance certificate had been given and that he was not prepared to give any more time for it. The petitioners then took this matter to the Custodian of Evacuee Property by a revision petition under section 43 (4) of Act XII of 1957. 2. The learned Custodian in his order dated 27th July 1960, observed that the objection about the non-production of the income-tax clearance certificate no longer applied because a certificate by that time had been obtained and produced. With regard to the absence of the petitioners on the date of hearing he observed that this can be overlooked, because in spite of such absence the order of the Deputy Custodian could still be challenged on merits. He, however, went on to observe that though the sale was brought about by a registered document yet out of the agreed price of Rs, 29, only a sum of Rs. 1,0CO had been paid before the Sub-Registrar at the time of the registration. He then observed that though in the sale deed itself the vendor had admitted the receipt of payment of the balance of the consideration on different dates before the execution of the sale deed, it was difficult to accept this because if the petitioners had enough money and if they were willing to pay it to the transferor the proper course to them was to make the payment in the presence of the Sub-Registrar at the time of registration. On this ground alone he dismissed the revision petition, because he was of the opinion that no useful purpose would be served by sending the case back to the Deputy Custodian for decision on merits. The validity of this order of the Custodian has been challenged in this writ petition. 3. We have heard the Advocates of the parties, and we are of the opinion that this writ petition must succeed. The learned Custodian having condoned the delay in the production of the momenta clearance certificate and having also overlooked the absence of the petitioners or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 462?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 462 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-12-04): in this writ petition. 3. We have heard the Advocates of the parties, and we are of the opinion that this writ petition must succeed. The learned Custodian having condoned the delay in the production of the momenta clearance certificate and having also overlooked the absence of the petitioners or their counsel before the Deputy Custodian on the date on which the petition for confirmation was dismissed should have sent the case back to the Deputy Custodian for the consideration of the application for confirmation on merits. Admittedly he recorded no evidence, nor did he call upon the petitioners to prove the payment of the sale consideration besides the sum of Rs. 1,000 paid before the Registrar by further evidence apart from the mere admission of the vendor in the sale deed. In fact, he did not hold any inquiry and the petitioners were given no opportunity to substantiate their case that they had paid the agreed price. The course adopted by the learned Custodian clearly violates the principle of natural justice. He was dealing with this matter m the exercise of his revisional jurisdiction and, having condoned the delay and the default upon which ground alone the petition had been rejected by the Deputy Custodian, he could not then proceed to decide the matter without giving an opportunity to the petitioners to prove that they had in fact paid the whole of the consideration. 11 may have been possible for the petitioners to prove by cogent evidence, apart from the recitals of the sale deed, that the consideration bad was paid. This opportunity was denied to them. 4. We, therefore, allow this writ petition and quash the order of the learned Custodian dated 27th July 1960. The case will now go back to the Custodian. We make no order as to costs. - Petition allowed.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 72 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 72 was decided by BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT on 1962-05-29. The case involved ABDUL WAHID KHAN (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, KARACHI AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include ESTOPPEL EVIDENCE ACT (I OF 1872) - S. 115 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 36 (4) DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT, (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. (2) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43 (6). PAKISTAN https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1962/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1962_72.html 1/12 28/10/2025, 00:26 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1962/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1962_72.html (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43 (6) WRIT CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170. The case was heard by WAHIDUDDIN AHMED AND A. S. FARUQUI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 72, the court applied the following statutes: ESTOPPEL EVIDENCE ACT (I OF 1872) - S. 115 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 36 (4) DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT, (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. (2) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43 (6). PAKISTAN https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1962/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1962_72.html 1/12 28/10/2025, 00:26 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1962/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1962_72.html (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43 (6) WRIT CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170. This case was heard in BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT and decided on 1962-05-29.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 72 were: S. H. JAJFRI FOR PETITIONER. MAQEEM ANSARI P. P. FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. 1-4.MALIK KARAM ELLAHI FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 7.SYED RIAZ-UL-HASAN FOR RESPONDENT NO. 9.NEMO FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 8.. The judges presiding were: WAHIDUDDIN AHMED AND A. S. FARUQUI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 72 were: ABDUL WAHID KHAN (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, KARACHI AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 72.
Answer: JUDGMBNT Wahiduddin Ahmed, J.-This Writ petition is directed against the order of Mascot Ahmed J. passed as Custodian in a so moth review matter dated the 25th April, 1960 against the petitioner. The learned Custodian by this order reviewed the order of his learned predecessor Muhammad BUX Demon, J. dated the 14th September, 1957, and restored the order dated the IST November, 1955, passed by Mr. Manner Adam, the then Custodian. The dispute between the parties, In this writ petition, is in respect of the site of 13 burnt evacuee shops situated on Anderson Road, Quetta. Abdul Zahid Khan, the petitioner, on 24th January, 1948 applied for allotment to him of 13 burnt shops for re-construction for shop purposes on lease. On 3rd April, 1948, the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Baluchistan allotted these shops to him for reconstruction on the condition that he would execute an agreement of lease in favor of the Custodian. It appears that the petitioner took possession of the site before executing any agreement. On 13th October, 1949, he, however, executed a lease-deed for one year in favor of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Baluchistan. This lease was renewable from year to year at the option of the lessor. Curiously enough the lease executed on behalf of the Custodian instead of 13 burnt shops was in respect of 24 Municipal numbers. Its rent was fixed at Rs. 140 per month adjustable towards the cost of construction amounting to Rs. 55,000. It further provided that as soon as the lessee’s costs were adjusted towards the rent the lessee will have no right or title or Interest In the property allotted to him and TT shall revert to the lessor. On these terms the lease was renewed from year to year. But on 11th December, 1954 another lease was executed on behalf of the Custodian Department which contained absolutely different terms to those which were agreed upon originally between the petitioner and the Custodian Department. Certain interested parties brought this fact to the notice of the Rehabilitation Department and further alleged that the allottee had exceeded the limit of the allotment and constructed 32 shops. An inquiry was held by the Rehabilitation Commissioner-cu/w- Additional Custodian, who found that Abdul Zahid Khan has not only managed to include an additional area in the agreement but has actually capitalized on the allotment by converting TT Into a big business deal whereby he has carried out the construction neither allowed by the allotment nor covered by the agreement. The petitioner took up the matter In appeal before the then A. G. G. who upheld the finding of the Rehabilitation Commissioner and by order dated 18-12-1953 directed the subordinate authorities to Investigate into the allegations against the petitioner and in this connection issued the following directions : “It Is directed that the possession of the petitioner Abdul Zahid in excess of the thirteen burnt shops belonging to Ram Pearl Turbans Singh as allotted to him by the Political Agent’s order dated 3-4-1948 should be examined, and that FHE is found to possess anything in excess of that order, the property so possessed should be reclaimed and allotment order, if any, should be cancelled. Compensation, if any, is warranted, should be given to him.” These directions were not followed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. Instead of giving effect to the order of the A. G. G. he not only went back on his previous finding but without notice to the representatives of the department further came to the conclusion on 3-11-54 that after excluding the two shops No. 4- and 28, the petitioner was not found to be In possession of any property not properly allotted to hm. On 16-12-54 the Deputy Custodian executed a fresh lease-deed in petitioner’s favor. Under the terms of this agreement the rent was reduced from Rs. 1,600 to Rs. 100 per annum. Approved cost of construction was raised" from Rs, 55,003 to Rs. 87,864. The petitioner was further allowed to pay the price of the site as fixed by the Lessor in six yearly installments. Thereupon Abdul Rehman and Muhammad Ali Houri, petitioner’s tenants made representations to Mr. Manner Adam the then Custodian in Revision No. 157 of 1955. The revision being barred by time, the then Custodian on BMG satisfied that there was a prima facie case for interference so moth issued a notice to the petitioner to show cause why the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 16-12-1954 and the lease should not be set aside. After hearing the petitioner and the representatives of the department. Mr. Manner Adam came to the conclusion that the petitioner in conspiracy with the officers of the Custodian and Rehabilitation Department had managed to obtain the possession of much larger area then was actually allotted to him. He further held that the Deputy Custodian without any authority had entered into a lease in 1954 which virtually meant that he had gifted the property to the petitioner without any consideration. The then learned Custodian further found that the petitioner instead of Rs. 55,01,0 which was originally agreed upon as the value of the superstructure to be raised by him had managed to get TT increased to Rs. 87,864 illegally. The then learned Custodian in view of the above circumstances set aside the lease-deed executed in favor of the petitioner by the Deputy Custodian, Quetta, In the year 1954, and directed the Additional Custodian to make inquiries about the area of the site of 13 burnt shops which was originally allotted to him. He further directed that the Deputy Custodian will execute a fresh lease in favor of the petitioner contaming the terms mentioned in the agreement entered into In the year 1949, and will take action to recover the possession of the excess area of the site which is in his possession. He also directed to Investigate how much income the petitioner has earned after the construction of the shops allotted to him with a view to consider whether he had recovered such amount as would completely take away his interest in the property allotted to him in the year 1948. The petitioner challenged the above-mentioned order dated the 1st November, 1955 of Mr. Manner Adam in a review petition before Mr. Muhammad BUX A. Demon, the then Custodian in Review No. It may be mentioned that prior to filing of this review petition the petitioner had also filed a writ petition known as Writ Petition No in this Court at Quetta. When the matter came up for harem before the High Court the then Custodian undertook to investigate into the claims of the petitioner and if possible to redress his grievances. Accordingly by order dated the 14th September, 1957 the then Custodian reviewed the order of his learned predecessor and set it aside. He upheld the lease-deed executed in his favor in the year 1954 by the Deputy Custodian and found that since the petitioner had constructed the property on the site allotted to him without any objection by the Custodian, Rehabilitation and other connected departments all of them are clearly stopped from challenging, at this stage, the action of the petitioner lo putting up the construction on the site that was allotted to him. According to him the petitioner raised constructions on the site that was allotted to him in broad day-light and no one having objected to his action at that time, it was not open either to the Custodian Department or to the Rehabilitation Department to question the rights and liabilities of the petitioner in respect of the reconstructed portion. It will, however, be noticed that m spite of these clear observations the learned Custodian did not review the order of the learned A.G.G. passed by him on 18th December, 1953, on the ground that he had no jurisdiction to do so. Thus this order remained intact and in operation. Thereupon Muhammad Ali Ghoul, one of the tenants of the property in dispute, filed Writ Petition No. against the petitioner and challenged the order of the learned Custodian passed on 14th September, 1957, referred to above. This writ petition was dismissed on the ground that the tenant had no locus standi whatever to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court, but Plaque Hussain, J. in his order dated the 10th November, 1958 expressed his surprise on the view taken by Muhammad BUX Demon, J. the then Custodian in the above-mentioned order. He made certain observations about the night of the petitioner in the property In dispute and directed the office to send a copy of his judgment to the office for consideration and taking proper action against the petitioner. Being unsuccessful in the above-mentioned writ petition, the tenants approached Maud Ahmed, J. the then Custodian, for the review of the order of his predecessor Muhammad BUX, J. This application was found time-barred. The learned Custodian did not enter tam this application but issued a notice for so moth review of the order passed by his predecessor in the year 1957. This matter came up for hearing before Mascot Ahmed, J. on 25th April, 1960. After examining the various orders passed by the A. G. G. Baluchistan, Mr. Manner Adam and Mr. Muhammad BUX Demon in the years 1953, 1955 and 1957, he arrived at the irresistible conclusion that the petitioner had committed a fraud on the department and clandestinely obtained possession of much more area than was allotted to him. He further observed as under : “In my opinion, Mr. Monsieur Adam was perfectly justified in setting aside the lease of the year 1954 and In directing that an Inquiry be made for finding out the exact dimensions and other particulars of 13 burnt shops that were originally allotted to the respondent. His successor, Mr. Muhammad BUX A. Demon was, In my option, not justified min setting aside Mr. Monsieur Adam’s order and making practically a gift of the property in dispute to the respondent. I, therefore, set aside the order dated the 14th September, 1957, passed by Mr. Muhammad BUX A. Demon and restore that passed by Mr. Monsieur Adam on the IST November, 1955. I direct further that an inquiry be made for finding out how much area covered by the 13 burnt shops was originally intended to be allotted to the respondent and how much area mm addition to that was encroached upon by him afterward, with a view to determining the relative values of both the areas, which the respondent would not be able to acquire under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Copies of both the orders should be forwarded to the Deputy Rehabilitation and Settlement Commissioner, Quetta, and he should be directed to hold a thorough inquiry into the matter and submit his report, without fail, by the IST July, 1960. Further action to be taken in the matter would be regulated by the result of the inquiry.” The petitioner seeks to challenge this order in the writ petition before us. During the pendency of this writ petition CERTAM shops out of the property In dispute were transferred to respondents Nos. 1, 5,6, and 8 by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Quetta, and the petitioner has also challenged the transfer of these shops in this writ petition. Mr. Afro the learned counsel for the petitioner has made a faint attempt to persuade us that the decision of Mascot Ahmed J. referred to above, is not correct on the merits of the case. The learned counsel has failed to convince us on this point. The number of documents placed on the record confirms our view that the petitioner is not only in possession of a much more area than what was allotted to him but has also managed to OCTAM a lease In the year 1954 the terms of which are such which fully justify the observations of Mascot Ahmad, J. that the officer concerned who executed this lease-deed had made a gift of the property in dispute to him. It was urged by Mr. Afro that the view of Muhammad BUX J. that the department was stopped from challenging the possession of the petitioner of the property in dispute and his right on the site in his possession Is correct, has not impressed us. The question of estoppel does not arise constructions on the area which was not covered by the 13 burnt shops was challenged from the beginning. This question was raised from time to time in the years 1952, 1953 and 1954. The department at no stage made any representation to the petitioner on account of which he changed his position and had thereafter, taken a different attitude which had harmed the interest of the petitioner in the property in dispute. On the other hand the petitioner even after the decision of the Rehabilitation Commissioner in the year 1953 that he is in occupation of much more area than what was allotted to hm continued to raise constructions on the property in dispute. It, therefore, does not lie in the mouth of the petitioner to urge before us that the department is in any way stopped to dispute his right to remain in possession of the excess area which was not allotted to him. It must have been noticed that in the year 1954, the Deputy Custodian, Quetta, without the approval of the Custodian or any other higher officer of the Rehabilitation Department executed a fresh Cease-deed in favor of the petitioner. The terms of this lease-deed are such which no reasonable persons having any responsibility to the department could agree in the circumstances of the present case. The Deputy Custodian not only reduced the rent from Rs. 1,600 per annum to Rs. 100 per annum but further Increased the cost of construction from the original sanctioned amount of Rs. 55,000 to Rs. 87,864. The original term that the cost of the construction would be adjusted towards the rent payable by the petitioner was also omitted. The Deputy Custodian produced a new term that the petitioner would be entitled to be the owner of the superstructure and would pay only the price of the land as determined by the department in six-yearly installments. Mr. Afro contended that this action of the Deputy Custodian was fully justified in view of the instructions received from the Central Government on 2nd April, 1953, at page 57 of the paper book, It is quite correct that under these instructions the allottees were granted certain concessions, but these concessions were subject to the approval of the superior authorities in the Rehabilitation and Custodian Departments and were not to be invoked of his own by an officer of the status of the Deputy Custodial, Quetta. It seems to us that in the circumstances of the present case Mr. Manner Adam was perfectly justified in setting aside the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner passed on 3rd November, 1954 and the lease-deed dated 16th December, 1954. Mr. Muhammad BUX Demon was clearly in error when he restored the above-mentioned order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Cease-deed executed in favor of the petite NER on the ground that the department was stopped from going back on their own actions. In our opinion the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated the 3rd November, 1954 and the lease granted on 16th December, 1954 were subject to the revisional power vested in the Custodian. It 1s, therefore, difficult for us to appreciate how could this right be considered to have been taken away on the plea of estoppel. It is, therefore, quite clear to us that Mascot Ahmed J. was perfectly justified m restored the order passed by Mr. Manner Adam in the year 1955 and in setting aside the order of Muhammad BUX, J. passed in the year 1957. Mr. Jarl next contended that the learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to exercise the power of review vested in him under section 43 (6) of Act XII of 1957, because the property in dispute was requisitioned by the Government of Pakistan under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. and was no longer an evacuee property. This contention also has no substance. As pointed out by Mascot Ahmed J. in March 1959 when the evacuee property was requisitioned under a notification issued by the Government of Pakistan under subsection (2) of section 3 of the above-mentioned Act application of Muhammad All Houri respondent was pending in respect of the property in dispute before the Custodian and, therefore, the property in dispute was excluded from the purview of the said notification and had not lost the evacuee character. This contention, therefore, must fail. It was further contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the property in dispute was declared as non-evacuee before January 1957 and, therefore under section 3 of Act XII of 1957 the Custodian was not competent to declare it as evacuee property. This contention has no foundation. There is nothing on the record to suggest that the property in dispute was at any time declared as non evacuee. On the other hand on Nth September, 157, Muhammad BUX J. restored the lease executed in favor of the petitioner in the year 1954. Even if this order is taken to be in the nature declaring the superstructure constructed by the petitioner as non-evacuee it was not done Immediately before IST January, 1957 and the above-mentioned provision, therefore, has no application to the facts of the present case. It was vehemently urged before us that the learned Custodian has transgressed his power of review under section 43 subsection (6) of Act XII of 1957 and has acted in excess of the power of review that vested in him. Mr. Afro contended that the power of review of the Custodian is to be exercised on the same principles as are laid down In Order XLVII, rule 1, C. P. C. In support of his contention the learned counsel relied on a decision of this Court at Lahore in the case of Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram v. The Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore In this case Shabbir Named, J. observed that the power of review of the Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 43 subsection (6) was not unlimited, and in spite of the fact that the phraseology of this subsection purports to give unlimited powers to the Custodian the provisions of Order XLVII, C. P. C. were not entirely applicable to the exercise of the power of review by the Custodian of Evacuee Property. It will, however, be noticed that the learned Judges of the Division Beach in the above-mentioned case did not decide the question before them on the observations referred to above, but on different considerations. Under section 43, rule 6 it is laid down as under : “The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him in this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at an> time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require.” The introduction of this subsection has a history behind it. After the decision of the case by the Supreme Court reported as Samurai v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi (I) m which it was held that the principles of Order XLVII, rule 1, C. P. C. are applicable to the power of review vested in the Custodian, the Legislature completely changed the provisions of section 36 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, and produced the above-mentioned provision of law in Act XII of 1957 in order to remove the difficulties created by the above-mentioned decision. In our option, therefore, the observation of the Supreme Court, m Samurai’s case has no application to the provisions of section 43, subsection (6) of Act XII of 1957. The powers of review vested in the Custodian under the abovementioned provision of law are unlimited and TT 1s open to him to review any order of his predecessor or of his own if the justice of the case so requires. If therefore, Shabbir Ahmed, J. meant by making the above-mentioned observation that the provisions of section 43, Rule 6 are to be read I'm the light of the observations on Samurai’s case we respectfully differ from TT. In our opinion Shabbir Ahmed, J. did not mean so. If the whole judgment in the above-mentioned case is read it would appear that the Division Bench MN that case only held that the Custodian in exercise of his power of review under the abovementioned provision of law cannot decide a case in disregard of the clear provisions of law on the ground that the justice of the case demands it. There can be no dispute with this observation, and we entirely agree with Shabbir Ahmed, J. that if in the exercise of his power of review the Custodian disregards any provision of law then such an order cannot be considered as a good order. Mr. Afro, however, has failed to point out in what way Mascot Ahmed J. disregarded the provisions of any law when he reviewed the order of Muhammad BUX, J. The question before Maud Ahmed, J. was very simple ; whether Muhammad BUX Demon, J. was justified in reviewing the order of Mr. Manner Adam, and he came to the conclusion that his learned predecessor was not justified in up-setting the order of Mr. Manner Adam. Mr. Afro further contended that unless fresh material is discovered by the Custodian he has no power to review his own order or the order of his predecessor. In support of his contention he referred us to the case of Rai's Ghazi Muhammad v. The Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan In this case a Division Bench of this Court at Lahore held that the Custodian was not empowered to reopen the case on the ground of fraud if no new material was discovered by him. One gets this impression from the head-note of the case, but if the body of the judgment is referred to it would be noticed that in that case it was urged before the Division Bench that notwithstanding what is stated in section 3 of Act XII of 1957 if fraud is discovered after 1st January 1957 the Custodian should be able to reopen the transaction. In that context Kay ani, C. J. observed as under : “In other words there was no new material which could be said to have led to the discovery of fraud. We have found it necessary to mention these facts because it was argued by the Custodian’s counsel that notwithstanding what is stated in section 3 of the Act, if fraud is discovered after the 1st January 1957, the Custodian should be able to re-open the transaction. Since there was no discovery of any fresh material, the argument is not available.” From the above observations it is absolutely clear that the head-note given in the report is misleading and there is nothing in this judgment which supports the contention of Mr. Afro that if new facts are not discovered the Custodian is not competent to review the order of his predecessor, or of his own. On the other hand, the learned Judges of the High Court in this case took the same view which we have accepted in the present case. Kazan C. J. at page 867 of the report on this question observed as under : “Now, as regards the legal objections, our opinion is that the Custodian’s power under section 43, subsection to “review bis own order or an order passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require” and “at any time” is very wide and does not confine him to only one occasion. If something requiring further attention comes to his notice and if the justice of the case so requires, he ought to be able to review his order or that of his predecessor a second time.” Thus both the decisions cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner have no bearing on the facts of this case. It is absolutely clear to us that neither Maud Ahmed, J. disregarded any provision of law in reviewing the order of Muhammad BUX, J. nor did he in any way exceed his power of review in setting aside that order. We cannot, therefore, hold that the impugned order suffers from any illegality, MN this respect. We, therefore, hold that the impugned order is absolutely valid, and no exception can be taken to TT. In this writ petition the petitioner has also challenged the provisional transfer of certain ships by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Quetta, under the previsions of Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Mr. Afro the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that as long as the proceedings In respect of the property in dispute are pending before the Custodian Authorities the Settlement Authorities have no jurisdiction to settle the property under the above-mentioned provision of law. This contention is not without force. But the petitioner has not challenged the validity of the above-mentioned transfer orders by the department in the proceedings before them. It was urged BJ the learned counsel for the Department that if the petitioner moves the Settlement Authorities in this respect they would certainly consider the ports raised in this connection and decide the question. They contended that if the Settlement Authorities decided the post raised against him, it will be open to him to come to this Court in a separate writ petition and obtain the redress of his grievances, Mr. Music An sari the learned Public Prosecutor contended before us that the present Writ Petition suffers from misnomer of causes of action, and we should not exercise our writ jurisdiction in such a mutter. His contention appears to us to be well-founded. It seems to us that the petitioner is unnecessarily wasting his time In pursuing his remedy before this JCOURT. Even if the petitioner has occupied more area than what “was allotted to him under the Compensation Act he is entitled to get the property in his possession on payment of the market price of the land mm dispute and on payment of certain penalties. There is another difficulty also in the way of the petitioner. In order to determine his rights in respect of the property in dispute It is essential for him to get the inquiry ordered by Maud Ahmed, J. to be concluded. On the result of that inquiry alone it would be clear what property was allotted to him and what area of the land is m his illegal possession. This inquiry will further show the abilities of the petitioner in respect of the rent due from hm. So long as this inquiry Is not concluded the property in dispute will remain an evacuee property and the petitioner also will not be entitled to claim the property in settlement under the provisions of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. In these circumstances we are satisfied that there is no sufficient material before us to adjudicate upon the validity of the transfer of certain shops in favor of some of the abovementioned respondents. The petitioner not only, therefore, should get the equity concluded against him, as ordered by Maud Ahmed, J. but should, in the first instance, also approach the Settlement Authority for the adjudication of his rights in respect of the property in dispute for the purposes of settlement. In our opinion, this is not a fit case in which we should exercise our writ jurisdiction on the above-mentioned question involved in this matter. In the result we find no force in this Writ Petition and, subject to the above remarks, dismiss it with costs. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): JUDGMBNT Wahiduddin Ahmed, J.-This Writ petition is directed against the order of Mascot Ahmed J. passed as Custodian in a so moth review matter dated the 25th April, 1960 against the petitioner. The learned Custodian by this order reviewed the order of his learned predecessor Muhammad BUX Demon, J. dated the 14th September, 1957, and restored the order dated the IST November, 1955, passed by Mr. Manner Adam, the then Custodian. The dispute between the parties, In this writ petition, is in respect of the site of 13 burnt evacuee shops situated on Anderson Road, Quetta. Abdul Zahid Khan, the petitioner, on 24th January, 1948 applied for allotment to him of 13 burnt shops for re-construction for shop purposes on lease. On 3rd April, 1948, the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Baluchistan allotted these shops to him for reconstruction on the condition that he would execute an agreement of lease in favor of the Custodian. It appears that the petitioner took possession of the site before executing any agreement. On 13th October, 1949, he, however, executed a lease-deed for one year in favor of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Baluchistan. This lease was renewable from year to year at the option of the lessor. Curiously enough the lease executed on behalf of the Custodian instead of 13 burnt shops was in respect of 24 Municipal numbers. Its rent was fixed at Rs. 140 per month adjustable towards the cost of construction amounting to Rs. 55,000. It further provided that as soon as the lessee’s costs were adjusted towards the rent the lessee will have no right or title or Interest In the property allotted to him and TT shall revert to the lessor. On these terms the lease was renewed from year to year. But on 11th December, 1954 another lease was executed on behalf of the Custodian Department which contained absolutely different terms to those which were agreed upon originally between the petitioner and the Custodian Department. Certain interested parties brought this fact to the notice of the Rehabilitation Department and further alleged that the allottee had exceeded the limit of the allotment and constructed 32 shops. An inquiry was held by the Rehabilitation Commissioner-cu/w- Additional Custodian, who found that Abdul Zahid Khan has not only managed to include an additional area in the agreement but has actually capitalized on the allotment by converting TT Into a big business deal whereby he has carried out the construction neither allowed by the allotment nor covered by the agreement. The petitioner took up the matter In appeal before the then A. G. G. who upheld the finding of the Rehabilitation Commissioner and by order dated 18-12-1953 directed the subordinate authorities to Investigate into the allegations against the petitioner and in this connection issued the following directions : “It Is directed that the possession of the petitioner Abdul Zahid in excess of the thirteen burnt shops belonging to Ram Pearl Turbans Singh as allotted to him by the Political Agent’s order dated 3-4-1948 should be

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): allegations against the petitioner and in this connection issued the following directions : “It Is directed that the possession of the petitioner Abdul Zahid in excess of the thirteen burnt shops belonging to Ram Pearl Turbans Singh as allotted to him by the Political Agent’s order dated 3-4-1948 should be examined, and that FHE is found to possess anything in excess of that order, the property so possessed should be reclaimed and allotment order, if any, should be cancelled. Compensation, if any, is warranted, should be given to him.” These directions were not followed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. Instead of giving effect to the order of the A. G. G. he not only went back on his previous finding but without notice to the representatives of the department further came to the conclusion on 3-11-54 that after excluding the two shops No. 4- and 28, the petitioner was not found to be In possession of any property not properly allotted to hm. On 16-12-54 the Deputy Custodian executed a fresh lease-deed in petitioner’s favor. Under the terms of this agreement the rent was reduced from Rs. 1,600 to Rs. 100 per annum. Approved cost of construction was raised" from Rs, 55,003 to Rs. 87,864. The petitioner was further allowed to pay the price of the site as fixed by the Lessor in six yearly installments. Thereupon Abdul Rehman and Muhammad Ali Houri, petitioner’s tenants made representations to Mr. Manner Adam the then Custodian in Revision No. 157 of 1955. The revision being barred by time, the then Custodian on BMG satisfied that there was a prima facie case for interference so moth issued a notice to the petitioner to show cause why the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 16-12-1954 and the lease should not be set aside. After hearing the petitioner and the representatives of the department. Mr. Manner Adam came to the conclusion that the petitioner in conspiracy with the officers of the Custodian and Rehabilitation Department had managed to obtain the possession of much larger area then was actually allotted to him. He further held that the Deputy Custodian without any authority had entered into a lease in 1954 which virtually meant that he had gifted the property to the petitioner without any consideration. The then learned Custodian further found that the petitioner instead of Rs. 55,01,0 which was originally agreed upon as the value of the superstructure to be raised by him had managed to get TT increased to Rs. 87,864 illegally. The then learned Custodian in view of the above circumstances set aside the lease-deed executed in favor of the petitioner by the Deputy Custodian, Quetta, In the year 1954, and directed the Additional Custodian to make inquiries about the area of the site of 13 burnt shops which was originally allotted to him. He further directed that the Deputy Custodian will execute a fresh lease in favor of the petitioner contaming the terms mentioned in the agreement entered into In the year 1949, and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): to make inquiries about the area of the site of 13 burnt shops which was originally allotted to him. He further directed that the Deputy Custodian will execute a fresh lease in favor of the petitioner contaming the terms mentioned in the agreement entered into In the year 1949, and will take action to recover the possession of the excess area of the site which is in his possession. He also directed to Investigate how much income the petitioner has earned after the construction of the shops allotted to him with a view to consider whether he had recovered such amount as would completely take away his interest in the property allotted to him in the year 1948. The petitioner challenged the above-mentioned order dated the 1st November, 1955 of Mr. Manner Adam in a review petition before Mr. Muhammad BUX A. Demon, the then Custodian in Review No. It may be mentioned that prior to filing of this review petition the petitioner had also filed a writ petition known as Writ Petition No in this Court at Quetta. When the matter came up for harem before the High Court the then Custodian undertook to investigate into the claims of the petitioner and if possible to redress his grievances. Accordingly by order dated the 14th September, 1957 the then Custodian reviewed the order of his learned predecessor and set it aside. He upheld the lease-deed executed in his favor in the year 1954 by the Deputy Custodian and found that since the petitioner had constructed the property on the site allotted to him without any objection by the Custodian, Rehabilitation and other connected departments all of them are clearly stopped from challenging, at this stage, the action of the petitioner lo putting up the construction on the site that was allotted to him. According to him the petitioner raised constructions on the site that was allotted to him in broad day-light and no one having objected to his action at that time, it was not open either to the Custodian Department or to the Rehabilitation Department to question the rights and liabilities of the petitioner in respect of the reconstructed portion. It will, however, be noticed that m spite of these clear observations the learned Custodian did not review the order of the learned A.G.G. passed by him on 18th December, 1953, on the ground that he had no jurisdiction to do so. Thus this order remained intact and in operation. Thereupon Muhammad Ali Ghoul, one of the tenants of the property in dispute, filed Writ Petition No. against the petitioner and challenged the order of the learned Custodian passed on 14th September, 1957, referred to above. This writ petition was dismissed on the ground that the tenant had no locus standi whatever to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court, but Plaque Hussain, J. in his order dated the 10th November, 1958 expressed his surprise on the view taken by Muhammad BUX Demon, J. the then Custodian in the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): was dismissed on the ground that the tenant had no locus standi whatever to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court, but Plaque Hussain, J. in his order dated the 10th November, 1958 expressed his surprise on the view taken by Muhammad BUX Demon, J. the then Custodian in the above-mentioned order. He made certain observations about the night of the petitioner in the property In dispute and directed the office to send a copy of his judgment to the office for consideration and taking proper action against the petitioner. Being unsuccessful in the above-mentioned writ petition, the tenants approached Maud Ahmed, J. the then Custodian, for the review of the order of his predecessor Muhammad BUX, J. This application was found time-barred. The learned Custodian did not enter tam this application but issued a notice for so moth review of the order passed by his predecessor in the year 1957. This matter came up for hearing before Mascot Ahmed, J. on 25th April, 1960. After examining the various orders passed by the A. G. G. Baluchistan, Mr. Manner Adam and Mr. Muhammad BUX Demon in the years 1953, 1955 and 1957, he arrived at the irresistible conclusion that the petitioner had committed a fraud on the department and clandestinely obtained possession of much more area than was allotted to him. He further observed as under : “In my opinion, Mr. Monsieur Adam was perfectly justified in setting aside the lease of the year 1954 and In directing that an Inquiry be made for finding out the exact dimensions and other particulars of 13 burnt shops that were originally allotted to the respondent. His successor, Mr. Muhammad BUX A. Demon was, In my option, not justified min setting aside Mr. Monsieur Adam’s order and making practically a gift of the property in dispute to the respondent. I, therefore, set aside the order dated the 14th September, 1957, passed by Mr. Muhammad BUX A. Demon and restore that passed by Mr. Monsieur Adam on the IST November, 1955. I direct further that an inquiry be made for finding out how much area covered by the 13 burnt shops was originally intended to be allotted to the respondent and how much area mm addition to that was encroached upon by him afterward, with a view to determining the relative values of both the areas, which the respondent would not be able to acquire under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Copies of both the orders should be forwarded to the Deputy Rehabilitation and Settlement Commissioner, Quetta, and he should be directed to hold a thorough inquiry into the matter and submit his report, without fail, by the IST July, 1960. Further action to be taken in the matter would be regulated by the result of the inquiry.” The petitioner seeks to challenge this order in the writ petition before us. During the pendency of this writ petition CERTAM shops out of the property In dispute were transferred to respondents Nos.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): Further action to be taken in the matter would be regulated by the result of the inquiry.” The petitioner seeks to challenge this order in the writ petition before us. During the pendency of this writ petition CERTAM shops out of the property In dispute were transferred to respondents Nos. 1, 5,6, and 8 by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Quetta, and the petitioner has also challenged the transfer of these shops in this writ petition. Mr. Afro the learned counsel for the petitioner has made a faint attempt to persuade us that the decision of Mascot Ahmed J. referred to above, is not correct on the merits of the case. The learned counsel has failed to convince us on this point. The number of documents placed on the record confirms our view that the petitioner is not only in possession of a much more area than what was allotted to him but has also managed to OCTAM a lease In the year 1954 the terms of which are such which fully justify the observations of Mascot Ahmad, J. that the officer concerned who executed this lease-deed had made a gift of the property in dispute to him. It was urged by Mr. Afro that the view of Muhammad BUX J. that the department was stopped from challenging the possession of the petitioner of the property in dispute and his right on the site in his possession Is correct, has not impressed us. The question of estoppel does not arise constructions on the area which was not covered by the 13 burnt shops was challenged from the beginning. This question was raised from time to time in the years 1952, 1953 and 1954. The department at no stage made any representation to the petitioner on account of which he changed his position and had thereafter, taken a different attitude which had harmed the interest of the petitioner in the property in dispute. On the other hand the petitioner even after the decision of the Rehabilitation Commissioner in the year 1953 that he is in occupation of much more area than what was allotted to hm continued to raise constructions on the property in dispute. It, therefore, does not lie in the mouth of the petitioner to urge before us that the department is in any way stopped to dispute his right to remain in possession of the excess area which was not allotted to him. It must have been noticed that in the year 1954, the Deputy Custodian, Quetta, without the approval of the Custodian or any other higher officer of the Rehabilitation Department executed a fresh Cease-deed in favor of the petitioner. The terms of this lease-deed are such which no reasonable persons having any responsibility to the department could agree in the circumstances of the present case. The Deputy Custodian not only reduced the rent from Rs. 1,600 per annum to Rs. 100 per annum but further Increased the cost of construction from the original sanctioned amount of Rs.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): no reasonable persons having any responsibility to the department could agree in the circumstances of the present case. The Deputy Custodian not only reduced the rent from Rs. 1,600 per annum to Rs. 100 per annum but further Increased the cost of construction from the original sanctioned amount of Rs. 55,000 to Rs. 87,864. The original term that the cost of the construction would be adjusted towards the rent payable by the petitioner was also omitted. The Deputy Custodian produced a new term that the petitioner would be entitled to be the owner of the superstructure and would pay only the price of the land as determined by the department in six-yearly installments. Mr. Afro contended that this action of the Deputy Custodian was fully justified in view of the instructions received from the Central Government on 2nd April, 1953, at page 57 of the paper book, It is quite correct that under these instructions the allottees were granted certain concessions, but these concessions were subject to the approval of the superior authorities in the Rehabilitation and Custodian Departments and were not to be invoked of his own by an officer of the status of the Deputy Custodial, Quetta. It seems to us that in the circumstances of the present case Mr. Manner Adam was perfectly justified in setting aside the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner passed on 3rd November, 1954 and the lease-deed dated 16th December, 1954. Mr. Muhammad BUX Demon was clearly in error when he restored the above-mentioned order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Cease-deed executed in favor of the petite NER on the ground that the department was stopped from going back on their own actions. In our opinion the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated the 3rd November, 1954 and the lease granted on 16th December, 1954 were subject to the revisional power vested in the Custodian. It 1s, therefore, difficult for us to appreciate how could this right be considered to have been taken away on the plea of estoppel. It is, therefore, quite clear to us that Mascot Ahmed J. was perfectly justified m restored the order passed by Mr. Manner Adam in the year 1955 and in setting aside the order of Muhammad BUX, J. passed in the year 1957. Mr. Jarl next contended that the learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to exercise the power of review vested in him under section 43 (6) of Act XII of 1957, because the property in dispute was requisitioned by the Government of Pakistan under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. and was no longer an evacuee property. This contention also has no substance. As pointed out by Mascot Ahmed J. in March 1959 when the evacuee property was requisitioned under a notification issued by the Government of Pakistan under subsection (2) of section 3 of the above-mentioned Act application of Muhammad All Houri respondent was pending in respect of the property in dispute before the Custodian and, therefore, the property in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): March 1959 when the evacuee property was requisitioned under a notification issued by the Government of Pakistan under subsection (2) of section 3 of the above-mentioned Act application of Muhammad All Houri respondent was pending in respect of the property in dispute before the Custodian and, therefore, the property in dispute was excluded from the purview of the said notification and had not lost the evacuee character. This contention, therefore, must fail. It was further contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the property in dispute was declared as non-evacuee before January 1957 and, therefore under section 3 of Act XII of 1957 the Custodian was not competent to declare it as evacuee property. This contention has no foundation. There is nothing on the record to suggest that the property in dispute was at any time declared as non evacuee. On the other hand on Nth September, 157, Muhammad BUX J. restored the lease executed in favor of the petitioner in the year 1954. Even if this order is taken to be in the nature declaring the superstructure constructed by the petitioner as non-evacuee it was not done Immediately before IST January, 1957 and the above-mentioned provision, therefore, has no application to the facts of the present case. It was vehemently urged before us that the learned Custodian has transgressed his power of review under section 43 subsection (6) of Act XII of 1957 and has acted in excess of the power of review that vested in him. Mr. Afro contended that the power of review of the Custodian is to be exercised on the same principles as are laid down In Order XLVII, rule 1, C. P. C. In support of his contention the learned counsel relied on a decision of this Court at Lahore in the case of Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram v. The Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore In this case Shabbir Named, J. observed that the power of review of the Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 43 subsection (6) was not unlimited, and in spite of the fact that the phraseology of this subsection purports to give unlimited powers to the Custodian the provisions of Order XLVII, C. P. C. were not entirely applicable to the exercise of the power of review by the Custodian of Evacuee Property. It will, however, be noticed that the learned Judges of the Division Beach in the above-mentioned case did not decide the question before them on the observations referred to above, but on different considerations. Under section 43, rule 6 it is laid down as under : “The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him in this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at an> time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require.” The introduction of this subsection has

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): period or of his own motion at an> time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require.” The introduction of this subsection has a history behind it. After the decision of the case by the Supreme Court reported as Samurai v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi (I) m which it was held that the principles of Order XLVII, rule 1, C. P. C. are applicable to the power of review vested in the Custodian, the Legislature completely changed the provisions of section 36 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, and produced the above-mentioned provision of law in Act XII of 1957 in order to remove the difficulties created by the above-mentioned decision. In our option, therefore, the observation of the Supreme Court, m Samurai’s case has no application to the provisions of section 43, subsection (6) of Act XII of 1957. The powers of review vested in the Custodian under the abovementioned provision of law are unlimited and TT 1s open to him to review any order of his predecessor or of his own if the justice of the case so requires. If therefore, Shabbir Ahmed, J. meant by making the above-mentioned observation that the provisions of section 43, Rule 6 are to be read I'm the light of the observations on Samurai’s case we respectfully differ from TT. In our opinion Shabbir Ahmed, J. did not mean so. If the whole judgment in the above-mentioned case is read it would appear that the Division Bench MN that case only held that the Custodian in exercise of his power of review under the abovementioned provision of law cannot decide a case in disregard of the clear provisions of law on the ground that the justice of the case demands it. There can be no dispute with this observation, and we entirely agree with Shabbir Ahmed, J. that if in the exercise of his power of review the Custodian disregards any provision of law then such an order cannot be considered as a good order. Mr. Afro, however, has failed to point out in what way Mascot Ahmed J. disregarded the provisions of any law when he reviewed the order of Muhammad BUX, J. The question before Maud Ahmed, J. was very simple ; whether Muhammad BUX Demon, J. was justified in reviewing the order of Mr. Manner Adam, and he came to the conclusion that his learned predecessor was not justified in up-setting the order of Mr. Manner Adam. Mr. Afro further contended that unless fresh material is discovered by the Custodian he has no power to review his own order or the order of his predecessor. In support of his contention he referred us to the case of Rai's Ghazi Muhammad v. The Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan In this case a Division Bench of this Court at Lahore

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): the Custodian he has no power to review his own order or the order of his predecessor. In support of his contention he referred us to the case of Rai's Ghazi Muhammad v. The Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan In this case a Division Bench of this Court at Lahore held that the Custodian was not empowered to reopen the case on the ground of fraud if no new material was discovered by him. One gets this impression from the head-note of the case, but if the body of the judgment is referred to it would be noticed that in that case it was urged before the Division Bench that notwithstanding what is stated in section 3 of Act XII of 1957 if fraud is discovered after 1st January 1957 the Custodian should be able to reopen the transaction. In that context Kay ani, C. J. observed as under : “In other words there was no new material which could be said to have led to the discovery of fraud. We have found it necessary to mention these facts because it was argued by the Custodian’s counsel that notwithstanding what is stated in section 3 of the Act, if fraud is discovered after the 1st January 1957, the Custodian should be able to re-open the transaction. Since there was no discovery of any fresh material, the argument is not available.” From the above observations it is absolutely clear that the head-note given in the report is misleading and there is nothing in this judgment which supports the contention of Mr. Afro that if new facts are not discovered the Custodian is not competent to review the order of his predecessor, or of his own. On the other hand, the learned Judges of the High Court in this case took the same view which we have accepted in the present case. Kazan C. J. at page 867 of the report on this question observed as under : “Now, as regards the legal objections, our opinion is that the Custodian’s power under section 43, subsection to “review bis own order or an order passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require” and “at any time” is very wide and does not confine him to only one occasion. If something requiring further attention comes to his notice and if the justice of the case so requires, he ought to be able to review his order or that of his predecessor a second time.” Thus both the decisions cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner have no bearing on the facts of this case. It is absolutely clear to us that neither Maud Ahmed, J. disregarded any provision of law in reviewing the order of Muhammad BUX, J. nor did he in any way exceed his power of review in setting aside that order. We cannot, therefore, hold that the impugned order suffers from any illegality, MN this respect. We, therefore, hold that the impugned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): disregarded any provision of law in reviewing the order of Muhammad BUX, J. nor did he in any way exceed his power of review in setting aside that order. We cannot, therefore, hold that the impugned order suffers from any illegality, MN this respect. We, therefore, hold that the impugned order is absolutely valid, and no exception can be taken to TT. In this writ petition the petitioner has also challenged the provisional transfer of certain ships by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Quetta, under the previsions of Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Mr. Afro the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that as long as the proceedings In respect of the property in dispute are pending before the Custodian Authorities the Settlement Authorities have no jurisdiction to settle the property under the above-mentioned provision of law. This contention is not without force. But the petitioner has not challenged the validity of the above-mentioned transfer orders by the department in the proceedings before them. It was urged BJ the learned counsel for the Department that if the petitioner moves the Settlement Authorities in this respect they would certainly consider the ports raised in this connection and decide the question. They contended that if the Settlement Authorities decided the post raised against him, it will be open to him to come to this Court in a separate writ petition and obtain the redress of his grievances, Mr. Music An sari the learned Public Prosecutor contended before us that the present Writ Petition suffers from misnomer of causes of action, and we should not exercise our writ jurisdiction in such a mutter. His contention appears to us to be well-founded. It seems to us that the petitioner is unnecessarily wasting his time In pursuing his remedy before this JCOURT. Even if the petitioner has occupied more area than what “was allotted to him under the Compensation Act he is entitled to get the property in his possession on payment of the market price of the land mm dispute and on payment of certain penalties. There is another difficulty also in the way of the petitioner. In order to determine his rights in respect of the property in dispute It is essential for him to get the inquiry ordered by Maud Ahmed, J. to be concluded. On the result of that inquiry alone it would be clear what property was allotted to him and what area of the land is m his illegal possession. This inquiry will further show the abilities of the petitioner in respect of the rent due from hm. So long as this inquiry Is not concluded the property in dispute will remain an evacuee property and the petitioner also will not be entitled to claim the property in settlement under the provisions of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. In these circumstances we are satisfied that there is no sufficient material before us to adjudicate upon the validity of the transfer of certain shops in favor

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 72?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 72 (BALOCHISTAN HIGH COURT, 1962-05-29): also will not be entitled to claim the property in settlement under the provisions of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. In these circumstances we are satisfied that there is no sufficient material before us to adjudicate upon the validity of the transfer of certain shops in favor of some of the abovementioned respondents. The petitioner not only, therefore, should get the equity concluded against him, as ordered by Maud Ahmed, J. but should, in the first instance, also approach the Settlement Authority for the adjudication of his rights in respect of the property in dispute for the purposes of settlement. In our opinion, this is not a fit case in which we should exercise our writ jurisdiction on the above-mentioned question involved in this matter. In the result we find no force in this Writ Petition and, subject to the above remarks, dismiss it with costs. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 204 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 204 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1961-11-28. The case involved MUHAMMAD BACHALAND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, KARACHI (S. Z.) AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - SS. 18 AND 36 (4) (5) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 34. The case was heard by WAHIDUDDIN AHMED AND BASHIR AHMED.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 204?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 204, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - SS. 18 AND 36 (4) (5) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 34. This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1961-11-28.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 204?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 204 were: MAZHARALI KHAN FOR APPELLANT. SAYEED A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.ABDUL KADIR SHAIKH A. A- G. FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.AZIZULLAH K. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 5.. The judges presiding were: WAHIDUDDIN AHMED AND BASHIR AHMED.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 204?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 204 were: MUHAMMAD BACHALAND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, KARACHI (S. Z.) AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 204.
Answer: Judgment Wahiduddin Ahmed, J.-This first appeal arises out of Suit No. of 1958 filed in the District Court of Dad for setting aside the order of the Custodian in Application No. B-38 dated the 17th of May 1954 and permanent injunction against the respondents for not interfere with the possession of the appellants in respect of the property in dispute. Mr. Abdullah Demon, the then District Judge of Dad, by judgment dated the 30th of June 19S9 dismissed the appellant’s suit on the short ground that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to interfere with the impugned order. The agricultural land in dispute is situated in Del USIA and in Del Poor, Talk Dakar, District Dad. In 1903 one Racial Khan, the grandfather of appellant No. 1, sold his share equivalent to 49 acres of land m the agricultural property in dispute to Rural and Rochdale, Hindu evacuees, for Rs. 2,000. The Hindu purchasers remained in possession of this property and enjoyed its produce till they migrated to India in the year 1948. In 1949, Roman Khan, father of Appellant No. and appellant No. filed Suit No. 87 of 1949 in the Sub-Civil Court, Behar, District Dad, for redemption of the property in dispute on the allegation that the transfer was not a sale but a mortgage against the Hindu purchasers. The learned Civil Court held an inquiry under the Deckhand Agriculturists Relief Act and passed an ex parte preliminary decree in favor of the appellants on the 15th of February 1950. The appellants also filed Application No. 13 of 1950 under section 18 of Ordinance XV of 1949 before the Assistant Custodian, Evacuee Property, Dad, for a declaration that the property in dispute was not evacuee property. This application was accepted on the 2nd of January 1951. The learned Assistant Custodian declared the property in dispute as non-evacuee and further held that the equity of redemption vests in the applicant-mortgagors, and permitted them to move the Civil Court for determination of the amount of the mortgage-debt after proper accounting. This order was approved by Mr. Akbar Hussain, the then Custodian, on the 13th of January 1951. The last mentioned order was produced before the Sub-Civil Court, Behar, who ultimately passed a final decree of redemption on the 29th of November 1952 in appellants’ favor bolding that no amount was due on the mortgage and the property in dispute exclusively belonged to them. But this did not see the end of the dispute. In 1954, Mr. Monsieur Adam, the then Custodian, re-opened the question of the evacuee nature of the property in dispute in exercise of his so moth revision and review powers in Application No. B-38. On the 17th of May 1954, in these proceedings, he set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian dated the 2nd of January 1951 and his predecessor’s order of approval dated the 13th of January 1951. In setting aside these orders he observed that it is impossible to believe that had the transaction been one of mortgage, Muhammad Roman or his father would have kept quiet from 1903 to 1948 and allowed the two Hindus to enjoy the property to the extent of Rs. 4,000. He further observed that according to the agreement the appellants were to repurchase the land for the price it was sold within eight years’ time and yet no action was taken with regard to the re-purchase at any time during 45 years intervening between the date of the transaction and the migration to Bharat. He therefore held that the appellants’ claim was false and the property IA dispute BMG evacuee vested MN the Custodian. He further held that in any case the mortgage right vested in the Custodian in 1948 and the property in dispute could not be declared as non-evacuee property. The learned Custodian in arriving at these conclusions further remarked that the appellants in their application under section 18 concealed the fact before the Assistant Custodian that they had already obtained an ex parte decree against the Hindu owners, without imp leading the Custodian as party, from the Sub-Civil Court, Behar. The appellants challenged the above-mentioned order of the learned Custodian in Suit No. of 1958 on the ground that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to review the order of his predecessor. On the pleadings of the parties as many as eleven issues were framed. But at the trial the learned District Judge treated the following first two issues, reproduced below, as preliminary issues : (1) Whether the Court has jurisdiction to enter tam the suit ? (2) Whether the order of the then Custodian of Evacuee Property Mr. Monsieur Adam is illegal, ultra vires, bad, perverse and nullity in law ? His conclusions are that the order of the Custodian passed in 1954 was absolutely intra vires, the decree obtained from the Civil Court was not binding upon the Custodian and the property BMG evacuee property the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The appellants seek to challenge these findings in this first appeal before us. Mr. Mazda All, the learned counsel for the appellants, conceded that the Civil Courts have no jurisdiction in the matter in case the property in dispute is found to be evacuee property, but his main contention Is that the order of the Custodian dated the 17th of May 1954 referred to above was without jurisdiction. In support of his argument he has taken two-fold objections : firstly, that the learned Custodian had no right to review his predecessor’s order dated the 13th of January 1951 as no fresh material was placed before him to come to a different conclusion; and secondly, that the learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to declare that the final decree passed by the Subacrid Court, Behar, in Suit No. 87 of 1949 was not binding on him. After hearing the learned counsel of the parties we are satisfied that the objections raised by the learned counsel against the decree under appeal are without substance and this appeal must fail. In support of his first contention the learned counsel has referred us to a decision of the Supreme Court of Pakistan in Samurai v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, South Zone, West Pakistan, Karachi In this decision their Lordships observed that recourse could be hard to the general Law for ascertain the principles governing the exercise of the power of review vested in the Custodian under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Law, and in this respect their Lordships referred to the principles set out in Order Elvis, r. 1, C. P. C. Their Lordships further observed as under : “It is natural therefore to expect that the law should give to the Custodian the power of review exercisable upon the coming into existence of circumstances equivalent to the discovery of new and important matter, or evidence not previously available, and in the very nature of the case, it is not possible to fix any limit of time within which such discovery or availability could be given effect to.” The appellants’ counsel argued that in view of the above observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court, the learned Custodian could review the order of his predecessor only upon the coming into existence of circumstances equivalent to the discovery of new and important matter, or evidence not previously available. According to him no fresh material was placed before the learned Custodian and therefore his order reviewing the order of his learned predecessor was absolutely without jurisdiction. In our opinion this objection is not available to the appellants in the present case. It will be noticed that Mr. Monsieur Adam not only reviewed the order of his learned predecessor passed on the administrative side approving the order of the Assistant Custodian, but also set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian dated the 2nd of January 1951. Thus the then Custodian exercised two jurisdictions namely his so moth revisional powers and so moth review powers. So far as the so moth revisional power of the Custodian is concerned, there is no doubt in our mind that it is unlimited and is not circumscribed by any conditions whatsoever. Mr. Mazda Ali therefore conceded that if the ma'am order is taken to be passed I'm the revisional jurisdiction by the learned Custodian, TT is perfectly valid, and no exception can be taken to it. According to him the difficulty only arises in respect of the power of review exercised by the learned Custodian. It has already been stated that the learned Custodian only approved the order passed by the Assistant Custodian. There is no specific provision in the evacuee law which requires the subordinate Custodian authorities to refer the order passed by them for approval to the Custodian. This is only a Departmental practice in order to safeguard the evacuee interest. The Assistant Custodian’s order was submitted to the Custodian in this case with a view to safeguard the evacuee interest. There is nothing on the record to show that Mr. Akbar Hussain the then Custodian approved the order of the Assistant Custodian in the exercise of his judicial powers. It was admitted at the Bar that none of the parties was heard and the ports in dispute were not considered by him after notice to the Rehabilitation Authorities. In our option the order of the Custodian approving the order of the Assistant Custodian was nothing more than an administrative order. Apart from this it is quite clear from the impugned order that the fact that the appellants had obtained a decree from the Sub-Civil Court, Behar, before making an application under section 18 to the B Assistant Custodian, was for the first time brought to the notice of the Custodian during the pendency of the so moon revision and review matter. This was of course a new fact brought to the notice of the Custodian and therefore the learned Custodian had ample jurisdiction even on the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court to review the order of his learned predecessor in respect of the property in dispute. It is thus quite clear to us that primarily under the impugned order the learned Custodian set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian and only incidentally set aside the order of his learned predecessor whereby the order of the Assistant Custodian was approved. In our opinion, by approval, the order of the Assistant Custodian did not become the order of the Custodian Moreover, for the review of administrative orders the same principles will not apply which are applicable to orders passed b> the Custodian on the judicial side. In view of this we are satisfied that the impugned order of the learned Custodian does not suffer from any infirmity and is intra vires. As regards the second objection that the learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to hold that the decree passed in Suit No. 87 of 199 was not binding on him, the learned counsel was unable to refer us to any provision of law which comes in the way of the Custodian to pass such orders. Admittedly the Custodian was not a party in the above-mentioned suit and TT was open to the learned Custodian to observe that as be been not a party in these proceedings the decree passed in the above-mentioned suit was not binding on him. Mr. Mazda Ali has referred us to a decision in Custodian, Evacuee Property, Punjab and others v. Parch Dayak Chaoan Lai and others In that case Malayan, J. observed that in those cases where relief is claimed against the Custodian of Evacuee Property, the Custodian cannot decide such disputes and only Civil Courts have jurisdiction in those matters. The learned counsel has not placed before us the relevant provision of evacuee law which is applicable in the Indian Dominion. At any rate, with respect, we are not m agreement with the view expressed in the above-mentioned decision. Under the Administration of Evacuee Law of 1949 It was incumbent on a party to approach the Custodian to establish his night in any property owned by the Hindu evacuees. In such cases naturally the Custodian is interested to safeguard the merest of the evacuees, but the provisions of our evacuee law permits him to decide such disputes. This objection, therefore, must fail. On the view we have taken of the matter, the learned Custodian was fully competent to set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian and that of his predecessor in so far as It approved the former order. The property, therefore, Is evacuee and the view of the learned District Judge that in such matters the Civil Court has no jurisdiction is perfectly sound, and no exception can be taken to TT. In the result the appeal is dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 204?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 204 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-28): Judgment Wahiduddin Ahmed, J.-This first appeal arises out of Suit No. of 1958 filed in the District Court of Dad for setting aside the order of the Custodian in Application No. B-38 dated the 17th of May 1954 and permanent injunction against the respondents for not interfere with the possession of the appellants in respect of the property in dispute. Mr. Abdullah Demon, the then District Judge of Dad, by judgment dated the 30th of June 19S9 dismissed the appellant’s suit on the short ground that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to interfere with the impugned order. The agricultural land in dispute is situated in Del USIA and in Del Poor, Talk Dakar, District Dad. In 1903 one Racial Khan, the grandfather of appellant No. 1, sold his share equivalent to 49 acres of land m the agricultural property in dispute to Rural and Rochdale, Hindu evacuees, for Rs. 2,000. The Hindu purchasers remained in possession of this property and enjoyed its produce till they migrated to India in the year 1948. In 1949, Roman Khan, father of Appellant No. and appellant No. filed Suit No. 87 of 1949 in the Sub-Civil Court, Behar, District Dad, for redemption of the property in dispute on the allegation that the transfer was not a sale but a mortgage against the Hindu purchasers. The learned Civil Court held an inquiry under the Deckhand Agriculturists Relief Act and passed an ex parte preliminary decree in favor of the appellants on the 15th of February 1950. The appellants also filed Application No. 13 of 1950 under section 18 of Ordinance XV of 1949 before the Assistant Custodian, Evacuee Property, Dad, for a declaration that the property in dispute was not evacuee property. This application was accepted on the 2nd of January 1951. The learned Assistant Custodian declared the property in dispute as non-evacuee and further held that the equity of redemption vests in the applicant-mortgagors, and permitted them to move the Civil Court for determination of the amount of the mortgage-debt after proper accounting. This order was approved by Mr. Akbar Hussain, the then Custodian, on the 13th of January 1951. The last mentioned order was produced before the Sub-Civil Court, Behar, who ultimately passed a final decree of redemption on the 29th of November 1952 in appellants’ favor bolding that no amount was due on the mortgage and the property in dispute exclusively belonged to them. But this did not see the end of the dispute. In 1954, Mr. Monsieur Adam, the then Custodian, re-opened the question of the evacuee nature of the property in dispute in exercise of his so moth revision and review powers in Application No. B-38. On the 17th of May 1954, in these proceedings, he set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian dated the 2nd of January 1951 and his predecessor’s order of approval dated the 13th of January 1951. In setting aside these orders he observed that it is impossible to believe that had the transaction

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 204?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 204 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-28): of May 1954, in these proceedings, he set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian dated the 2nd of January 1951 and his predecessor’s order of approval dated the 13th of January 1951. In setting aside these orders he observed that it is impossible to believe that had the transaction been one of mortgage, Muhammad Roman or his father would have kept quiet from 1903 to 1948 and allowed the two Hindus to enjoy the property to the extent of Rs. 4,000. He further observed that according to the agreement the appellants were to repurchase the land for the price it was sold within eight years’ time and yet no action was taken with regard to the re-purchase at any time during 45 years intervening between the date of the transaction and the migration to Bharat. He therefore held that the appellants’ claim was false and the property IA dispute BMG evacuee vested MN the Custodian. He further held that in any case the mortgage right vested in the Custodian in 1948 and the property in dispute could not be declared as non-evacuee property. The learned Custodian in arriving at these conclusions further remarked that the appellants in their application under section 18 concealed the fact before the Assistant Custodian that they had already obtained an ex parte decree against the Hindu owners, without imp leading the Custodian as party, from the Sub-Civil Court, Behar. The appellants challenged the above-mentioned order of the learned Custodian in Suit No. of 1958 on the ground that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to review the order of his predecessor. On the pleadings of the parties as many as eleven issues were framed. But at the trial the learned District Judge treated the following first two issues, reproduced below, as preliminary issues : (1) Whether the Court has jurisdiction to enter tam the suit ? (2) Whether the order of the then Custodian of Evacuee Property Mr. Monsieur Adam is illegal, ultra vires, bad, perverse and nullity in law ? His conclusions are that the order of the Custodian passed in 1954 was absolutely intra vires, the decree obtained from the Civil Court was not binding upon the Custodian and the property BMG evacuee property the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The appellants seek to challenge these findings in this first appeal before us. Mr. Mazda All, the learned counsel for the appellants, conceded that the Civil Courts have no jurisdiction in the matter in case the property in dispute is found to be evacuee property, but his main contention Is that the order of the Custodian dated the 17th of May 1954 referred to above was without jurisdiction. In support of his argument he has taken two-fold objections : firstly, that the learned Custodian had no right to review his predecessor’s order dated the 13th of January 1951 as no fresh material was placed before him to come to a different conclusion; and secondly, that the learned Custodian had

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 204?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 204 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-28): support of his argument he has taken two-fold objections : firstly, that the learned Custodian had no right to review his predecessor’s order dated the 13th of January 1951 as no fresh material was placed before him to come to a different conclusion; and secondly, that the learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to declare that the final decree passed by the Subacrid Court, Behar, in Suit No. 87 of 1949 was not binding on him. After hearing the learned counsel of the parties we are satisfied that the objections raised by the learned counsel against the decree under appeal are without substance and this appeal must fail. In support of his first contention the learned counsel has referred us to a decision of the Supreme Court of Pakistan in Samurai v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, South Zone, West Pakistan, Karachi In this decision their Lordships observed that recourse could be hard to the general Law for ascertain the principles governing the exercise of the power of review vested in the Custodian under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Law, and in this respect their Lordships referred to the principles set out in Order Elvis, r. 1, C. P. C. Their Lordships further observed as under : “It is natural therefore to expect that the law should give to the Custodian the power of review exercisable upon the coming into existence of circumstances equivalent to the discovery of new and important matter, or evidence not previously available, and in the very nature of the case, it is not possible to fix any limit of time within which such discovery or availability could be given effect to.” The appellants’ counsel argued that in view of the above observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court, the learned Custodian could review the order of his predecessor only upon the coming into existence of circumstances equivalent to the discovery of new and important matter, or evidence not previously available. According to him no fresh material was placed before the learned Custodian and therefore his order reviewing the order of his learned predecessor was absolutely without jurisdiction. In our opinion this objection is not available to the appellants in the present case. It will be noticed that Mr. Monsieur Adam not only reviewed the order of his learned predecessor passed on the administrative side approving the order of the Assistant Custodian, but also set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian dated the 2nd of January 1951. Thus the then Custodian exercised two jurisdictions namely his so moth revisional powers and so moth review powers. So far as the so moth revisional power of the Custodian is concerned, there is no doubt in our mind that it is unlimited and is not circumscribed by any conditions whatsoever. Mr. Mazda Ali therefore conceded that if the ma'am order is taken to be passed I'm the revisional jurisdiction by the learned Custodian, TT is perfectly valid, and no exception can be taken to it. According

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 204?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 204 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-28): our mind that it is unlimited and is not circumscribed by any conditions whatsoever. Mr. Mazda Ali therefore conceded that if the ma'am order is taken to be passed I'm the revisional jurisdiction by the learned Custodian, TT is perfectly valid, and no exception can be taken to it. According to him the difficulty only arises in respect of the power of review exercised by the learned Custodian. It has already been stated that the learned Custodian only approved the order passed by the Assistant Custodian. There is no specific provision in the evacuee law which requires the subordinate Custodian authorities to refer the order passed by them for approval to the Custodian. This is only a Departmental practice in order to safeguard the evacuee interest. The Assistant Custodian’s order was submitted to the Custodian in this case with a view to safeguard the evacuee interest. There is nothing on the record to show that Mr. Akbar Hussain the then Custodian approved the order of the Assistant Custodian in the exercise of his judicial powers. It was admitted at the Bar that none of the parties was heard and the ports in dispute were not considered by him after notice to the Rehabilitation Authorities. In our option the order of the Custodian approving the order of the Assistant Custodian was nothing more than an administrative order. Apart from this it is quite clear from the impugned order that the fact that the appellants had obtained a decree from the Sub-Civil Court, Behar, before making an application under section 18 to the B Assistant Custodian, was for the first time brought to the notice of the Custodian during the pendency of the so moon revision and review matter. This was of course a new fact brought to the notice of the Custodian and therefore the learned Custodian had ample jurisdiction even on the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court to review the order of his learned predecessor in respect of the property in dispute. It is thus quite clear to us that primarily under the impugned order the learned Custodian set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian and only incidentally set aside the order of his learned predecessor whereby the order of the Assistant Custodian was approved. In our opinion, by approval, the order of the Assistant Custodian did not become the order of the Custodian Moreover, for the review of administrative orders the same principles will not apply which are applicable to orders passed b> the Custodian on the judicial side. In view of this we are satisfied that the impugned order of the learned Custodian does not suffer from any infirmity and is intra vires. As regards the second objection that the learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to hold that the decree passed in Suit No. 87 of 199 was not binding on him, the learned counsel was unable to refer us to any provision of law which comes in the way of the Custodian to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 204?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 204 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-28): regards the second objection that the learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to hold that the decree passed in Suit No. 87 of 199 was not binding on him, the learned counsel was unable to refer us to any provision of law which comes in the way of the Custodian to pass such orders. Admittedly the Custodian was not a party in the above-mentioned suit and TT was open to the learned Custodian to observe that as be been not a party in these proceedings the decree passed in the above-mentioned suit was not binding on him. Mr. Mazda Ali has referred us to a decision in Custodian, Evacuee Property, Punjab and others v. Parch Dayak Chaoan Lai and others In that case Malayan, J. observed that in those cases where relief is claimed against the Custodian of Evacuee Property, the Custodian cannot decide such disputes and only Civil Courts have jurisdiction in those matters. The learned counsel has not placed before us the relevant provision of evacuee law which is applicable in the Indian Dominion. At any rate, with respect, we are not m agreement with the view expressed in the above-mentioned decision. Under the Administration of Evacuee Law of 1949 It was incumbent on a party to approach the Custodian to establish his night in any property owned by the Hindu evacuees. In such cases naturally the Custodian is interested to safeguard the merest of the evacuees, but the provisions of our evacuee law permits him to decide such disputes. This objection, therefore, must fail. On the view we have taken of the matter, the learned Custodian was fully competent to set aside the order of the Assistant Custodian and that of his predecessor in so far as It approved the former order. The property, therefore, Is evacuee and the view of the learned District Judge that in such matters the Civil Court has no jurisdiction is perfectly sound, and no exception can be taken to TT. In the result the appeal is dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 171 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 171 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1961-11-07. The case involved MESSRS KHAIR DIN ANAR DIN PETITIONER VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, KARACHI AND OTHBRS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 9, S.7. The case was heard by WAHIDUDDIN AHMED AND BASHIR AHMAD.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 171?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 171, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 9, S.7. This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1961-11-07.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 171?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 171 were: IHSANUL HAQ FOR APPELLANT. SAYEED A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.NAIMUDDIN FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. 3.. The judges presiding were: WAHIDUDDIN AHMED AND BASHIR AHMAD.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 171?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 171 were: MESSRS KHAIR DIN ANAR DIN PETITIONER VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, KARACHI AND OTHBRS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 171.
Answer: Judgment Wahiduddin Ahmed, J.-The dispute in this writ petition is in respect of a shop situated on the first floor consisting of three rooms in the building known as “Sherman Terrace”, Saddam, Whinstone Street, Karachi, which is a trust property. This shop was formerly occupied by Mohandas and Haciendas as tenants of the Trust. These gentlemen were carrying on business in these premises under the name and style of “Dignity Store”. Under an agreement dated the IST of January 1948 these Hindu gentlemen, who became evacuees, transferred their right and interest in the above-mentioned business concern along with their right of tenancy in the premises in question to Messes H. M. Wherein-Anardin through their partner Malik Salimullah for a sum of Rs. 1,55,000. According to the agreement the petitioners at the time of the agreement had paid Rs, 1,50,000. In Case No. 107 of 1949, Mr. F. M. Hibatullah, the then Assistant Custodian, by an order dated the IST of April 1950, treated the business concern a? evacuee property and permitted the petitioners to run it as manager on behalf of the Custodian on furnishing security. It, however, appears that the Hindu evacuees transferred the business concern to the petitioners without the sanction of the landlord, and the Trustees of the building filed a suit for their ejectment. Prolonged litigation continued between the parties and ultimately on the 30th of November 1955, the petitioners were evicted from the shop in dispute and the Trustees were put m possession. Thereupon Malik Salimullah, the partner of the petitioners’ firm, m his capacity as the manager of the Custodian, moved the Custodian on the 17th of December 1955 under sections 9 and 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 and challenged their eviction from the property in dispute on the ground that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to pass any order In respect of evacuee property. On the 19th of December 1955, the Custodian ordered that the shop in dispute be sealed until final decision. On the 16th of May 1956 the Custodian accepted the application of the petitioners and directed that the possession of the shop in dispute be handed over to Malik Salimullah in his capacity as manager of the Custodian. The Trustees challenged this order in Writ Petition No. 154 of 1956 and a Division Bench of this Court, composed of Racial and Sushi, JJ. by an order dated the 15th of January 1958 dismissed the petition on the ground that the tenancy right was evacuee property and the Custodian’s order directing the Trustees to hand over the possession of the shops to the manager was valid and could not be disturbed. In view of the order of the High Court In the above writ petition the petitioners moved the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner on the 12th of May 1958 for the restoration of the possession of the shop in dispute. About the same time the Trustees of the building also on the 27th of May 1958 moved an application before the Custodian Authorities under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 for a declaration that the evacuee tenancy rights in respect of the shop in dispute no longer exist as they had already term mated it by notice dated the 15th of January 1958 to the Custodian. This application hanged on till April 1959. On the 25th of April 1959 Mr. S. Asia Hussain, the then Deputy Custodian (Judicial) Karachi held that the tenancy rights had been rightly term mated and the Trustees were not bound to hand over possession of the shop in dispute to the petitioners. The petitioners challenged this order in Appeal No. F. (358) of 1959 before Mr. Abdul Majid Khan, Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi, but he also upheld the order of the Deputy Custodian and made the following observations : “This tenancy right was permeable on one month’s notice. That notice has been served on the Custodian and has not been contested. The tenancy right has, therefore, terminated by operation of law. The order passed by the learned Deputy Custodian is therefore upheld and is hereby approved. The appeal is consequently dismissed.” The petitioners in this writ petition filed on the 4th of August J959, have challenged the validity of the order of the Additional Custodian (Judicial) Karachi dated the 1st of August 1959 on the ground that the view of the officer concerned that the tenancy rights of the evacuees had been terminated by the aforesaid notice cannot be sustained and the application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 being barred by imitation was not maintainable and should have been dismissed. On these grounds the petitioners have prayed for a writ of certiorari against the impugned order. During the course of the hearing of the wait petition it was brought to the notice of this Court that the petitioners not only attacked the order of the Additional Custodian referred to above in this writ petition, but they also challenged its validity in Revision No. F. (177)/59 before the learned Custodian. The learned Custodian under an order dated the 30th of October 1959 had surrendered the tenancy rights of Messes Mohandas and Haciendas evacuees in respect of the shop in dispute. The learned Custodian’s order in this respect is reproduced below: “By an order passed today I have, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 9 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, surrendered the tenancy rights of Messes Udhavdass and Haciendas, evacuees, in respect of this property. This revision petition against the order dated the IST August 1959, passed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, has, therefore, become fructuous and is, hereby dismissed.” The learned counsel for the respondents, in the face of the abovementioned order, has contended that the tenancy night of the shop in dispute is no longer an evacuee property and the petitioners are not entitled to get its possession as they clam this right as managers through the Custodian. Mr. Ethanol Had, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has strongly urged before us that the learned Custodian’s order is without jurisdiction, and he was not competent to surrender the tenancy right. This contention Is without force and has no substance. Under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act all evacuee property vests in the Custodian, and it is for him to decide whether it is in the interest of the evacuee to keep alive his A tenancy rights in any particular property. The learned counsel for the petitioners has not been able to refer us to any provision under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act in support of his contention that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to surrender the evacuee tenancy rights. In the absence of any such provision the order passed by the learned Custodian dated the 30th of October 1959 is perfectly valid and operative. It may also be posted out that the petitioners’ application for confirmation of the sale transaction of January 1948 had already been dismissed by the Custodian. The learned Custodian, under the order referred to above, has asked'the petitioners to render accounts of the property of Messes Dignity Stores. In these circumstances the petition has become fructuous and the petitioners are not entitled to any relief in respect of the shop MN dispute in this writ petition. Accordingly we dismiss the petition with costs. Petition dismissed,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 171?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 171 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-07): Judgment Wahiduddin Ahmed, J.-The dispute in this writ petition is in respect of a shop situated on the first floor consisting of three rooms in the building known as “Sherman Terrace”, Saddam, Whinstone Street, Karachi, which is a trust property. This shop was formerly occupied by Mohandas and Haciendas as tenants of the Trust. These gentlemen were carrying on business in these premises under the name and style of “Dignity Store”. Under an agreement dated the IST of January 1948 these Hindu gentlemen, who became evacuees, transferred their right and interest in the above-mentioned business concern along with their right of tenancy in the premises in question to Messes H. M. Wherein-Anardin through their partner Malik Salimullah for a sum of Rs. 1,55,000. According to the agreement the petitioners at the time of the agreement had paid Rs, 1,50,000. In Case No. 107 of 1949, Mr. F. M. Hibatullah, the then Assistant Custodian, by an order dated the IST of April 1950, treated the business concern a? evacuee property and permitted the petitioners to run it as manager on behalf of the Custodian on furnishing security. It, however, appears that the Hindu evacuees transferred the business concern to the petitioners without the sanction of the landlord, and the Trustees of the building filed a suit for their ejectment. Prolonged litigation continued between the parties and ultimately on the 30th of November 1955, the petitioners were evicted from the shop in dispute and the Trustees were put m possession. Thereupon Malik Salimullah, the partner of the petitioners’ firm, m his capacity as the manager of the Custodian, moved the Custodian on the 17th of December 1955 under sections 9 and 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 and challenged their eviction from the property in dispute on the ground that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to pass any order In respect of evacuee property. On the 19th of December 1955, the Custodian ordered that the shop in dispute be sealed until final decision. On the 16th of May 1956 the Custodian accepted the application of the petitioners and directed that the possession of the shop in dispute be handed over to Malik Salimullah in his capacity as manager of the Custodian. The Trustees challenged this order in Writ Petition No. 154 of 1956 and a Division Bench of this Court, composed of Racial and Sushi, JJ. by an order dated the 15th of January 1958 dismissed the petition on the ground that the tenancy right was evacuee property and the Custodian’s order directing the Trustees to hand over the possession of the shops to the manager was valid and could not be disturbed. In view of the order of the High Court In the above writ petition the petitioners moved the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner on the 12th of May 1958 for the restoration of the possession of the shop in dispute. About the same time the Trustees of the building also on the 27th of May 1958 moved an application before

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 171?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 171 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-07): Court In the above writ petition the petitioners moved the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner on the 12th of May 1958 for the restoration of the possession of the shop in dispute. About the same time the Trustees of the building also on the 27th of May 1958 moved an application before the Custodian Authorities under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 for a declaration that the evacuee tenancy rights in respect of the shop in dispute no longer exist as they had already term mated it by notice dated the 15th of January 1958 to the Custodian. This application hanged on till April 1959. On the 25th of April 1959 Mr. S. Asia Hussain, the then Deputy Custodian (Judicial) Karachi held that the tenancy rights had been rightly term mated and the Trustees were not bound to hand over possession of the shop in dispute to the petitioners. The petitioners challenged this order in Appeal No. F. (358) of 1959 before Mr. Abdul Majid Khan, Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi, but he also upheld the order of the Deputy Custodian and made the following observations : “This tenancy right was permeable on one month’s notice. That notice has been served on the Custodian and has not been contested. The tenancy right has, therefore, terminated by operation of law. The order passed by the learned Deputy Custodian is therefore upheld and is hereby approved. The appeal is consequently dismissed.” The petitioners in this writ petition filed on the 4th of August J959, have challenged the validity of the order of the Additional Custodian (Judicial) Karachi dated the 1st of August 1959 on the ground that the view of the officer concerned that the tenancy rights of the evacuees had been terminated by the aforesaid notice cannot be sustained and the application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 being barred by imitation was not maintainable and should have been dismissed. On these grounds the petitioners have prayed for a writ of certiorari against the impugned order. During the course of the hearing of the wait petition it was brought to the notice of this Court that the petitioners not only attacked the order of the Additional Custodian referred to above in this writ petition, but they also challenged its validity in Revision No. F. (177)/59 before the learned Custodian. The learned Custodian under an order dated the 30th of October 1959 had surrendered the tenancy rights of Messes Mohandas and Haciendas evacuees in respect of the shop in dispute. The learned Custodian’s order in this respect is reproduced below: “By an order passed today I have, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 9 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, surrendered the tenancy rights of Messes Udhavdass and Haciendas, evacuees, in respect of this property. This revision petition against the order dated the IST August 1959, passed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, has, therefore, become fructuous and is, hereby dismissed.” The learned counsel

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 171?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 171 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-07): Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, surrendered the tenancy rights of Messes Udhavdass and Haciendas, evacuees, in respect of this property. This revision petition against the order dated the IST August 1959, passed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, has, therefore, become fructuous and is, hereby dismissed.” The learned counsel for the respondents, in the face of the abovementioned order, has contended that the tenancy night of the shop in dispute is no longer an evacuee property and the petitioners are not entitled to get its possession as they clam this right as managers through the Custodian. Mr. Ethanol Had, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has strongly urged before us that the learned Custodian’s order is without jurisdiction, and he was not competent to surrender the tenancy right. This contention Is without force and has no substance. Under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act all evacuee property vests in the Custodian, and it is for him to decide whether it is in the interest of the evacuee to keep alive his A tenancy rights in any particular property. The learned counsel for the petitioners has not been able to refer us to any provision under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act in support of his contention that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to surrender the evacuee tenancy rights. In the absence of any such provision the order passed by the learned Custodian dated the 30th of October 1959 is perfectly valid and operative. It may also be posted out that the petitioners’ application for confirmation of the sale transaction of January 1948 had already been dismissed by the Custodian. The learned Custodian, under the order referred to above, has asked'the petitioners to render accounts of the property of Messes Dignity Stores. In these circumstances the petition has become fructuous and the petitioners are not entitled to any relief in respect of the shop MN dispute in this writ petition. Accordingly we dismiss the petition with costs. Petition dismissed,

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 424 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 424 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1961-12-01. The case involved MRS. DOREEN BARKAT RAM (PETITIONER) VERSUS (1) THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND (2) THE CHIEF SETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATION COMMISSIONER, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43 (6) WRIT CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170. The case was heard by SHABIR AHMAD AND ANWARUL HAQ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 424, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43 (6) WRIT CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1961-12-01.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 424 were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD IQBALAND S. M. ZAFAR FOR PETITIONER. MAJOR ISHAQ MUHAMMAD KHAN, SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER (LEGAL) FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SHABIR AHMAD AND ANWARUL HAQ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 424 were: MRS. DOREEN BARKAT RAM (PETITIONER) VERSUS (1) THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND (2) THE CHIEF SETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATION COMMISSIONER, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 424.
Answer: Judgment Shabbir Ahmad, J.-This petition for having the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan and Karachi dated the 31st of May 1961, quashed by mean sofa writ of certiorari has been presented by Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram, the order impugned by her being to the effect that a compromise entered into between her and some relatives of her late husband Bark at Ram be treated as binding on the petitioner. The claim of the petitioner is that Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, who, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, passed the Impugned order, had no jurisdiction to pass it, and it TS on this ground that she prays for the vacation of his order. The petition is opposed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, and the Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, West Pakistan, who are the two respondents in this petition. 2. Briefly stated, the relevant facts are these. On the 10th of August 1945, the petitioner married Bark at Ram, son of Hard Ram, who was a son of the late Sir Gang Ram. Bark at Ram had three brothers, namely, Lies Ram, Te} Ram and Shiv Ram, and the four brothers and their father constituted a joint Hindu Family governed by Hindu Law. The marriage between the petitioner and Bark at Ram was solemnized under the Special Marriage Act (III of 1872) and the husband died about a year later on the 29th of September 1946. On the 23rd of March 1947, the petitioner lodged a suit for administration of the property of her husband, Bark at Ram. In this suit she alleged that as the marriage between her and her late husband, Bark at Ram, was solemnized under the Special Marriage Act (II of 1872) the joint Hindu family, which her husband, his three brothers and their father constituted, came to an end as far as her husband was concerned, because under section 22 of the Special Marriage Act, 1872, the husband of the petitioner ceased to be a member of that joint Hindu family and became the sole owner of the property that would have fallen to his share, if there had been a partition of the joint Hindu family property. Claiming to be entitled to one-fifth of the joint Hindu family property of her father-in-law and his four sons, the petitioner had instituted the above-mentioned suit for administration. The suit was still pending when British India was divided into two Domains, namely, Pakistan and India. The father and brothers of Bark at Ram, who were defendants in the suit instituted by the petitioner, left Pakistan, but were represented by a counsel before the Court which was dealing with the suit. On the 10th of July 1948, this suit for administration of the property of late Bark at Ram was compromised by the parties, and as a result, the petitioner was to get some money and some shares in companies. The authorities competent to deal with evacuee property treated the entire joint family property as evacuee property, whereupon WW. the petitioner presented a petition under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 (Act XV of 1949), on the 28th of April 1955, for getting a declaration that one-fifth of the property, the whole of which had been treated as evacuee property, belonged to her and could not, on that ground, be treated as evacuee property. The Deputy Custodian did not accept the claim of the petitioner and held by his order dated the 5th of July 1956 that she was entitled to no more than Rs. 1,87,000 out of the estate left by her late husband. The petitioner lodged an appeal against the order of the Deputy Custodian which was accepted on the 13th of August 1957 by the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property. Against this order of the Additional Custodian, the Rehabilitation Department presented an application for revision before the then Custodian, the late Mr. Muhammad Jan, but this petition for revision was lodged in on the 4th of July 1958, by an order reported as PLD 1958 (Custodian) 33. The finding of Mr. Muhammad Jan acting as Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, was that the compromise, on the basis of which the suit lodged by the petitioner for administration of the property of her late husband had been terminated in the form of a decree of a Civil Court, could not be acted upon because the decree was a nullity. The reason for this finding was stated to be that the West Punjab (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1948, did not permit Courts to deal with suits relating to evacuee property. Mr. Muhammad Jan held, however, that the petitioner was not entitled to one-fifth of the property that had belonged to the joint Hindu family but only one-tenth of it. After the decision of the Deputy Custodian dated the 5th of July 1956, which has been mentioned above, Ordinance XV of 1949 was replaced by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance of 1956, which was replaced by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) and the future course of litigation was governed by those laws. In exercise of the powers vesting in it in that behalf by the relevant law, the Central Government presented a petition before the Tribunal set up under the law for having it held that the property, which had been held by Mr. Muhammad Jan to be nonevacuee property, was in fact evacuee property. It appears that the Tribunal suggested to the representative of the Rehabilitation Department who appeared before them for the Central Government in that reference that the better and easier course was to have the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan dated the 4th of July 1958 reviewed by the then Custodian (Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad). This advice appears to have been followed and a petition for review was presented before Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad. He held that the petition presented by the Rehabilitation Department was not maintainable WW. as it had been presented long after the period of limitation prescribed for such petitions had expired, but he reviewed, of his own accord, the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan and held that justice of the case required, that the petitioner should not get more than Rs. 1,87,000 out of the property left by her husband. It is this order passed by Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, that the petitioner wants this Court to quash in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. 3. It is necessary to have a clear picture of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, under which the impugned order was passed, and It is, therefore, reproduced here for ready reference. The section reads as follows “43. Appeal, revision and review.-(1) Any person aggrieved by a final order under section 20, section 22 or section 23 passed by a Deputy or Assistant Custodian may prefer an appeal to the Custodian. (2) The appeal shall be presented in such manner and with such time as may be prescribed. (3) The Custodian to whom an appeal is preferred under subsection (1) may dispose of it himself or make it over for disposal to an Additional Custodian. (4) The Custodian may, at any time, either of his own motion or on application made to him within the prescribed period in this behalf call for the record of any proceeding for the administration of evacuee property, which is pending before or has been disposed of by an officer subordinate to him, including an Additional Custodian, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed in the said proceeding, and may pass such order in relation thereto as he thinks fit : Provided that the Custodian shall not pass an order revising or modifying any order affecting any person without giving such person and the Rehabilitation Authority an opportunity of being heard. (5) The Custodian may dispose of a case under subsection (4) himself or, except when it relates to an order of an Additional Custodian, make It over to an Additional Custodian for disposal. (6) The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him in this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at any time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order WW. passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require : Provided that no final order passed on or before the seventeenth day of November 1956 declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property shall be reviewed. (7) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, any order made by the Custodian, or Additional, Deputy or Assistant Custodian shall be final and small not be called in question in any Court.” Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, passed his order under subsection (6) of section 43, reproduced above. He disposed of the matter by means of the last paragraph of his order dated the 31st of May 1960, which reads as under : “So far as the Custodian’s power to review a previous order is concerned, the only limitation imposed on him is that no order passed prior to the 17th November 1956 declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property shall be reviewed by him. This proviso was omitted by an amending Act of 1958, but that Act was repealed by an Ordinance of 1959. It is a debatable question whether the repeal made by the amending Act of 1958 is saved by the provisions of section 6-A of the General Clauses Act, but assuming that it is not so saved, and the proviso is no longer part of the subsection, as the order in question was passed after, and not before, the 17th November 1956, there is nothing to prevent me from reviewing it. The subsection makes it quite clear that such an order can be reviewed by the successor-in-office of the Custodian on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require. In my opinion, the justice of this case requires that the respondent should get only the fruit of the compromise decree which she had obtained in the year 1948 and nothing more because that compromise was entered into by her willingly with the family of which her deceased husband was one of the members. With all due respect to my learned predecessor, I am of opinion that he should have exercised the power conferred by subsection (3) of section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and accepted the compromise decree instead of granting the respondent a declaration that she owned /10th share in the joint family property. I, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by subsections (4) and (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and subsection (3) of section 41 of the Act, hereby, set aside the two orders dated the 13th August 1957 and the 4th July 1958, passed by the Additional Custodian and the Custodian of Evacuee Property, respectively, restore the order dated the 5th July 1956, passed by the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property Lahore, and give my approval to the WW. compromise decree passed in favor of the respondent, according to which she would be entitled only to a sum of Rs. 1,87,000 from the property belonging to the joint Hindu family consisting of Lala Hard Ram and his sons. If out of this money, some payments have already been made to the respondent, she would be entitled only to the balance out of the income or sale proceeds of that joint family property, if and when the same comes to the hands of the Custodian.” 4. Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the decree based on the compromise which the petitioner entered into with the defendants in the suit which she had brought for administration of the property left by her husband was a nullity because at the time when it was passed the West Punjab (Protection of Evacuee Property) Act, 1948, was in force and no suit regarding evacuee property was competent. In reply the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan, Settlement Commissioner (Legal), who appeared for the two respondents, was that the order of the Civil Judge whereby he accepted the compromise between the parties to the suit for administration of the property of Bark at Ram could not be deemed to be a decree and was, therefore, not hit by the provisions of the West Punjab (Protection of Evacuee Property) Act, 1948. In my option, TT is unnecessary for the purposes of this petition to determine which of these two rival contentions is correct, because the fate of the petition depends on whether the impugned order passed by Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad on the 31st of May 1960 reviewing the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan dated the 4th of July 1958 could be considered to be a valid order in the eyes of law. 5. I have mentioned in an earlier part of this order, and this will also be clear from the last paragraph of the order of Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad dated the 31st of May 1960, that the only reason on which he reviewed the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan was that he felt that the justice of the case demanded the acceptance of the compromise. Major Iraq Muhammad Khan contended that as Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, had, in his order dated the 31st of May 1960 held that justice demanded that the acceptance of the compromise be binding on the petitioner, his order was in accordance we the subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and no question of quashing it by issuing a WNT of certiorari could arise. If the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan to the effect that under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, WW. 1957, the powers of the Custodian are as wide as they were held by Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as a Custodian, to be, is accepted, it is obvious that the order attacked by the petitioner could not be deemed to be without jurisdiction and no question of issuing a writ would arise. If, however, it is found that the impugned order transgressed the limits prescribed by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Act, it will have to be held that the order of Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad dated the 31st of May 1960 was without jurisdiction. But whether a writ would be issued would naturally depend on the consideration of whether or not the extraordinary power of this Court to issue a writ should be exercised. 6. It appears to me that Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, was not right when he held that the power of a Custodian to review an order passed by any of his predecessors was unlimited or was limited only to this extent that the Custodian could pass any order that he felt the justice of the case required. The power that he was exercising was that of review and though the provisions of Order XLVII of the Code of Civil Procedure which deal with review by Courts governed by that law are not strictly applicable to the exercise of the powers of review by the Custodian, reference to that provision of the Code of Civil Procedure would not be without justification, and indeed one finds that in a decision given by the Supreme Court of Pakistan which is reported as Samurai v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi it was remarked that the provisions of Order XLVII, Civil Procedure Code, were not entirely applicable to the exercise of power of review by a Custodian of Evacuee Property. Major Iraq Muhammad Khan tried to meet the decision of the Supreme Court by saying that it was given under section 36 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, which section was in material regard different in terms to section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. 1957, in so far as the powers of review given to the Custodian under the Ordinance of 1949 were not as wide as those given to that officer under the Act of 1957. It is true that provisions relating to review are not precisely the same in the Ordinance of 1949 and the Act of 1957, but even so the remarks of the Lordships of the Supreme Court in Samurai v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, to the effect that the provisions of Order XLVII, Civil Procedure Code, were not inapplicable to proceedings for review before the Custodian of Evacuee Property are fully as applicable to cases arising under the Act of 1957 as they were to cases arising under the Ordinance of 1949. This does not, however, justify the inference that it is only under the circumstances mentioned in WW. Order XLVII of the Code of Civil Procedure that a Custodian of Evacuee Property can exercise his powers of review. I] am, therefore, of the opinion that whether or not the Custodian of Evacuee Property acted with jurisdiction when passing an order of review must be considered in the light of the provisions of the law which confer the powers of review on him. 7. The main point that requires determination is whether the fact that the Custodian of Evacuee Property considers that a certain order should be passed as the justice of the case demands it was sufficient to bring the case within the ambit of subsection (6) of section 43 of Act of 1957. Having given the matter my anxious consideration, I have reached the conclusion that no order can be considered to be just for the purposes of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, if the thing which according to the Custodian of Evacuee Property was demanded by the justice of the case offends against the provisions of any law applicable to it. I say that because I am clear in my mind that for the purposes of what is done by a Tribunal set up by a State a thing cannot be said to be just if it contravenes a provision of law which governs it. If, therefore, what is directed to be done by the Custodian offends against the provisions of the law that applies, it could not be considered to be just for the purposes of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, however just the Custodian himself might have considered it to be. It needs hardly be mentioned that the review of an order means substituting therefor another order either because the previous order was wrong or because the latter order was more appropriate in the circumstances of a particular case. As far as I am aware, powers of review given to no Tribunal are as wide as those given to a Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, but from that inference cannot be drawn that the Legislature which brought that Act on the statute book had conferred on the Custodian the power to ignore any law which he wanted to ignore, because if that had been the intention of the Legislature, it would have been expressed in very clear terms. Conferment of powers which were claimed to have been conferred on the Custodian of Evacuee Property was a thing so much cut of the ordinary that it cannot be inferred to have been done unless such an inference was unavoidable. 8. It was contended by Major Iraq Muhammad Khan that the plain meaning of the language in which subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, is touched was that the Custodian had the power to review any order of any of his predecessors-in-office or of himself and substitute therefor any order which in his view the justice of the case required. I am not prepared to accept this contention which can lead to results that would be startling. It could not be urged that in the exercise of his ordinary jurisdiction the Custodian of Evacuee Property can pass an order which 1s opposed to law. But if the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan were to be accepted, a Custodian could after t passing the order, which is in accord with law, could in the purported exercise of review jurisdiction pass an order which contravenes the law of the land in all possible respects. The only reasonable interpretation that can be put on the words of section 43, whereby a Custodian of Evacuee Property has been given power to pass an order which the justice of the case may require, is that the order he passes on review should not offend against the few of the land. A number of orders could be passed under the law in any case, and when subsection (6) of section 43 of Act of 1957 confers on the Custodian of Evacuee Property the power to pass on review of an order passed by himself or by any of his predecessors-in-office any order that justice of the case may demand, the intention clearly is that though the order which had to be reviewed was correct according to law, it could be set aside m exercise of the power of review conferred by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, subject to the condition that a law which was otherwise bind mg did not get contravened by the order passed in the purported exercise of the powers of review. That this is the meaning of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957), is also clear from the fourth subsection of the section which empowers the Custodian to pass any order in the exercise of his revisional jurisdiction. This subsection empowers the Custodian to pass any order that he thinks fit and this power to pass an order that the Tribunal having power to pass orders in revision thinks fit is conferred by almost all laws which confer powers of revision. Can anyone for a moment think that in the exercise of his power of revision a Custodian of Evacuee Property can, after sending for the record of a case to satisfy himself about the legality or propriety of an order passed by one of his subordinates, say that though the order passed by his subordinate was legal and the only proper order in the circumstances of the case, he would pass another order because he considered it fit to pass it ? The answer to this question will not be given in the affirmative by anyone. I am clear in my mind that the powers of review conferred on the Custodian of Evacuee Property by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, are, like the powers of revision conferred on him by subsection (4) of that section, limited to passing orders the passing of which the< law does not prohibit. It is inconceivable that the law is that though a Custodian of Evacuee Property cannot set aside in exercise of his powers of revision an order passed by one of his subordinates because he would thereby be violating the law of the land, he can set aside the same order if it had been passed by his predecessor-in- office or himself 9. It was next contended by Major Iraq Muhammad Khan that though Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad had not said m his impugned order that Mr. Muhammad Jan had erred when he said in his order dated the 4th of July 1958 that the compromise on which the decree in the suit for administration of her husband’s property brought by the petitioner was based was valid in law, it should be presumed that he had given that finding. I find it difficult to ascribe to anyone, especially someone who deals with rights and labilities of persons, words that he has not said. In his impugned order Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property has said that the powers of the Custodian while passing an order reviewing an order of his predecessor-m- office or his own were subject only to the restriction that the order he wants to pass should be one which he thinks that the justice of the case requires and does not appear to have considered whether the compromise he was validating could be validated. If he had wanted to say in his impugned order that the compromise entered into and the decree based on it were valid in spite of the provisions of the West Punjab (Protection of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1948, or that an invalid compromise or decree could be acted upon by a Custodian when he exercises powers of review under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957,1 have no doubt that he would have said so, but as he has not said so, I will be treading on a very dangerous ground if I said that he has said that. 10. The next contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan was that before this Court issues a writ, it has to come to the conclusion that the impugned order of Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad was against law, Le. that the compromise and the decree based on the compromise were Invalid and could not have been acted upon. I do not agree with this contention, and I am of the view that a writ can issue if the Court be of the view that the Custodian had passed an order under the belief that he had more powers than he actually possessed. Whether or not the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan dated the 4th of July 1958 was wrong would be for the Custodian who wants to exercise powers of review to decide. It is clear WW. that the order passed by Mr. Muhammad Jan as Custodian on the 4th of July 1958 could not be declared to be valid by this Court because he had dealt with a question which was in exclusive jurisdiction of a Custodian to decide, and I do not see how the validity or otherwise of that order can be adjudicated upon by this Court when considering whether a writ should issue with regard to an order by which the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan was reviewed by another Custodian. While considering the question that arises in this Court one has to determine only whether the powers of review could be exercised. 11. What I have said above will have made it clear that my finding is that Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad passed his impugned order dated the 31st of May 1961 MN exercise of a jurisdiction which he did not possess or in other words he dealt with the case on the incorrect assumption that a Custodian, when exercising powers of review under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, could pass any order that he felt was demanded by the justice of the case and was not bound by laws or rules applicable to the matter. I am clear in my mind that he acted on wrong premises and thereby acted without jurisdiction. A writ of certiorari can issue from this Court when jurisdiction which it did not possess has been exercised by a Tribunal of special jurisdiction, and as no valid ground has been made out for non-exercise of its powers by this Court, I would issue a writ of certiorari to the effect that the impugned order was without jurisdiction and could not be acted upon. I might add that the petitioner also prayed for a writ of mandamus directing the Settlement authorities not to acquire or dispose of the property of the Late Sir Gang Ram till the share of the petitioner in that property is determined and partitioned. The prayer for a writ of mandamus is connected with the main prayer, and as the relief sought by means of the writ of mandamus flows from the writ of certiorari which has been Issued, I would also issue the writ of mandamus prayed for. In the result, I would accept the petition with costs. Antral Had, J.-I agree. Petition accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): Judgment Shabbir Ahmad, J.-This petition for having the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan and Karachi dated the 31st of May 1961, quashed by mean sofa writ of certiorari has been presented by Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram, the order impugned by her being to the effect that a compromise entered into between her and some relatives of her late husband Bark at Ram be treated as binding on the petitioner. The claim of the petitioner is that Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, who, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, passed the Impugned order, had no jurisdiction to pass it, and it TS on this ground that she prays for the vacation of his order. The petition is opposed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, and the Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, West Pakistan, who are the two respondents in this petition. 2. Briefly stated, the relevant facts are these. On the 10th of August 1945, the petitioner married Bark at Ram, son of Hard Ram, who was a son of the late Sir Gang Ram. Bark at Ram had three brothers, namely, Lies Ram, Te} Ram and Shiv Ram, and the four brothers and their father constituted a joint Hindu Family governed by Hindu Law. The marriage between the petitioner and Bark at Ram was solemnized under the Special Marriage Act (III of 1872) and the husband died about a year later on the 29th of September 1946. On the 23rd of March 1947, the petitioner lodged a suit for administration of the property of her husband, Bark at Ram. In this suit she alleged that as the marriage between her and her late husband, Bark at Ram, was solemnized under the Special Marriage Act (II of 1872) the joint Hindu family, which her husband, his three brothers and their father constituted, came to an end as far as her husband was concerned, because under section 22 of the Special Marriage Act, 1872, the husband of the petitioner ceased to be a member of that joint Hindu family and became the sole owner of the property that would have fallen to his share, if there had been a partition of the joint Hindu family property. Claiming to be entitled to one-fifth of the joint Hindu family property of her father-in-law and his four sons, the petitioner had instituted the above-mentioned suit for administration. The suit was still pending when British India was divided into two Domains, namely, Pakistan and India. The father and brothers of Bark at Ram, who were defendants in the suit instituted by the petitioner, left Pakistan, but were represented by a counsel before the Court which was dealing with the suit. On the 10th of July 1948, this suit for administration of the property of late Bark at Ram was compromised by the parties, and as a result, the petitioner was to get some money and some shares in companies. The authorities competent to deal with evacuee property

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): with the suit. On the 10th of July 1948, this suit for administration of the property of late Bark at Ram was compromised by the parties, and as a result, the petitioner was to get some money and some shares in companies. The authorities competent to deal with evacuee property treated the entire joint family property as evacuee property, whereupon WW. the petitioner presented a petition under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 (Act XV of 1949), on the 28th of April 1955, for getting a declaration that one-fifth of the property, the whole of which had been treated as evacuee property, belonged to her and could not, on that ground, be treated as evacuee property. The Deputy Custodian did not accept the claim of the petitioner and held by his order dated the 5th of July 1956 that she was entitled to no more than Rs. 1,87,000 out of the estate left by her late husband. The petitioner lodged an appeal against the order of the Deputy Custodian which was accepted on the 13th of August 1957 by the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property. Against this order of the Additional Custodian, the Rehabilitation Department presented an application for revision before the then Custodian, the late Mr. Muhammad Jan, but this petition for revision was lodged in on the 4th of July 1958, by an order reported as PLD 1958 (Custodian) 33. The finding of Mr. Muhammad Jan acting as Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, was that the compromise, on the basis of which the suit lodged by the petitioner for administration of the property of her late husband had been terminated in the form of a decree of a Civil Court, could not be acted upon because the decree was a nullity. The reason for this finding was stated to be that the West Punjab (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1948, did not permit Courts to deal with suits relating to evacuee property. Mr. Muhammad Jan held, however, that the petitioner was not entitled to one-fifth of the property that had belonged to the joint Hindu family but only one-tenth of it. After the decision of the Deputy Custodian dated the 5th of July 1956, which has been mentioned above, Ordinance XV of 1949 was replaced by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance of 1956, which was replaced by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) and the future course of litigation was governed by those laws. In exercise of the powers vesting in it in that behalf by the relevant law, the Central Government presented a petition before the Tribunal set up under the law for having it held that the property, which had been held by Mr. Muhammad Jan to be nonevacuee property, was in fact evacuee property. It appears that the Tribunal suggested to the representative of the Rehabilitation Department who appeared before them for the Central Government in that reference that the better and easier course

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): that the property, which had been held by Mr. Muhammad Jan to be nonevacuee property, was in fact evacuee property. It appears that the Tribunal suggested to the representative of the Rehabilitation Department who appeared before them for the Central Government in that reference that the better and easier course was to have the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan dated the 4th of July 1958 reviewed by the then Custodian (Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad). This advice appears to have been followed and a petition for review was presented before Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad. He held that the petition presented by the Rehabilitation Department was not maintainable WW. as it had been presented long after the period of limitation prescribed for such petitions had expired, but he reviewed, of his own accord, the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan and held that justice of the case required, that the petitioner should not get more than Rs. 1,87,000 out of the property left by her husband. It is this order passed by Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, that the petitioner wants this Court to quash in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. 3. It is necessary to have a clear picture of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, under which the impugned order was passed, and It is, therefore, reproduced here for ready reference. The section reads as follows “43. Appeal, revision and review.-(1) Any person aggrieved by a final order under section 20, section 22 or section 23 passed by a Deputy or Assistant Custodian may prefer an appeal to the Custodian. (2) The appeal shall be presented in such manner and with such time as may be prescribed. (3) The Custodian to whom an appeal is preferred under subsection (1) may dispose of it himself or make it over for disposal to an Additional Custodian. (4) The Custodian may, at any time, either of his own motion or on application made to him within the prescribed period in this behalf call for the record of any proceeding for the administration of evacuee property, which is pending before or has been disposed of by an officer subordinate to him, including an Additional Custodian, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed in the said proceeding, and may pass such order in relation thereto as he thinks fit : Provided that the Custodian shall not pass an order revising or modifying any order affecting any person without giving such person and the Rehabilitation Authority an opportunity of being heard. (5) The Custodian may dispose of a case under subsection (4) himself or, except when it relates to an order of an Additional Custodian, make It over to an Additional Custodian for disposal. (6) The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him in this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at any time and after giving

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): except when it relates to an order of an Additional Custodian, make It over to an Additional Custodian for disposal. (6) The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him in this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at any time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order WW. passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require : Provided that no final order passed on or before the seventeenth day of November 1956 declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property shall be reviewed. (7) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, any order made by the Custodian, or Additional, Deputy or Assistant Custodian shall be final and small not be called in question in any Court.” Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, passed his order under subsection (6) of section 43, reproduced above. He disposed of the matter by means of the last paragraph of his order dated the 31st of May 1960, which reads as under : “So far as the Custodian’s power to review a previous order is concerned, the only limitation imposed on him is that no order passed prior to the 17th November 1956 declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property shall be reviewed by him. This proviso was omitted by an amending Act of 1958, but that Act was repealed by an Ordinance of 1959. It is a debatable question whether the repeal made by the amending Act of 1958 is saved by the provisions of section 6-A of the General Clauses Act, but assuming that it is not so saved, and the proviso is no longer part of the subsection, as the order in question was passed after, and not before, the 17th November 1956, there is nothing to prevent me from reviewing it. The subsection makes it quite clear that such an order can be reviewed by the successor-in-office of the Custodian on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require. In my opinion, the justice of this case requires that the respondent should get only the fruit of the compromise decree which she had obtained in the year 1948 and nothing more because that compromise was entered into by her willingly with the family of which her deceased husband was one of the members. With all due respect to my learned predecessor, I am of opinion that he should have exercised the power conferred by subsection (3) of section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and accepted the compromise decree instead of granting the respondent a declaration that she owned /10th share in the joint family property. I, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by subsections (4) and (6) of section 43 of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and accepted the compromise decree instead of granting the respondent a declaration that she owned /10th share in the joint family property. I, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by subsections (4) and (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and subsection (3) of section 41 of the Act, hereby, set aside the two orders dated the 13th August 1957 and the 4th July 1958, passed by the Additional Custodian and the Custodian of Evacuee Property, respectively, restore the order dated the 5th July 1956, passed by the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property Lahore, and give my approval to the WW. compromise decree passed in favor of the respondent, according to which she would be entitled only to a sum of Rs. 1,87,000 from the property belonging to the joint Hindu family consisting of Lala Hard Ram and his sons. If out of this money, some payments have already been made to the respondent, she would be entitled only to the balance out of the income or sale proceeds of that joint family property, if and when the same comes to the hands of the Custodian.” 4. Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the decree based on the compromise which the petitioner entered into with the defendants in the suit which she had brought for administration of the property left by her husband was a nullity because at the time when it was passed the West Punjab (Protection of Evacuee Property) Act, 1948, was in force and no suit regarding evacuee property was competent. In reply the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan, Settlement Commissioner (Legal), who appeared for the two respondents, was that the order of the Civil Judge whereby he accepted the compromise between the parties to the suit for administration of the property of Bark at Ram could not be deemed to be a decree and was, therefore, not hit by the provisions of the West Punjab (Protection of Evacuee Property) Act, 1948. In my option, TT is unnecessary for the purposes of this petition to determine which of these two rival contentions is correct, because the fate of the petition depends on whether the impugned order passed by Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad on the 31st of May 1960 reviewing the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan dated the 4th of July 1958 could be considered to be a valid order in the eyes of law. 5. I have mentioned in an earlier part of this order, and this will also be clear from the last paragraph of the order of Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad dated the 31st of May 1960, that the only reason on which he reviewed the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan was that he felt that the justice of the case demanded the acceptance of the compromise. Major Iraq Muhammad Khan contended that as Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): 1960, that the only reason on which he reviewed the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan was that he felt that the justice of the case demanded the acceptance of the compromise. Major Iraq Muhammad Khan contended that as Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, had, in his order dated the 31st of May 1960 held that justice demanded that the acceptance of the compromise be binding on the petitioner, his order was in accordance we the subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and no question of quashing it by issuing a WNT of certiorari could arise. If the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan to the effect that under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, WW. 1957, the powers of the Custodian are as wide as they were held by Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as a Custodian, to be, is accepted, it is obvious that the order attacked by the petitioner could not be deemed to be without jurisdiction and no question of issuing a writ would arise. If, however, it is found that the impugned order transgressed the limits prescribed by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Act, it will have to be held that the order of Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad dated the 31st of May 1960 was without jurisdiction. But whether a writ would be issued would naturally depend on the consideration of whether or not the extraordinary power of this Court to issue a writ should be exercised. 6. It appears to me that Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property, was not right when he held that the power of a Custodian to review an order passed by any of his predecessors was unlimited or was limited only to this extent that the Custodian could pass any order that he felt the justice of the case required. The power that he was exercising was that of review and though the provisions of Order XLVII of the Code of Civil Procedure which deal with review by Courts governed by that law are not strictly applicable to the exercise of the powers of review by the Custodian, reference to that provision of the Code of Civil Procedure would not be without justification, and indeed one finds that in a decision given by the Supreme Court of Pakistan which is reported as Samurai v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi it was remarked that the provisions of Order XLVII, Civil Procedure Code, were not entirely applicable to the exercise of power of review by a Custodian of Evacuee Property. Major Iraq Muhammad Khan tried to meet the decision of the Supreme Court by saying that it was given under section 36 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, which section was in material regard different in terms to section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. 1957,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): Muhammad Khan tried to meet the decision of the Supreme Court by saying that it was given under section 36 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, which section was in material regard different in terms to section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. 1957, in so far as the powers of review given to the Custodian under the Ordinance of 1949 were not as wide as those given to that officer under the Act of 1957. It is true that provisions relating to review are not precisely the same in the Ordinance of 1949 and the Act of 1957, but even so the remarks of the Lordships of the Supreme Court in Samurai v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, to the effect that the provisions of Order XLVII, Civil Procedure Code, were not inapplicable to proceedings for review before the Custodian of Evacuee Property are fully as applicable to cases arising under the Act of 1957 as they were to cases arising under the Ordinance of 1949. This does not, however, justify the inference that it is only under the circumstances mentioned in WW. Order XLVII of the Code of Civil Procedure that a Custodian of Evacuee Property can exercise his powers of review. I] am, therefore, of the opinion that whether or not the Custodian of Evacuee Property acted with jurisdiction when passing an order of review must be considered in the light of the provisions of the law which confer the powers of review on him. 7. The main point that requires determination is whether the fact that the Custodian of Evacuee Property considers that a certain order should be passed as the justice of the case demands it was sufficient to bring the case within the ambit of subsection (6) of section 43 of Act of 1957. Having given the matter my anxious consideration, I have reached the conclusion that no order can be considered to be just for the purposes of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, if the thing which according to the Custodian of Evacuee Property was demanded by the justice of the case offends against the provisions of any law applicable to it. I say that because I am clear in my mind that for the purposes of what is done by a Tribunal set up by a State a thing cannot be said to be just if it contravenes a provision of law which governs it. If, therefore, what is directed to be done by the Custodian offends against the provisions of the law that applies, it could not be considered to be just for the purposes of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, however just the Custodian himself might have considered it to be. It needs hardly be mentioned that the review of an order means substituting therefor another order either because the previous order was wrong or because the latter order

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, however just the Custodian himself might have considered it to be. It needs hardly be mentioned that the review of an order means substituting therefor another order either because the previous order was wrong or because the latter order was more appropriate in the circumstances of a particular case. As far as I am aware, powers of review given to no Tribunal are as wide as those given to a Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, but from that inference cannot be drawn that the Legislature which brought that Act on the statute book had conferred on the Custodian the power to ignore any law which he wanted to ignore, because if that had been the intention of the Legislature, it would have been expressed in very clear terms. Conferment of powers which were claimed to have been conferred on the Custodian of Evacuee Property was a thing so much cut of the ordinary that it cannot be inferred to have been done unless such an inference was unavoidable. 8. It was contended by Major Iraq Muhammad Khan that the plain meaning of the language in which subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, is touched was that the Custodian had the power to review any order of any of his predecessors-in-office or of himself and substitute therefor any order which in his view the justice of the case required. I am not prepared to accept this contention which can lead to results that would be startling. It could not be urged that in the exercise of his ordinary jurisdiction the Custodian of Evacuee Property can pass an order which 1s opposed to law. But if the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan were to be accepted, a Custodian could after t passing the order, which is in accord with law, could in the purported exercise of review jurisdiction pass an order which contravenes the law of the land in all possible respects. The only reasonable interpretation that can be put on the words of section 43, whereby a Custodian of Evacuee Property has been given power to pass an order which the justice of the case may require, is that the order he passes on review should not offend against the few of the land. A number of orders could be passed under the law in any case, and when subsection (6) of section 43 of Act of 1957 confers on the Custodian of Evacuee Property the power to pass on review of an order passed by himself or by any of his predecessors-in-office any order that justice of the case may demand, the intention clearly is that though the order which had to be reviewed was correct according to law, it could be set aside m exercise of the power of review conferred by subsection (6) of section 43 of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): of his predecessors-in-office any order that justice of the case may demand, the intention clearly is that though the order which had to be reviewed was correct according to law, it could be set aside m exercise of the power of review conferred by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, subject to the condition that a law which was otherwise bind mg did not get contravened by the order passed in the purported exercise of the powers of review. That this is the meaning of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957), is also clear from the fourth subsection of the section which empowers the Custodian to pass any order in the exercise of his revisional jurisdiction. This subsection empowers the Custodian to pass any order that he thinks fit and this power to pass an order that the Tribunal having power to pass orders in revision thinks fit is conferred by almost all laws which confer powers of revision. Can anyone for a moment think that in the exercise of his power of revision a Custodian of Evacuee Property can, after sending for the record of a case to satisfy himself about the legality or propriety of an order passed by one of his subordinates, say that though the order passed by his subordinate was legal and the only proper order in the circumstances of the case, he would pass another order because he considered it fit to pass it ? The answer to this question will not be given in the affirmative by anyone. I am clear in my mind that the powers of review conferred on the Custodian of Evacuee Property by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, are, like the powers of revision conferred on him by subsection (4) of that section, limited to passing orders the passing of which the< law does not prohibit. It is inconceivable that the law is that though a Custodian of Evacuee Property cannot set aside in exercise of his powers of revision an order passed by one of his subordinates because he would thereby be violating the law of the land, he can set aside the same order if it had been passed by his predecessor-in- office or himself 9. It was next contended by Major Iraq Muhammad Khan that though Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad had not said m his impugned order that Mr. Muhammad Jan had erred when he said in his order dated the 4th of July 1958 that the compromise on which the decree in the suit for administration of her husband’s property brought by the petitioner was based was valid in law, it should be presumed that he had given that finding. I find it difficult to ascribe to anyone, especially someone who deals with rights and labilities of persons, words that he has not said. In his

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): of her husband’s property brought by the petitioner was based was valid in law, it should be presumed that he had given that finding. I find it difficult to ascribe to anyone, especially someone who deals with rights and labilities of persons, words that he has not said. In his impugned order Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad acting as the Custodian of Evacuee Property has said that the powers of the Custodian while passing an order reviewing an order of his predecessor-m- office or his own were subject only to the restriction that the order he wants to pass should be one which he thinks that the justice of the case requires and does not appear to have considered whether the compromise he was validating could be validated. If he had wanted to say in his impugned order that the compromise entered into and the decree based on it were valid in spite of the provisions of the West Punjab (Protection of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1948, or that an invalid compromise or decree could be acted upon by a Custodian when he exercises powers of review under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957,1 have no doubt that he would have said so, but as he has not said so, I will be treading on a very dangerous ground if I said that he has said that. 10. The next contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan was that before this Court issues a writ, it has to come to the conclusion that the impugned order of Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad was against law, Le. that the compromise and the decree based on the compromise were Invalid and could not have been acted upon. I do not agree with this contention, and I am of the view that a writ can issue if the Court be of the view that the Custodian had passed an order under the belief that he had more powers than he actually possessed. Whether or not the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan dated the 4th of July 1958 was wrong would be for the Custodian who wants to exercise powers of review to decide. It is clear WW. that the order passed by Mr. Muhammad Jan as Custodian on the 4th of July 1958 could not be declared to be valid by this Court because he had dealt with a question which was in exclusive jurisdiction of a Custodian to decide, and I do not see how the validity or otherwise of that order can be adjudicated upon by this Court when considering whether a writ should issue with regard to an order by which the order of Mr. Muhammad Jan was reviewed by another Custodian. While considering the question that arises in this Court one has to determine only whether the powers of review could be exercised. 11. What I have said above will have made it clear that my finding is that Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad passed his

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 424?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 424 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1961-12-01): Jan was reviewed by another Custodian. While considering the question that arises in this Court one has to determine only whether the powers of review could be exercised. 11. What I have said above will have made it clear that my finding is that Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad passed his impugned order dated the 31st of May 1961 MN exercise of a jurisdiction which he did not possess or in other words he dealt with the case on the incorrect assumption that a Custodian, when exercising powers of review under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, could pass any order that he felt was demanded by the justice of the case and was not bound by laws or rules applicable to the matter. I am clear in my mind that he acted on wrong premises and thereby acted without jurisdiction. A writ of certiorari can issue from this Court when jurisdiction which it did not possess has been exercised by a Tribunal of special jurisdiction, and as no valid ground has been made out for non-exercise of its powers by this Court, I would issue a writ of certiorari to the effect that the impugned order was without jurisdiction and could not be acted upon. I might add that the petitioner also prayed for a writ of mandamus directing the Settlement authorities not to acquire or dispose of the property of the Late Sir Gang Ram till the share of the petitioner in that property is determined and partitioned. The prayer for a writ of mandamus is connected with the main prayer, and as the relief sought by means of the writ of mandamus flows from the writ of certiorari which has been Issued, I would also issue the writ of mandamus prayed for. In the result, I would accept the petition with costs. Antral Had, J.-I agree. Petition accepted.

Question: What is case 1962 PLD 306 about?
Answer: Case 1962 PLD 306 was decided by HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN on 1961-11-13. The case involved ABDUL MAJID (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) AMENDMENT ORDINANCE (XXII OF 1959) - S. GENERAL CLAUSES ACT (X OF 1897) - S. 6-A PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43 (6) PROVISO PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) (AMENDMENT) ACT (XLV OF 1958) - S. (A).. The case was heard by WAHIDUDDIN AHMED AND A. S. FARUQUI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: In case 1962 PLD 306, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) AMENDMENT ORDINANCE (XXII OF 1959) - S. GENERAL CLAUSES ACT (X OF 1897) - S. 6-A PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43 (6) PROVISO PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) (AMENDMENT) ACT (XLV OF 1958) - S. (A).. This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN and decided on 1961-11-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1962 PLD 306 were: S. M. RAZA FOR PETITIONER. SAEED A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENTS NO. AND 2.NATHULAL FOR RESPONDENT NO. 3.A. S. PIRZADA FOR RESPONDENT NO. 4.. The judges presiding were: WAHIDUDDIN AHMED AND A. S. FARUQUI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: The parties in case 1962 PLD 306 were: ABDUL MAJID (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1962 PLD 306.
Answer: Judgment Baroque, J.-This writ petition is directed against the order dated 27th August 1959 passed by the Custodian, Evacuee Property West Pakistan and Karachi, whereby he held that he was not competent to review an earlier order of the Custodian because he was of the opinion that the repeal of the amending Act XLV of 1958 by Ordinance XXII of 1959 had the effect of reviving the proviso to section 43 (6) of Act XII of 1957 which had been deleted by Act XLV of 1958. 2. The facts leading up to the impugned order, as stated In the writ petition, may very briefly be stated. The petitioner is in occupation of the premises bearing No. 1734 situated In Ward-A, Hyderabad. It is the case of the petitioner that the property bear mg Surveys Nos. 1734 and 1730 belonged to one Daydream son of Kishanchand who migrated to India in 1948 and became an evacuee; that after the migration of Daydream his father Kishanchand, who continued to live at Hyderabad, got his name mutated as an owner of the said property, but when this came to the notice of the Custodian Department the Assistant Custodian by his order dated 31-1-58 held that the said mutation was illegal, and consequently the revenue record was mended and the name of Daydream was brought back on the City Survey Record Io respect of both the aforesaid premises. Krishan-chand then moved the Deputy Custodian, Hyderabad, who, by his order dated 15-V-58, set aside the earlier order dated 27-8-58 and declared the two premises to be non-evacuee and as belonging to Kishanchand. A reference was then made to the Custodian by the Rehabilitation Department and the matter came up before Justice A. M. Jan who, in his order dated 27-12-58, expressed some doubt about the validity of the order of the Duty Custodian, but he kept the case on his file to see if it was fit one for review. Notices for this purpose were issued to the parties. The matter then came up before Mascot Ahmad, J. who had in the meantime been appointed Custodian. There were three connected matters before him relating to the same question. These were No. F. (6)/59, No. F. (60)/58 and No. F. (70)/58. The first was in the nature of a so moth review, the second arose out of a revision application by the present petitioner and the third was a reference by the Rehabilitation Department. All these three matters were in effect disposed of by the order, against which the present writ petition is directed and which was passed in No. F. (6)/59 (so moth). w. 3. The question which the learned Custodian rammed was whether the order dated 30th January 1950 (sic) passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, whereby the property of Kishanchand had been declared to be non-evacuee, could be set aside and he came to the conclusion that the proviso to subsection (6) of section 43 of Act XII of 1957 was still in operation and that prohibited the review of any order passed before the 17th day of November, 1916 declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property. 4. Section 43 of the Act contams provision for appeal, revision and review. We are concerned with the question of review which is contained in subsection (6) to which the proviso referred to above related. This may be conveniently reproduced : “43 The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him in this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at any time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require : Provided that no final order passed on or before. The seventeenth day of November, 1956, declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property shall be reviewed.” This proviso was omitted by Act XLV of 1958 Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Amendment Act of 1958 by its section This amended Act came into force on 23rd September 1958, and it is necessary to refer to some of its provisions. It also introduced section 3-A after section 3 of Act XII of 1957. This new section reads as follows : “3-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the commencement of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Amendment Act, 1958 shall be declared to be non-evacuee or, as the case may be, non-evacuee property, on or after such commencement. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply to any evacuee in respect of whom or to any evacuee property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before such commencement as aforesaid for treating such evacuee as non-evacuee or such evacuee property as non-evacuee property.” Another amendment was brought in by section of this amending Act which read as follows : “4. Amendment of section 43, Act XII of 1957.- In section 43 of the said Act, (a) in subsection the proviso shall be omitted ; and (IB) in subsection after the words “foregoing provisions of this section’, the words "and the other provisions of this Act,” shall be served.” A further amendment was made by section 5 by inserting two new sections, viz. 43-A and 43-B after section 43 of Act XII of 1957. Section 43-A provided for a revision by High Court upon a reference by the Government in any case m which a Custodian had on or after the IST day of January 1953 declared any person as non-evacuee or any property to be non- evacuee property. Section 43-B laid down that any order passed by Custodian of the nature referred to above shall take effect subject to such order, if any, as the High Court might pass under section 43-A. I have referred to the main amending sections of Act XLV of 1958, because the other provisions are generally of a consequential nature arising from the three amendments mentioned above. 5. Then came Ordinance XXII of 1959, Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) (Amendment) Ordinance 1959. This consists only of seven sections and the main amendment that it introduced consisted of the substitution of the old sections 43- A and 43- B by two new sections bearing the same numbers. By section 43-A the jurisdiction to inquire into the matters referred to in old section 43-A was given to a Tribunal instead of the High Court. The new section 43-A was on the same lines as the old ones except this that instead of the High Court the ‘Tribunal’ was substituted. All other sections consisted of consequential amendments arising out of the new section 43-A. By the last section the Act XLV of 1958 was repealed. The question which falls for consideration is as to what was the effect of this repeal. 6. The learned Custodian came to the conclusion that the effect of section 7 (repealing section) of the Ordinance of 1959 was to obliterate altogether the amend mg Act XLV of 1958 and the amendments made by that Act no longer remained in operation. Upon the view he held that the old proviso to subsection (6) of section 43 of the main Act was revived which prohibited the review of an order passed on or before 17th November 1956. And since the first order in this case was passed long before 17-11-56 the learned Custodian held that he was not competent to review that order. w. “6-A. Repeal of Act making textual amendment in Act or Regulation.1-Where any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act repeals any enactment by which the text of any Central Act or Regulation was amended by the express omission, insertion or substitution of any matter, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not affect the continuance of any such amendment made by the enactment so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal.” The obvious effect of this provision in the present case would be that the repeal of Act XLV of 1958 would not affect the con ti nuance of any amendment which had been made by TC in the ma'am Act (Act XII of 1957), unless a different intention appeared The learned Custodian has referred the contrary intention from two circumstances : Firstly, he observed that if the only object of promulgating the Ordinance of 1959 was to substitute section 43-A and section 43-B of Act XLV of 1958 by the two new sections 43-A and 43-B, it would have been unnecessary to repeal the amending Act of 1958. The following portion of the order of the learned Custodian may be reproduced : “The last mentioned two sections were substituted by two other sections, bearing the same numbers by the amending Ordinance 1959, and if that had been the only object of promulgating the Ordinance of 1959, and if the intention was to keep alive the amendments made by the amending Act of the year 1958, it would have been unnecessary to “repeal the amending Act of 1958, by section 7 of the Ordinance.” 8. The second reason given by the Custodian is that if it was the intention of the legislature not to obliterate the amendments brought out by Act XLV of 1958 the result would be that section 3-A, which was inserted by the Amendment Act of 1958, would stand side by side with sections 22 and 41 of the main Act, and this, according to the learned Custodian, would create an inconsistency. I shall now proceed to deal with both these points. 9. Ordinance XXII of 1959 was a temporary legislation and was to remain in force until the 31st day of December, 1960, and it was expressly provided that thereafter the amendments made by this Ordinance in the Act XII of 1957 shall cease to form part of that Act and shall be deemed to have been repealed. Subsection (2) of section of the Ordinance provided as follows “(2) It shall come into force at once and shall remain in force until the thirty-first day of December 1960, whereupon the amendments ordered to be made in the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, by sections 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 shall cease to form part of that Act and shall be deemed to have been repealed.” If the repealing section was not there in this Ordinance the result would have been that after the 31st of December w. 1960 the Tribunal would have ceased to exist and the former section 43-A and section 43- B, which gave revisional jurisdiction to the High Court, would have been revived. This clearly was not contemplated because the revisional jurisdiction of the High Color was substituted by the jurisdiction given to the Tribunal in respect of the same matters and this, according to the express provision of the Ordinance, was to last up to 31st December 1960. The intention was that all inquiries into the orders passed by the Custodian after the first day of January 1953 were to end by 31st December, 1960. And it was certainly not intended that on the expiry of the Ordinance XXII of 1959 the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court with respect to the same nature of the equity be revived. To that extent the different intention clearly appears. That, according to us, was the purpose of the repealing section 7. 10. With regard to the assumed inconsistency between section 3-A on the one hand and sections 22 and 41 on the other, the first thing to note is that section 3-A was added by the amending Act of 1958. The legislature did not consider it inconsistent with sections 22 and 41 of Act XII of 1957 and which were allowed to stand with section 3-A. Section 3-A, it may be noted, was in the nature of a converse rule to section 3 of the main Act. Section 3 provided that no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the 1st day of January, 1957 should be treated as evacuee after the said date. Two exceptions were made, one of which was that it did not apply to such person and property in respect of which any action had commenced, or any proceedings were pending immediately before the date mentioned in sub-clause Section.'-A enacted a converse provision. It laid down that no person or property treated as evacuee immediately before the coming into force of this amending Act was to be declared non-evacuee after the commencement of this Act. Subsection (2) made an exception for cases of person and property, in respect of which any action had commenced, or any proceedings were pending before the commencement of this Act. Section 22 provides for claim by interested person for a declaration that a property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property was not so or that his interest in the property had not been affected by the provisions of the Act. An application in this regard had to be made within the prescribed period. Section 41 of the main Act contains a bar to the jurisdiction of Courts for entertain or adjudicating upon any question whether any person or property is or is not evacuee. w. Subsection (2) of that section provides that whenever such a question arises in any Court or Authority the question shall be stated and remitted to the Custodian for decision. 11. It appears to us that sections 22 and 41 could stand inspire of section 3-A which had been introduced by the amending Act of 1958, and they were advisedly maintained. The repeal of these two sections would have left no power in the Custodian to declare a property as evacuee either in the pending cases or cases which came within the exceptions to section 3-A. Moreover, as far as section 41 is concerned, its main purpose was to oust the jurisdiction of the Courts or any other authority. We, therefore, do not agree with the Earned Custodian that one of the objects of the repeal mg section 7 of Ordinance XXII of 1959 was TP obliterate section 3-A. It may further be noted that the consistency, if any, in the provisions referred to above was not a too thing. It was there when the amending Act of 1958 produced section 3-A ITO the main Act which already contained sections 22 and 41. We are, however, of the view that there was no inch insistency, and it was certainly not intended to remove the inconsistency, if any, by the repeal of amending Act of 1958 by section 7 of the Ordinance. 12. The plain effect of section 6-A of the General Clauses Act is that the repeal of an amending Act does not affect the continuance of the amendment which, in fact, becomes a part and parcel of the main Act. If such is the intention it would have to be either expressly stated as it was indeed done m the case of subsection (2) of section of the Ordinance of 1959 or there must appear clearly a different intention. In the present case there is no express provision, and we are clearly of the view that a different intention does not appear. B 13. The words of section 6-A of the General Clauses Act are so clear that no case law is required to appreciate its meaning. We may however note a case reported in Three Goal Paper Mills Ltd. v. Ram Alabama Mai and others In that case it was urged that since section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act was amended by virtue of the Industrial Disputes Act XLVII of 1950 and that Act was itself repealed by the Industrial Disputes Amendment Act of 1956, the earlier amendment ceased to exist and the law, therefore, stood as it was before the amendment. This contention was repelled, and it was held that the repeal of an amending Act does not have the effect of destroying the amendment. 14. We are, therefore, clearly of the view that the repeal of the arr ending Act of 1958 did cot have the effect of reviving the proviso to subsection (6) of section 43. It was expressly omitted by the amending Act of 1958, and it could not be resurrected except by an express provision or by necessary intendment. The learned Custodian was clearly MN error in hold’ ING otherwise. He had the jurisdiction to review the order in so far as the proviso to subsection (6) had been omitted. 15. For the reasons given above we quash the order of the learned Custodian dated 27th August 1959 with one set of costs. The matter will now go back to the Custodian who will decide the case on merits. Petition acc épée d

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 306 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-13): Judgment Baroque, J.-This writ petition is directed against the order dated 27th August 1959 passed by the Custodian, Evacuee Property West Pakistan and Karachi, whereby he held that he was not competent to review an earlier order of the Custodian because he was of the opinion that the repeal of the amending Act XLV of 1958 by Ordinance XXII of 1959 had the effect of reviving the proviso to section 43 (6) of Act XII of 1957 which had been deleted by Act XLV of 1958. 2. The facts leading up to the impugned order, as stated In the writ petition, may very briefly be stated. The petitioner is in occupation of the premises bearing No. 1734 situated In Ward-A, Hyderabad. It is the case of the petitioner that the property bear mg Surveys Nos. 1734 and 1730 belonged to one Daydream son of Kishanchand who migrated to India in 1948 and became an evacuee; that after the migration of Daydream his father Kishanchand, who continued to live at Hyderabad, got his name mutated as an owner of the said property, but when this came to the notice of the Custodian Department the Assistant Custodian by his order dated 31-1-58 held that the said mutation was illegal, and consequently the revenue record was mended and the name of Daydream was brought back on the City Survey Record Io respect of both the aforesaid premises. Krishan-chand then moved the Deputy Custodian, Hyderabad, who, by his order dated 15-V-58, set aside the earlier order dated 27-8-58 and declared the two premises to be non-evacuee and as belonging to Kishanchand. A reference was then made to the Custodian by the Rehabilitation Department and the matter came up before Justice A. M. Jan who, in his order dated 27-12-58, expressed some doubt about the validity of the order of the Duty Custodian, but he kept the case on his file to see if it was fit one for review. Notices for this purpose were issued to the parties. The matter then came up before Mascot Ahmad, J. who had in the meantime been appointed Custodian. There were three connected matters before him relating to the same question. These were No. F. (6)/59, No. F. (60)/58 and No. F. (70)/58. The first was in the nature of a so moth review, the second arose out of a revision application by the present petitioner and the third was a reference by the Rehabilitation Department. All these three matters were in effect disposed of by the order, against which the present writ petition is directed and which was passed in No. F. (6)/59 (so moth). w. 3. The question which the learned Custodian rammed was whether the order dated 30th January 1950 (sic) passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, whereby the property of Kishanchand had been declared to be non-evacuee, could be set aside and he came to the conclusion that the proviso to subsection (6) of section 43 of Act XII of 1957 was still

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 306 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-13): order dated 30th January 1950 (sic) passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, whereby the property of Kishanchand had been declared to be non-evacuee, could be set aside and he came to the conclusion that the proviso to subsection (6) of section 43 of Act XII of 1957 was still in operation and that prohibited the review of any order passed before the 17th day of November, 1916 declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property. 4. Section 43 of the Act contams provision for appeal, revision and review. We are concerned with the question of review which is contained in subsection (6) to which the proviso referred to above related. This may be conveniently reproduced : “43 The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him in this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at any time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order passed by his predecessor-in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require : Provided that no final order passed on or before. The seventeenth day of November, 1956, declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property shall be reviewed.” This proviso was omitted by Act XLV of 1958 Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Amendment Act of 1958 by its section This amended Act came into force on 23rd September 1958, and it is necessary to refer to some of its provisions. It also introduced section 3-A after section 3 of Act XII of 1957. This new section reads as follows : “3-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the commencement of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Amendment Act, 1958 shall be declared to be non-evacuee or, as the case may be, non-evacuee property, on or after such commencement. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply to any evacuee in respect of whom or to any evacuee property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before such commencement as aforesaid for treating such evacuee as non-evacuee or such evacuee property as non-evacuee property.” Another amendment was brought in by section of this amending Act which read as follows : “4. Amendment of section 43, Act XII of 1957.- In section 43 of the said Act, (a) in subsection the proviso shall be omitted ; and (IB) in subsection after the words “foregoing provisions of this section’, the words "and the other provisions of this Act,” shall be served.” A further amendment was made by section 5 by inserting two new sections, viz. 43-A and 43-B after section 43 of Act XII of 1957. Section 43-A provided for a revision by High Court upon a reference by the Government in any case m which a Custodian had on or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 306 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-13): A further amendment was made by section 5 by inserting two new sections, viz. 43-A and 43-B after section 43 of Act XII of 1957. Section 43-A provided for a revision by High Court upon a reference by the Government in any case m which a Custodian had on or after the IST day of January 1953 declared any person as non-evacuee or any property to be non- evacuee property. Section 43-B laid down that any order passed by Custodian of the nature referred to above shall take effect subject to such order, if any, as the High Court might pass under section 43-A. I have referred to the main amending sections of Act XLV of 1958, because the other provisions are generally of a consequential nature arising from the three amendments mentioned above. 5. Then came Ordinance XXII of 1959, Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) (Amendment) Ordinance 1959. This consists only of seven sections and the main amendment that it introduced consisted of the substitution of the old sections 43- A and 43- B by two new sections bearing the same numbers. By section 43-A the jurisdiction to inquire into the matters referred to in old section 43-A was given to a Tribunal instead of the High Court. The new section 43-A was on the same lines as the old ones except this that instead of the High Court the ‘Tribunal’ was substituted. All other sections consisted of consequential amendments arising out of the new section 43-A. By the last section the Act XLV of 1958 was repealed. The question which falls for consideration is as to what was the effect of this repeal. 6. The learned Custodian came to the conclusion that the effect of section 7 (repealing section) of the Ordinance of 1959 was to obliterate altogether the amend mg Act XLV of 1958 and the amendments made by that Act no longer remained in operation. Upon the view he held that the old proviso to subsection (6) of section 43 of the main Act was revived which prohibited the review of an order passed on or before 17th November 1956. And since the first order in this case was passed long before 17-11-56 the learned Custodian held that he was not competent to review that order. w. “6-A. Repeal of Act making textual amendment in Act or Regulation.1-Where any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act repeals any enactment by which the text of any Central Act or Regulation was amended by the express omission, insertion or substitution of any matter, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not affect the continuance of any such amendment made by the enactment so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal.” The obvious effect of this provision in the present case would be that the repeal of Act XLV of 1958 would not affect the con ti nuance of any amendment which had been made by TC in the ma'am

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 306 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-13): so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal.” The obvious effect of this provision in the present case would be that the repeal of Act XLV of 1958 would not affect the con ti nuance of any amendment which had been made by TC in the ma'am Act (Act XII of 1957), unless a different intention appeared The learned Custodian has referred the contrary intention from two circumstances : Firstly, he observed that if the only object of promulgating the Ordinance of 1959 was to substitute section 43-A and section 43-B of Act XLV of 1958 by the two new sections 43-A and 43-B, it would have been unnecessary to repeal the amending Act of 1958. The following portion of the order of the learned Custodian may be reproduced : “The last mentioned two sections were substituted by two other sections, bearing the same numbers by the amending Ordinance 1959, and if that had been the only object of promulgating the Ordinance of 1959, and if the intention was to keep alive the amendments made by the amending Act of the year 1958, it would have been unnecessary to “repeal the amending Act of 1958, by section 7 of the Ordinance.” 8. The second reason given by the Custodian is that if it was the intention of the legislature not to obliterate the amendments brought out by Act XLV of 1958 the result would be that section 3-A, which was inserted by the Amendment Act of 1958, would stand side by side with sections 22 and 41 of the main Act, and this, according to the learned Custodian, would create an inconsistency. I shall now proceed to deal with both these points. 9. Ordinance XXII of 1959 was a temporary legislation and was to remain in force until the 31st day of December, 1960, and it was expressly provided that thereafter the amendments made by this Ordinance in the Act XII of 1957 shall cease to form part of that Act and shall be deemed to have been repealed. Subsection (2) of section of the Ordinance provided as follows “(2) It shall come into force at once and shall remain in force until the thirty-first day of December 1960, whereupon the amendments ordered to be made in the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, by sections 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 shall cease to form part of that Act and shall be deemed to have been repealed.” If the repealing section was not there in this Ordinance the result would have been that after the 31st of December w. 1960 the Tribunal would have ceased to exist and the former section 43-A and section 43- B, which gave revisional jurisdiction to the High Court, would have been revived. This clearly was not contemplated because the revisional jurisdiction of the High Color was substituted by the jurisdiction given to the Tribunal in respect of the same matters and this, according to the express provision of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 306 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-13): B, which gave revisional jurisdiction to the High Court, would have been revived. This clearly was not contemplated because the revisional jurisdiction of the High Color was substituted by the jurisdiction given to the Tribunal in respect of the same matters and this, according to the express provision of the Ordinance, was to last up to 31st December 1960. The intention was that all inquiries into the orders passed by the Custodian after the first day of January 1953 were to end by 31st December, 1960. And it was certainly not intended that on the expiry of the Ordinance XXII of 1959 the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court with respect to the same nature of the equity be revived. To that extent the different intention clearly appears. That, according to us, was the purpose of the repealing section 7. 10. With regard to the assumed inconsistency between section 3-A on the one hand and sections 22 and 41 on the other, the first thing to note is that section 3-A was added by the amending Act of 1958. The legislature did not consider it inconsistent with sections 22 and 41 of Act XII of 1957 and which were allowed to stand with section 3-A. Section 3-A, it may be noted, was in the nature of a converse rule to section 3 of the main Act. Section 3 provided that no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the 1st day of January, 1957 should be treated as evacuee after the said date. Two exceptions were made, one of which was that it did not apply to such person and property in respect of which any action had commenced, or any proceedings were pending immediately before the date mentioned in sub-clause Section.'-A enacted a converse provision. It laid down that no person or property treated as evacuee immediately before the coming into force of this amending Act was to be declared non-evacuee after the commencement of this Act. Subsection (2) made an exception for cases of person and property, in respect of which any action had commenced, or any proceedings were pending before the commencement of this Act. Section 22 provides for claim by interested person for a declaration that a property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property was not so or that his interest in the property had not been affected by the provisions of the Act. An application in this regard had to be made within the prescribed period. Section 41 of the main Act contains a bar to the jurisdiction of Courts for entertain or adjudicating upon any question whether any person or property is or is not evacuee. w. Subsection (2) of that section provides that whenever such a question arises in any Court or Authority the question shall be stated and remitted to the Custodian for decision. 11. It appears to us that sections 22 and 41 could stand inspire of section 3-A which

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 306 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-13): is not evacuee. w. Subsection (2) of that section provides that whenever such a question arises in any Court or Authority the question shall be stated and remitted to the Custodian for decision. 11. It appears to us that sections 22 and 41 could stand inspire of section 3-A which had been introduced by the amending Act of 1958, and they were advisedly maintained. The repeal of these two sections would have left no power in the Custodian to declare a property as evacuee either in the pending cases or cases which came within the exceptions to section 3-A. Moreover, as far as section 41 is concerned, its main purpose was to oust the jurisdiction of the Courts or any other authority. We, therefore, do not agree with the Earned Custodian that one of the objects of the repeal mg section 7 of Ordinance XXII of 1959 was TP obliterate section 3-A. It may further be noted that the consistency, if any, in the provisions referred to above was not a too thing. It was there when the amending Act of 1958 produced section 3-A ITO the main Act which already contained sections 22 and 41. We are, however, of the view that there was no inch insistency, and it was certainly not intended to remove the inconsistency, if any, by the repeal of amending Act of 1958 by section 7 of the Ordinance. 12. The plain effect of section 6-A of the General Clauses Act is that the repeal of an amending Act does not affect the continuance of the amendment which, in fact, becomes a part and parcel of the main Act. If such is the intention it would have to be either expressly stated as it was indeed done m the case of subsection (2) of section of the Ordinance of 1959 or there must appear clearly a different intention. In the present case there is no express provision, and we are clearly of the view that a different intention does not appear. B 13. The words of section 6-A of the General Clauses Act are so clear that no case law is required to appreciate its meaning. We may however note a case reported in Three Goal Paper Mills Ltd. v. Ram Alabama Mai and others In that case it was urged that since section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act was amended by virtue of the Industrial Disputes Act XLVII of 1950 and that Act was itself repealed by the Industrial Disputes Amendment Act of 1956, the earlier amendment ceased to exist and the law, therefore, stood as it was before the amendment. This contention was repelled, and it was held that the repeal of an amending Act does not have the effect of destroying the amendment. 14. We are, therefore, clearly of the view that the repeal of the arr ending Act of 1958 did cot have the effect of reviving the proviso to subsection (6) of section 43. It was expressly omitted by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1962 PLD 306?
Answer: From case 1962 PLD 306 (HIGH COURT OF WEST PAKISTAN, 1961-11-13): an amending Act does not have the effect of destroying the amendment. 14. We are, therefore, clearly of the view that the repeal of the arr ending Act of 1958 did cot have the effect of reviving the proviso to subsection (6) of section 43. It was expressly omitted by the amending Act of 1958, and it could not be resurrected except by an express provision or by necessary intendment. The learned Custodian was clearly MN error in hold’ ING otherwise. He had the jurisdiction to review the order in so far as the proviso to subsection (6) had been omitted. 15. For the reasons given above we quash the order of the learned Custodian dated 27th August 1959 with one set of costs. The matter will now go back to the Custodian who will decide the case on merits. Petition acc épée d

Question: What is case 1996 CLC 838 about?
Answer: Case 1996 CLC 838 was decided by CHIEF COURT GILGIT on 1995-03-15. The case involved ZAMINDARAN MOUZA RATTU THROUGH HAJI INAYATULLAHAND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS ZAMINDARAN PATTI KULALOTE THROUGH ABDULL GHANIAND OTHERS (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - 8S. 42 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.XXXIX, RR. 1, AND S. 115. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD ISHAQ KHAN, CHAIRMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1996 CLC 838?
Answer: In case 1996 CLC 838, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - 8S. 42 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.XXXIX, RR. 1, AND S. 115. This case was heard in CHIEF COURT GILGIT and decided on 1995-03-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1996 CLC 838?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1996 CLC 838 were: MUHAMMAD ISSA AND MIR GHULAM SARWAR FOR PETITIONERS. SHARIFAHMAD FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD ISHAQ KHAN, CHAIRMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1996 CLC 838?
Answer: The parties in case 1996 CLC 838 were: ZAMINDARAN MOUZA RATTU THROUGH HAJI INAYATULLAHAND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS ZAMINDARAN PATTI KULALOTE THROUGH ABDULL GHANIAND OTHERS (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in CHIEF COURT GILGIT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1996 CLC 838.
Answer: 1. Patti Kumamoto through Abdul Ghana and others filed a declaratory suit No. in the Court of Civil Judge, 1st Class, Store against the Zamindaran Monza Ratty through Heidi Ayatollah and others on 13-6-1993. Along with the plaint, the plaintiffs filed an application under Order 39, Rules and 2 read with section, C.P.C. for the issuance of an injunction. In the first stance, the plaintiffs annexed with the plant a photostat copy of grazing right of 1973 Vikram but on 5-8-1993 through an application under Order 13, Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the plaintiffs sought permission to file some documents i.e. names of pastures of Store and a copy of Najib-ul-Arz, which was allowed. In the meanwhile, the defendants had filed their written statement to the plaint as well as the application for junction and MN support of their written statement, they had filed copies of revenue record as well as other relevant documents. 2. The learned Trial Judge, however, accepted the application and issued an ad interim injunction on the very day when the suit was filed, the. 13-6-1993. This order was followed by an order of confirmation dated 18-11-1993. 3. The defendants dissatisfied with the order of injunction filed an appeal with the District Judge, Diaper, but he dismissed the same vide judgment dated 12-6-1994. Hence the present civil revision by the defendants for setting aside both the orders of the lower forums. 4. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance’ have also gone through the record, which consists of various revenue and other documents, and have come to the evitable conclusion that this revision petition must succeed, for reasons that are not far to seek. In a case of grant of temporary injunction, it is the firm duty of the Courts to see whether the three essential ingredients are available for the issuance of such an injunction, which are balance of convenience, irreparable loss and a prima facie case. In this case, the documents which have been annexed by the defendant-petitioner with their written statement and replication go a long way to prove that stead of the plaintiff respondents they had to suffer irreparable loss with the issuance of the injunction. 15. The learned Trial Judge has completely misread the documentary evidence furnished by the defendant-petitioners in the shape of copies of Jamabandies, grazing rights etc. It is an admitted fact that the residents of Monza Ratty are the owners of the suit property whereas the plaintiff respondents who admittedly belong to Patti Kumamoto, Monza Choose are the tenants. The mutation bearing No. 161 placed on record shows that it was attested in presence of the parties fort her benefit and the plaintiff-respondents cannot now turn and say that they had no knowledge of the same. It is also on record, that defendant-petitioners have no concern with "Shanghai Pahari" and "Shushan', which is the exclusive ownership of the plaintiff- w respondents. 6. Shanghai Paean, is a separate pasture. There are three pastures, namely, Shanghai Pahari, Shanghai Paean and Shanghai Bala. Shanghai Paean and Ghanian Bala will not be mixed up with Shanghai Pahari and as regards Shanghai Bala, the same belongs to Fair Vote Monza, which position was admitted by the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondents. The defendant-petitioners had no claim to the ownership of Shanghai Pahari and Shushan which are the exclusive ownership of the plaintiff-respondents, but the documents placed on record with their written statement and replication make it manifest that they have grazing rights and nights of collecting fire-wood since time immemorial, injury will be caused to the defendant-petitioners. 7. From what has been discussed above, it becomes crystal clear that it is a fit case for interference by this Court. On the face of the record, both the Courts below have misread and non-read the evidence in the shape of documents produced by the defendant- petitioners. 8. This is a case of illegality and irregularity committed by the two Courts below warranting interference. 9. Accordingly, I accept this revision petition, set aside the impugned orders of the lower forums. No orders as to costs. Revision acc épée d

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 838?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 838 (CHIEF COURT GILGIT, 1995-03-15): 1. Patti Kumamoto through Abdul Ghana and others filed a declaratory suit No. in the Court of Civil Judge, 1st Class, Store against the Zamindaran Monza Ratty through Heidi Ayatollah and others on 13-6-1993. Along with the plaint, the plaintiffs filed an application under Order 39, Rules and 2 read with section, C.P.C. for the issuance of an injunction. In the first stance, the plaintiffs annexed with the plant a photostat copy of grazing right of 1973 Vikram but on 5-8-1993 through an application under Order 13, Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the plaintiffs sought permission to file some documents i.e. names of pastures of Store and a copy of Najib-ul-Arz, which was allowed. In the meanwhile, the defendants had filed their written statement to the plaint as well as the application for junction and MN support of their written statement, they had filed copies of revenue record as well as other relevant documents. 2. The learned Trial Judge, however, accepted the application and issued an ad interim injunction on the very day when the suit was filed, the. 13-6-1993. This order was followed by an order of confirmation dated 18-11-1993. 3. The defendants dissatisfied with the order of injunction filed an appeal with the District Judge, Diaper, but he dismissed the same vide judgment dated 12-6-1994. Hence the present civil revision by the defendants for setting aside both the orders of the lower forums. 4. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance’ have also gone through the record, which consists of various revenue and other documents, and have come to the evitable conclusion that this revision petition must succeed, for reasons that are not far to seek. In a case of grant of temporary injunction, it is the firm duty of the Courts to see whether the three essential ingredients are available for the issuance of such an injunction, which are balance of convenience, irreparable loss and a prima facie case. In this case, the documents which have been annexed by the defendant-petitioner with their written statement and replication go a long way to prove that stead of the plaintiff respondents they had to suffer irreparable loss with the issuance of the injunction. 15. The learned Trial Judge has completely misread the documentary evidence furnished by the defendant-petitioners in the shape of copies of Jamabandies, grazing rights etc. It is an admitted fact that the residents of Monza Ratty are the owners of the suit property whereas the plaintiff respondents who admittedly belong to Patti Kumamoto, Monza Choose are the tenants. The mutation bearing No. 161 placed on record shows that it was attested in presence of the parties fort her benefit and the plaintiff-respondents cannot now turn and say that they had no knowledge of the same. It is also on record, that defendant-petitioners have no concern with "Shanghai Pahari" and "Shushan', which is the exclusive ownership of the plaintiff- w respondents. 6. Shanghai Paean, is a separate pasture.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 838?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 838 (CHIEF COURT GILGIT, 1995-03-15): her benefit and the plaintiff-respondents cannot now turn and say that they had no knowledge of the same. It is also on record, that defendant-petitioners have no concern with "Shanghai Pahari" and "Shushan', which is the exclusive ownership of the plaintiff- w respondents. 6. Shanghai Paean, is a separate pasture. There are three pastures, namely, Shanghai Pahari, Shanghai Paean and Shanghai Bala. Shanghai Paean and Ghanian Bala will not be mixed up with Shanghai Pahari and as regards Shanghai Bala, the same belongs to Fair Vote Monza, which position was admitted by the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondents. The defendant-petitioners had no claim to the ownership of Shanghai Pahari and Shushan which are the exclusive ownership of the plaintiff-respondents, but the documents placed on record with their written statement and replication make it manifest that they have grazing rights and nights of collecting fire-wood since time immemorial, injury will be caused to the defendant-petitioners. 7. From what has been discussed above, it becomes crystal clear that it is a fit case for interference by this Court. On the face of the record, both the Courts below have misread and non-read the evidence in the shape of documents produced by the defendant- petitioners. 8. This is a case of illegality and irregularity committed by the two Courts below warranting interference. 9. Accordingly, I accept this revision petition, set aside the impugned orders of the lower forums. No orders as to costs. Revision acc épée d

Question: What is case 1996 CLC 1785 about?
Answer: Case 1996 CLC 1785 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1996-03-31. The case involved HEADMASTER, GOVERNMENT ZIA ULALOOM HIGHSCHOOL, RAJA BAZAR, RAWALPINDIAND OTHERS PETITIONERSVERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY.BOARD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - §.30 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.XXXIX, RR. AND CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 9, 37 AND 199 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 9. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD AQIL MIRZA.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: In case 1996 CLC 1785, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - §.30 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.XXXIX, RR. AND CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 9, 37 AND 199 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 9. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1996-03-31.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1996 CLC 1785 were: MALIK WAHEED ANJUM FOR PETITIONERS. KH. SAEED-UL-HASSAN FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 3.HAFIZS. A. REHMAN FOR RESPONDENT NO.4.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD AQIL MIRZA.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: The parties in case 1996 CLC 1785 were: HEADMASTER, GOVERNMENT ZIA ULALOOM HIGHSCHOOL, RAJA BAZAR, RAWALPINDIAND OTHERS PETITIONERSVERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY.BOARD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1996 CLC 1785.
Answer: This C.M. has been filed on behalf of the Headmaster, Government Via-ul-Aloom High School, Rawalpindi for allowing the school to get possession of thirteen rooms and three latrines, on temporary basis, during pendency of the main petition, the temporary relief was granted vide order dated 20-3-1996 by mean sofa short order. The reasons for the same are contained harm. 12. Property No.U-350, Raja Bazaar, Rawalpindi vests m the Evacuee Trust Property Board. Major portion of the build mg is in occupation of Government Via-ulAloom High School which was nationalized in 1972. The case of the m petitioner is that thirteen rooms and latrines, which were in use of the school have been illegally occupied by the functionaries of the Board with the help of some other persons with the result that the staff and the school children have been deprived of the user of the same. The Director of Education was required by this Court to personally visit the spot and find out the factual position. After spot inspection he informed the Court that there are 480 students in the school which has classes from Nursery to 10th and the teaching staff consists of male and female teachers. He has further informed that the disputed rooms are presently under lock and key and these were previously in possession of the school and shockingly even the latrines which were in the use of the school children have been locked. 3. To substantiate his submission that these rooms and the latrines were in use of the school, learned counsel for the petitioners has invited my attention to the application made by the Headmaster of the school on 29-1-1970 to the Education Department for recognition of the school. Twenty rooms and a big Hall are shown to be in possession of the school in this application. A map showing location of the classrooms is also annexed with this application. The application and the site plan annexed therewith have been placed on the record. These are duly signed/attested by the Assistant Secretary (Academic), Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Rawalpindi. Learned counsel has vehemently contended that these documents of old origin clearly show that twenty rooms and a Hall remained in possession of the school since before 1970 and the same should be allowed to be used by the school during pendency of the main petition, in the interest of better education of the school children. He apprehends that if it is not done the rooms shall be demolished and the character of the very site shall be changed to the detriment of the school. WW. V 4. The case of the Evacuee Trust Property Board, on the other hand, is that this. building had two portions, one is in occupation of the Government Via-ul-Aloom High School and the other was with the Madras Marinate- Aloom. Earlier to 1972, the school and the Madras were run by the late Air Sahib of Dave Sharif’ On nationalization, the school became an independent entity and the Madras remained under the control of Air Sahib. After the demise of Air Sahib the portion of the building in possession of the Madras was handed over to the Evacuee Trust Property Board by his son Aladdin. This portion measuring 15 Marla's has already been given on lease for 30 years to Sh. Ishtar-ul-Haq and Abdul Rashid for the purpose of construction of a shopping Plaza of three storeys, at monthly rental of Rs. 10,000. 5. Km. Speed-ul-Hassan, learned Legal Advisor of the Board has submitted that the Board has not occupied any of the rooms which were in possession of the school. The rooms now sought to be handed over to the school authorities were part of the Madras and not the school. He has vehemently opposed this application by contending that the very writ petition on disputed questions of fact is not attainable, the petitioner has no prima facie case, the disputed rooms having already been leased out by the Board to boost up its revenues the balance of convenience lies in refusal of the grant of temporary relief and this relief if granted would amount to granting the ultimate relief prayed for in the writ petition. His precise submission is that the prerequisites for grant of temporary relief under Order 39, Rules and 2, C.P.C. are wanting in the present case. 6. After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and taking into consideration the material placed on the record and the personal observations of the Director Education who visited the spot for verification of factual position, I find that prima facie out of the disputed accommodation ten rooms and three latrines were previously in use of the school, therefore, subject to the ultimate decision in the writ petition and purely by way of temporary arrangement, it is in the interest of justice to direct that the possession of the ten rooms and the latrines which are presently locked should be handed over by the Deputy Administrator of the Board to the Director Education, Rawalpindi Division for user thereof by the staff and the school children. 7. The contentions raised by the learned counsel of the Board may now be discussed. It is claimed by the petitioners that the school is the legal owner in possession of the building of WW. the school, in view of the decision of the Federal Government, dated 9- 5-1976 and subsequent instructions issued by the Evacuee Trust Property Board on 16-8-1984, thereunder the educational institutions situated in the properties vesting in the Evacuee Trust Property Board and run by the Provincial Education Departments stand transferred to the Education Department of the respective Provincial Government. Based on this proprietary claim prayer has been made in the writ petition that the respondents should be directed not to interfere in the peaceful ownership of the school and for restoring the possession of 13 rooms and three latrines to the Headmaster of the school. 8. The Evacuee Trust Property Board in pursuance of the decision of the special meeting held on 9-5-1976 under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, decided that such Evacuee Trust Buildings which housed educational institutions should be handed over to the Education Department. The decision to this effect finds mention in the following memo.:- "Evacuee Trust Board, Government of Pakistan. No. F-I/1474/ETPB, dated 10- 6-1976. Sub: Evacuee Trust Buildings in possession of Education Department - for Education purposes. ' f- In pursuance of the decision of the special meeting held on 9th May, 1976, under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, all, evacuee trust buildings, housing educational institutions (except buildings which are housed in religious buildings) are to be handed over to the Education Department of the Province concerned. You are, therefore, directed to immediately hand over all such buildings to the Education Department authorities of your district under advice to this office and the Secretary, Education Department of the Province. A report contaming list of properties as handed over should be forwarded immediately to this Secretariat. This issues with the approval of the Chairman. ”’. Subsequently, the Federal Government decided that Evacuee Trust Properties in possession of the educational institutions run by the Provincial Education Department may be transferred to the Provincial Government. The relevant memo, containing this decision is reproduced below: "Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan 9-Court. Street, Lahore. (1)-48/(6)/, dated 16-8-1984. m All Deputy/Assistant Administrators, Evacuee Trust Property Board in Pakistan. Sub:- Transfer of Evacuee Trust Properties in the Possession of Education Institutions run by the Provincial Education Department. Continuation of this office Memo. No.P91-48/(6)/, dated the 12th June, 1948 and subsequent reminder dated the 16th July, 1984, on the subject noted above. 2. The Federal Government now vide its Letter No.F.4(2)/MP/ETP/84, dated 5th July, 1984, has decided that the Evacuee Trust Properties in possession of the Educational Institutions run by the Provincial. Education Department may be transferred to the respective Provincial Governments on the Times as have been adopted in the case of Evacuee Trust Properties m possession of Local Bodies.” 9. The question of transfer of the school building in dispute to the Punjab Education Department TS already in process with the Federal Government in the Ministry of Minority Affairs, Islamabad. The letter dated 11- 2-1995 addressed by the Assistant Educational Advisor, on the subject reads as under:- "No.F.3-/92-PE-II Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Education PNE-Wing. Islamabad, the 11th February, 1996. Sub: Transfer of E.T-P. Building No.U-350 (Gurdwara) in possession of Government Via- Slalom High School, Raja Bazaar, Rawalpindi. Hi am directed enclose herewith a copy of Punjab Education Department Letter No.S.O. (R&B)-5-, dated 13th December, 1995, on the above subject addressed to Ministry of Minorities Affairs, Islamabad for taking necessary action in pursuance of Government of Pakistan 1984 decision as mentioned in para.6 of the letter referred to above. (Afar Iqbal Saved), » Assistant Educational Advisor." m I 10. Let me now examine whether the requisites for the grant of temporary relief prayed for ate available in the present case or not. The first question to be determined is whether the petitioner has a prima facie case. It has been argued on behalf of the school authorities that under similar decision of the Federal Government agricultural land belonging to the Evacuee Trust Property Board has been sold in various parts of the country at the rate of Rs.8 per index unit to the J K Displaced Persons holding temporary allotments. The Punjab Education Department has, therefore, become owner of the school building and the land appurtenant thereto under the afore quoted decisions of the Federal Government. In the light of the decisions of the Federal Government and the Evacuee Trust Property Board I am of the view that the petitioners have a very good case to urge that the school building and the appurtenant land which remained MN possession of the school are label to be transferred to the Punjab Education Department which has become vested with proprietary rights in the school premises. This means that the petitioners have a prima facie case. 11. The question relating to irreparable loss/damage if the relief claimed in this application is not granted, may now be discussed. It is an admitted position that initially the school and the Madras were run under the controls of Air Sahib. It can be safely presumed that after the Nationalization the school children continued to enjoy the facilities which were common to the school and the Madras, such as the latrines, staircases, verandas, entrances and the open area attached to the building. This is so because the portions respectively in possession of the school and the Madras are not independent and separate. These are the portions of one integrated building having common facilities. In these circumstances if a good part of the building is sliced away and a multistoreyed Plaza is £ built thereon the result would be that the school children will be deprived of using the latrines, open space around the building, the verandas and the staircases etc. The Director Education who is a responsible officer after spot inspection has reported that at least 10 locked rooms and three latrines were previously in use of the school If these rooms and the latrines are not restored to the school, then the school children are bound to suffer in education and this F will be a colossal loss to the school children specially and the Nation generally. This means that the inconvenience which the school children will suffer if the temporary relied on prayed for is not granted will be greater. In other words, the m balance of inconvenience is in favor of the petitioners for the grant of the temporary relief. 12. It must be noted that it is the duty of the State to provide free and compulsory Secondary Education. Article 37 falling in Chapter 2 of Part II of the Constitution reads as follows:- "37. The State shall (a) (b) remove illiteracy and provide free compulsory secondary education within the maximum possible period; (c) (d) (e) (f) II (g) (h) Similarly Article 9 of the Constitution guarantees protection to life as a fundamental right. The word " life occurring in this Article has been liberally interpreted by the superior WW. Courts of Pakistan, to include all such rights which are necessary for leading a proper and comfortable life, worthy of citizens of a free country. The requirement of acquiring knowledge is also part of ‘life’. In view of the Constitutional provisions embodied in Articles 9 and 37 of the Constitution, it is the duty of the State to provide all possible facilities and * opportunities to the citizens for receiving education. All laws have to be interpreted with a view to advance the Constitutional dictates and intention of the Constitution- givers. Keeping this principle in view, the question relating to irreparable loss while considering the grant of temporary relief in the circumstances of the present case has to be liberally construed in favor of I advancement of opportunities of education. Therefore, if the students are deprived of the facilities enjoyed by them, it will amount to irreparable loss for them, for the purpose of grant of interim relief under Order 39, Rules and 2, C.P.C. 13. IS Marla's of land including the rooms in dispute have been statedly leased out to two persons for building a three-storeyed shopping plaza on comparatively small rental of Rs. 10,000 per month and a lease deed is said to have already been executed. The disputed property is stated to be contiguously situated to a market in the Raja Bazaar. Yet this highly valuable property has been given on long lease secretly by private negotiation. Except for the execution of the lease deed no further tangible step has been taken, so much so even the lease money has not been paid to the Board. In these circumstances the lessees are not entitled to be heard at this stage when the question of temporary relief is to be decided. Of course, they shall be heard when the ma'am petition is to be decided. Keeping in view the three ingredients to be considered while granting interim injunction, I am of the view that all the conditions are fulfilled in the present case for the grant of temporary injunction. 114. Km. Speed-ul-Hassan, learned counsel for the Board has argued at length that the writ petition involves disputed questions of fact which cannot be resolved in Constitutional jurisdiction and hence the very writ petition is not main tamable. Normally the disputed questions of fact are not resolved in writ jurisdiction hut this is only a rule of propriety and not of want of jurisdiction. The High Court while exercising powers under Article 199 of the Constitution is competent to entertain and decide matters which may evolve disputed questions of fact. The Court, however, is always reluctant to exercise this power when the dispute involves intricate factual controversy requiring recording of evidence. But in exceptional cases even such an exercise can also be made when the Court finds that doing so will be necessary to secure justice in a particular case. Factual controversy notwithstanding, the Court may entertain and decide Constitutional petition sim cases where public merest litigation relating to enforcement of Fundamental Rights and other public interests are evolved. In the instant case the public interest relates to the education of so many school children. As already held in the earlier part of the judgment to receive Education is a right of every citizen on the one hand and duty of the State on the other. Therefore, the petition cannot be thrown away merely on the objection that it involves factual controversy whether the rooms now claimed by the school were in its possession or not. In the circumstances of the case, it does not give rise to an intricate factual controversy. The dispute, if any, can be resolved for deciding the question of temporary relief in such way that it promotes the cause of education. It must also be observed that questions of fact are usually disputed by the parties in almost all the Constitutional petitions. It is very rare that there is unanimity on facts between the parties. Should then Constitutional petitions be straightaway rejected because the respondents choose to deny the factual averments. Certainly the answer is no. MH 15. In view of the above circumstances, I am of the view that the petitioners have a prima. Face case as also the balance of convenience for grant of the temporary relied on prayed for. Resultantly the interim relief was granted. On 25-3-1996 to the following effect: - "For reasons to be recorded later, the Deputy Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board is directed to hand over the possession of the 10 rooms and 3 latrines to the Director Education, if necessary, with the help of the police force today. The S.H.O. Police Station City Rawalpindi shall render all possible help for the purpose of delivery of the possession of the rooms, when approached by the Deputy Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board in that behalf" 16. Before parting with this case I would like to observe that from the submission made at the Bar it appears that the building of the school is not in1 good shape. It requires rebuilding/repairs, which the Punjab Government cannot do unless the building is transferred to its ownership. Area of this entire property is stated to be about fifty Marla's. Out of this, the Board wants to have fifteen Marla's of land for construction of a shopping plaza to earn come for it. I understand that the Board also spends a lot of money to cater educational needs in the country. If deemed feasible, by mutual agreement of the functionaries of the Board and Education Department of the Punjab Government, WW. some solution can be worked out so that educational need of the school may be met, and the Board may also be able to utilize a part of the land to boost up its earnings. One possible solution can be that new school building may be raised at the expense of the Evacuee Trust Property Board on major portion of the land while about Marla's of land may be utilized by the Board for commercial purposes. If this is done, the school will have a proper new building with all the amenities and the Board will have a permanent source of income. The pendency of the main petition will not be a bar for the Board and the Punjab Education Department to arrive at some settlement in this behalf’ Needless to say that the discussion on merits while deciding the C.M. is purely tentative in nature. The Director Education (School), Rawalpindi shall take care that the rooms which may be found in dilapidated condition may not be used so that safety of children is not jeopardized. Copies of this order shall be communicated by the office to respondent No.2 and petitioner No.2.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 1785 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1996-03-31): This C.M. has been filed on behalf of the Headmaster, Government Via-ul-Aloom High School, Rawalpindi for allowing the school to get possession of thirteen rooms and three latrines, on temporary basis, during pendency of the main petition, the temporary relief was granted vide order dated 20-3-1996 by mean sofa short order. The reasons for the same are contained harm. 12. Property No.U-350, Raja Bazaar, Rawalpindi vests m the Evacuee Trust Property Board. Major portion of the build mg is in occupation of Government Via-ulAloom High School which was nationalized in 1972. The case of the m petitioner is that thirteen rooms and latrines, which were in use of the school have been illegally occupied by the functionaries of the Board with the help of some other persons with the result that the staff and the school children have been deprived of the user of the same. The Director of Education was required by this Court to personally visit the spot and find out the factual position. After spot inspection he informed the Court that there are 480 students in the school which has classes from Nursery to 10th and the teaching staff consists of male and female teachers. He has further informed that the disputed rooms are presently under lock and key and these were previously in possession of the school and shockingly even the latrines which were in the use of the school children have been locked. 3. To substantiate his submission that these rooms and the latrines were in use of the school, learned counsel for the petitioners has invited my attention to the application made by the Headmaster of the school on 29-1-1970 to the Education Department for recognition of the school. Twenty rooms and a big Hall are shown to be in possession of the school in this application. A map showing location of the classrooms is also annexed with this application. The application and the site plan annexed therewith have been placed on the record. These are duly signed/attested by the Assistant Secretary (Academic), Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Rawalpindi. Learned counsel has vehemently contended that these documents of old origin clearly show that twenty rooms and a Hall remained in possession of the school since before 1970 and the same should be allowed to be used by the school during pendency of the main petition, in the interest of better education of the school children. He apprehends that if it is not done the rooms shall be demolished and the character of the very site shall be changed to the detriment of the school. WW. V 4. The case of the Evacuee Trust Property Board, on the other hand, is that this. building had two portions, one is in occupation of the Government Via-ul-Aloom High School and the other was with the Madras Marinate- Aloom. Earlier to 1972, the school and the Madras were run by the late Air Sahib of Dave Sharif’ On nationalization, the school became an independent entity and the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 1785 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1996-03-31): had two portions, one is in occupation of the Government Via-ul-Aloom High School and the other was with the Madras Marinate- Aloom. Earlier to 1972, the school and the Madras were run by the late Air Sahib of Dave Sharif’ On nationalization, the school became an independent entity and the Madras remained under the control of Air Sahib. After the demise of Air Sahib the portion of the building in possession of the Madras was handed over to the Evacuee Trust Property Board by his son Aladdin. This portion measuring 15 Marla's has already been given on lease for 30 years to Sh. Ishtar-ul-Haq and Abdul Rashid for the purpose of construction of a shopping Plaza of three storeys, at monthly rental of Rs. 10,000. 5. Km. Speed-ul-Hassan, learned Legal Advisor of the Board has submitted that the Board has not occupied any of the rooms which were in possession of the school. The rooms now sought to be handed over to the school authorities were part of the Madras and not the school. He has vehemently opposed this application by contending that the very writ petition on disputed questions of fact is not attainable, the petitioner has no prima facie case, the disputed rooms having already been leased out by the Board to boost up its revenues the balance of convenience lies in refusal of the grant of temporary relief and this relief if granted would amount to granting the ultimate relief prayed for in the writ petition. His precise submission is that the prerequisites for grant of temporary relief under Order 39, Rules and 2, C.P.C. are wanting in the present case. 6. After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and taking into consideration the material placed on the record and the personal observations of the Director Education who visited the spot for verification of factual position, I find that prima facie out of the disputed accommodation ten rooms and three latrines were previously in use of the school, therefore, subject to the ultimate decision in the writ petition and purely by way of temporary arrangement, it is in the interest of justice to direct that the possession of the ten rooms and the latrines which are presently locked should be handed over by the Deputy Administrator of the Board to the Director Education, Rawalpindi Division for user thereof by the staff and the school children. 7. The contentions raised by the learned counsel of the Board may now be discussed. It is claimed by the petitioners that the school is the legal owner in possession of the building of WW. the school, in view of the decision of the Federal Government, dated 9- 5-1976 and subsequent instructions issued by the Evacuee Trust Property Board on 16-8-1984, thereunder the educational institutions situated in the properties vesting in the Evacuee Trust Property Board and run by the Provincial Education Departments stand transferred to the Education Department of the respective Provincial Government. Based on this proprietary claim prayer has

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 1785 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1996-03-31): instructions issued by the Evacuee Trust Property Board on 16-8-1984, thereunder the educational institutions situated in the properties vesting in the Evacuee Trust Property Board and run by the Provincial Education Departments stand transferred to the Education Department of the respective Provincial Government. Based on this proprietary claim prayer has been made in the writ petition that the respondents should be directed not to interfere in the peaceful ownership of the school and for restoring the possession of 13 rooms and three latrines to the Headmaster of the school. 8. The Evacuee Trust Property Board in pursuance of the decision of the special meeting held on 9-5-1976 under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, decided that such Evacuee Trust Buildings which housed educational institutions should be handed over to the Education Department. The decision to this effect finds mention in the following memo.:- "Evacuee Trust Board, Government of Pakistan. No. F-I/1474/ETPB, dated 10- 6-1976. Sub: Evacuee Trust Buildings in possession of Education Department - for Education purposes. ' f- In pursuance of the decision of the special meeting held on 9th May, 1976, under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, all, evacuee trust buildings, housing educational institutions (except buildings which are housed in religious buildings) are to be handed over to the Education Department of the Province concerned. You are, therefore, directed to immediately hand over all such buildings to the Education Department authorities of your district under advice to this office and the Secretary, Education Department of the Province. A report contaming list of properties as handed over should be forwarded immediately to this Secretariat. This issues with the approval of the Chairman. ”’. Subsequently, the Federal Government decided that Evacuee Trust Properties in possession of the educational institutions run by the Provincial Education Department may be transferred to the Provincial Government. The relevant memo, containing this decision is reproduced below: "Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan 9-Court. Street, Lahore. (1)-48/(6)/, dated 16-8-1984. m All Deputy/Assistant Administrators, Evacuee Trust Property Board in Pakistan. Sub:- Transfer of Evacuee Trust Properties in the Possession of Education Institutions run by the Provincial Education Department. Continuation of this office Memo. No.P91-48/(6)/, dated the 12th June, 1948 and subsequent reminder dated the 16th July, 1984, on the subject noted above. 2. The Federal Government now vide its Letter No.F.4(2)/MP/ETP/84, dated 5th July, 1984, has decided that the Evacuee Trust Properties in possession of the Educational Institutions run by the Provincial. Education Department may be transferred to the respective Provincial Governments on the Times as have been adopted in the case of Evacuee Trust Properties m possession of Local Bodies.” 9. The question of transfer of the school building in dispute to the Punjab Education Department TS already in process with the Federal Government in the Ministry of Minority Affairs, Islamabad. The letter dated 11- 2-1995 addressed by the Assistant Educational Advisor, on the subject reads as under:- "No.F.3-/92-PE-II Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Education PNE-Wing. Islamabad, the 11th February,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 1785 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1996-03-31): dispute to the Punjab Education Department TS already in process with the Federal Government in the Ministry of Minority Affairs, Islamabad. The letter dated 11- 2-1995 addressed by the Assistant Educational Advisor, on the subject reads as under:- "No.F.3-/92-PE-II Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Education PNE-Wing. Islamabad, the 11th February, 1996. Sub: Transfer of E.T-P. Building No.U-350 (Gurdwara) in possession of Government Via- Slalom High School, Raja Bazaar, Rawalpindi. Hi am directed enclose herewith a copy of Punjab Education Department Letter No.S.O. (R&B)-5-, dated 13th December, 1995, on the above subject addressed to Ministry of Minorities Affairs, Islamabad for taking necessary action in pursuance of Government of Pakistan 1984 decision as mentioned in para.6 of the letter referred to above. (Afar Iqbal Saved), » Assistant Educational Advisor." m I 10. Let me now examine whether the requisites for the grant of temporary relief prayed for ate available in the present case or not. The first question to be determined is whether the petitioner has a prima facie case. It has been argued on behalf of the school authorities that under similar decision of the Federal Government agricultural land belonging to the Evacuee Trust Property Board has been sold in various parts of the country at the rate of Rs.8 per index unit to the J K Displaced Persons holding temporary allotments. The Punjab Education Department has, therefore, become owner of the school building and the land appurtenant thereto under the afore quoted decisions of the Federal Government. In the light of the decisions of the Federal Government and the Evacuee Trust Property Board I am of the view that the petitioners have a very good case to urge that the school building and the appurtenant land which remained MN possession of the school are label to be transferred to the Punjab Education Department which has become vested with proprietary rights in the school premises. This means that the petitioners have a prima facie case. 11. The question relating to irreparable loss/damage if the relief claimed in this application is not granted, may now be discussed. It is an admitted position that initially the school and the Madras were run under the controls of Air Sahib. It can be safely presumed that after the Nationalization the school children continued to enjoy the facilities which were common to the school and the Madras, such as the latrines, staircases, verandas, entrances and the open area attached to the building. This is so because the portions respectively in possession of the school and the Madras are not independent and separate. These are the portions of one integrated building having common facilities. In these circumstances if a good part of the building is sliced away and a multistoreyed Plaza is £ built thereon the result would be that the school children will be deprived of using the latrines, open space around the building, the verandas and the staircases etc. The Director Education who is a responsible officer after spot inspection has reported that at least

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 1785 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1996-03-31): and a multistoreyed Plaza is £ built thereon the result would be that the school children will be deprived of using the latrines, open space around the building, the verandas and the staircases etc. The Director Education who is a responsible officer after spot inspection has reported that at least 10 locked rooms and three latrines were previously in use of the school If these rooms and the latrines are not restored to the school, then the school children are bound to suffer in education and this F will be a colossal loss to the school children specially and the Nation generally. This means that the inconvenience which the school children will suffer if the temporary relied on prayed for is not granted will be greater. In other words, the m balance of inconvenience is in favor of the petitioners for the grant of the temporary relief. 12. It must be noted that it is the duty of the State to provide free and compulsory Secondary Education. Article 37 falling in Chapter 2 of Part II of the Constitution reads as follows:- "37. The State shall (a) (b) remove illiteracy and provide free compulsory secondary education within the maximum possible period; (c) (d) (e) (f) II (g) (h) Similarly Article 9 of the Constitution guarantees protection to life as a fundamental right. The word " life occurring in this Article has been liberally interpreted by the superior WW. Courts of Pakistan, to include all such rights which are necessary for leading a proper and comfortable life, worthy of citizens of a free country. The requirement of acquiring knowledge is also part of ‘life’. In view of the Constitutional provisions embodied in Articles 9 and 37 of the Constitution, it is the duty of the State to provide all possible facilities and * opportunities to the citizens for receiving education. All laws have to be interpreted with a view to advance the Constitutional dictates and intention of the Constitution- givers. Keeping this principle in view, the question relating to irreparable loss while considering the grant of temporary relief in the circumstances of the present case has to be liberally construed in favor of I advancement of opportunities of education. Therefore, if the students are deprived of the facilities enjoyed by them, it will amount to irreparable loss for them, for the purpose of grant of interim relief under Order 39, Rules and 2, C.P.C. 13. IS Marla's of land including the rooms in dispute have been statedly leased out to two persons for building a three-storeyed shopping plaza on comparatively small rental of Rs. 10,000 per month and a lease deed is said to have already been executed. The disputed property is stated to be contiguously situated to a market in the Raja Bazaar. Yet this highly valuable property has been given on long lease secretly by private negotiation. Except for the execution of the lease deed no further tangible step has been taken, so much so even the lease money

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 1785 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1996-03-31): is stated to be contiguously situated to a market in the Raja Bazaar. Yet this highly valuable property has been given on long lease secretly by private negotiation. Except for the execution of the lease deed no further tangible step has been taken, so much so even the lease money has not been paid to the Board. In these circumstances the lessees are not entitled to be heard at this stage when the question of temporary relief is to be decided. Of course, they shall be heard when the ma'am petition is to be decided. Keeping in view the three ingredients to be considered while granting interim injunction, I am of the view that all the conditions are fulfilled in the present case for the grant of temporary injunction. 114. Km. Speed-ul-Hassan, learned counsel for the Board has argued at length that the writ petition involves disputed questions of fact which cannot be resolved in Constitutional jurisdiction and hence the very writ petition is not main tamable. Normally the disputed questions of fact are not resolved in writ jurisdiction hut this is only a rule of propriety and not of want of jurisdiction. The High Court while exercising powers under Article 199 of the Constitution is competent to entertain and decide matters which may evolve disputed questions of fact. The Court, however, is always reluctant to exercise this power when the dispute involves intricate factual controversy requiring recording of evidence. But in exceptional cases even such an exercise can also be made when the Court finds that doing so will be necessary to secure justice in a particular case. Factual controversy notwithstanding, the Court may entertain and decide Constitutional petition sim cases where public merest litigation relating to enforcement of Fundamental Rights and other public interests are evolved. In the instant case the public interest relates to the education of so many school children. As already held in the earlier part of the judgment to receive Education is a right of every citizen on the one hand and duty of the State on the other. Therefore, the petition cannot be thrown away merely on the objection that it involves factual controversy whether the rooms now claimed by the school were in its possession or not. In the circumstances of the case, it does not give rise to an intricate factual controversy. The dispute, if any, can be resolved for deciding the question of temporary relief in such way that it promotes the cause of education. It must also be observed that questions of fact are usually disputed by the parties in almost all the Constitutional petitions. It is very rare that there is unanimity on facts between the parties. Should then Constitutional petitions be straightaway rejected because the respondents choose to deny the factual averments. Certainly the answer is no. MH 15. In view of the above circumstances, I am of the view that the petitioners have a prima. Face case as also the balance of convenience for grant of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 CLC 1785?
Answer: From case 1996 CLC 1785 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1996-03-31): then Constitutional petitions be straightaway rejected because the respondents choose to deny the factual averments. Certainly the answer is no. MH 15. In view of the above circumstances, I am of the view that the petitioners have a prima. Face case as also the balance of convenience for grant of the temporary relied on prayed for. Resultantly the interim relief was granted. On 25-3-1996 to the following effect: - "For reasons to be recorded later, the Deputy Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board is directed to hand over the possession of the 10 rooms and 3 latrines to the Director Education, if necessary, with the help of the police force today. The S.H.O. Police Station City Rawalpindi shall render all possible help for the purpose of delivery of the possession of the rooms, when approached by the Deputy Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board in that behalf" 16. Before parting with this case I would like to observe that from the submission made at the Bar it appears that the building of the school is not in1 good shape. It requires rebuilding/repairs, which the Punjab Government cannot do unless the building is transferred to its ownership. Area of this entire property is stated to be about fifty Marla's. Out of this, the Board wants to have fifteen Marla's of land for construction of a shopping plaza to earn come for it. I understand that the Board also spends a lot of money to cater educational needs in the country. If deemed feasible, by mutual agreement of the functionaries of the Board and Education Department of the Punjab Government, WW. some solution can be worked out so that educational need of the school may be met, and the Board may also be able to utilize a part of the land to boost up its earnings. One possible solution can be that new school building may be raised at the expense of the Evacuee Trust Property Board on major portion of the land while about Marla's of land may be utilized by the Board for commercial purposes. If this is done, the school will have a proper new building with all the amenities and the Board will have a permanent source of income. The pendency of the main petition will not be a bar for the Board and the Punjab Education Department to arrive at some settlement in this behalf’ Needless to say that the discussion on merits while deciding the C.M. is purely tentative in nature. The Director Education (School), Rawalpindi shall take care that the rooms which may be found in dilapidated condition may not be used so that safety of children is not jeopardized. Copies of this order shall be communicated by the office to respondent No.2 and petitioner No.2.

Question: What is case 1996 MLD 860 about?
Answer: Case 1996 MLD 860 was decided by CHIEF COURT GILGIT on 1995-04-11. The case involved LALL ZAMAN (APPELLANT) VERSUS SAFDAR ALI KHAN RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - SS.48 AND 100 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - ARTICLE 183 DUTY OF COURT. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD ISHAQ KHAN, CHAIRMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1996 MLD 860?
Answer: In case 1996 MLD 860, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - SS.48 AND 100 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - ARTICLE 183 DUTY OF COURT. This case was heard in CHIEF COURT GILGIT and decided on 1995-04-11.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1996 MLD 860?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1996 MLD 860 were: MUHAMMAD SHAFI FOR APPELLANT. MUHAMMAD YAQOOB FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD ISHAQ KHAN, CHAIRMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1996 MLD 860?
Answer: The parties in case 1996 MLD 860 were: LALL ZAMAN (APPELLANT) VERSUS SAFDAR ALI KHAN RESPONDENT. This case was heard in CHIEF COURT GILGIT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1996 MLD 860.
Answer: 1. This second appeal by All Haman is directed against the judgment and decree dated 10- 10-1993, of the learned District Judge, Guitar Camp Gil git,’ whereby the first appeal filed by the present appellant against the order dated 20-10-1988 of the Executing Court, was dismissed. WW. 2. Briefly stated the facts of the case are that Radar Ali, respondent herein brought a suit for declaration and possession of certain landed property and house, fully described in the heading of the plaint. The learned Civil Judge, GPIS, who adjudicated upon the case after recording the evidence of the parties passed a decree in favor of plaintiff-respondent harm, vide his judgment dated 6-11-1982. The defendant-appellant All Haman preferred an appeal against the said judgment before the District Judge, Gil git where the matter was decided on oath on the Holy Qur'an, on the offer of the defendant All Haman to the plaintiff Radar Alt to take oath, which he did and the appeal of the defendant All Haman was dismissed by the learned District Judge, Gil git, vide his judgment dated 21-8-1983. 3. Radar Ali then filed an execution petition on 2-11-1983 before the Civil Judge, GPIS which was marked to Tonsilar Basin for compliance. The Tonsilar, in his turn further marked the same to Nail-Tehsildar for compliance. The Nail-Tehsildar submitted his report on 8-4-1984 and in the light of the same, the execution petition was partly accepted by the Executing Court, vide order, dated 15-7-1985. It may be mentioned here that no appeal whatsoever was filed by the decree-holder, before the District Judge against the order dated 15-7-85. It was after three years, 1e. on 21-5-1988, that the decree-holder Radar Ali field a second execution petition before the Executing Court which was accepted on 20-10-1988. 4. Against this order, All Haman, judgment-debtor filed an appeal before the District Judge, Guitar, but the same was dismissed on 10-10-1993. Hence the present second appeal. 5. It was contended by the learned counsel for the appellant, that the second execution application was clearly barred by time under Article 181 of the Limitation Act, as it was filed after four years 9 months of the first order of the Executing Court, which was passed on 15-7-1985 and as no appeal was filed against it, the same has attained finality in the eyes of law. He referred to case-law reported in M/s. National Bank of Pakistan v. MST. Praveen Akhtar PLD 1985 Keir. p.60, Syed Shaheed Hussain and others v. MST. Hawaiian Bibi and 3 others PLD 1990 LAH. p.222 and MST. Rabia Bibi and others v. Fate Muhammad through Legal Heirs 1994 CLC p. 1151 and argued that the appeal may be accepted, and the second execution application may be dismissed being barred by time and meritless. 6. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent contended that the WW. decree-holder was well within his legal rights to file a second execution application. He pressed into service section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure. He also contended that Article 183 of the Limitation Act provides a period of six years for the execution of a decree. 7. have given my anxious consideration to the arguments advanced by both the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the impugned judgment/orders of the lower forums and am of the considered option that the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant have no force while the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent has a clear edge over them. The authorities cited at the bar by learned counsel for the appellant are distinguishable on the period of limitation. Section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure clearly envisages that decree-holder can move the Court for a number of times for execution of a decree within a period of six years. Also Article 183 of the Limitation Act provides a period of six years to enforce a judge it, decree or order of any High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, or an order of the Supreme Court. It, therefore, becomes crystal clear that the decree-holder in this case was well within his legal rights to file as many execution applications as he wished within a period of six years. Admittedly the second execution application was filed after four years and nine months of the passing of the original order, therefore, the same was clearly with time. 8. Reverting to-the merits of the case, I am clear in my mind that plaintiff-respondent has Clearly given the boundaries of the disputed landed property and house in his plaint in an unambiguous manner and due to a clerical mistake of the petition-writer, the area of the land was given as 12 Canals where as the Nail-Tehsildar, who went to the spot for the execution of warrant of possession found it to be 36 Canals. Since entire Guitar District is unsettled, Revenue Record is not available, as such the disputed land could be more than 12 Canals. The duty of the Court is to execute a decree in its letter and spirit. In this case, the decree-holder was granted a decree for possession of half of the suit land. This decree was affirmed in the shape of oath taken by the plaintifffrespondent before the District Judge, Gil git, therefore, the decree-holder was legally entitled to get the possession of share of the total disputed landed property available at the spot, the boundaries of which were given in the heading of the plant, e.g. on the east river, on the west by road, on north by Sift Shah and on South by Reheat Al, situate in village Akash Basin. WW. 9. No objection whatsoever, was taken by the defendant-appellant regarding the description of the disputed property during the course of proceedings of the case, with the result that the decree-holder was entitled to get possession of half of the suit property available on the spot. 10. In view of the legal and factual position, the impugned order of the learned District Judge, Guitar, is unexceptionable. The second appeal is, therefore, dismissed, but the parties are left to bear their own costs. A A/I /Gil git Ap peal dismissed. WWW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 860?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 860 (CHIEF COURT GILGIT, 1995-04-11): 1. This second appeal by All Haman is directed against the judgment and decree dated 10- 10-1993, of the learned District Judge, Guitar Camp Gil git,’ whereby the first appeal filed by the present appellant against the order dated 20-10-1988 of the Executing Court, was dismissed. WW. 2. Briefly stated the facts of the case are that Radar Ali, respondent herein brought a suit for declaration and possession of certain landed property and house, fully described in the heading of the plaint. The learned Civil Judge, GPIS, who adjudicated upon the case after recording the evidence of the parties passed a decree in favor of plaintiff-respondent harm, vide his judgment dated 6-11-1982. The defendant-appellant All Haman preferred an appeal against the said judgment before the District Judge, Gil git where the matter was decided on oath on the Holy Qur'an, on the offer of the defendant All Haman to the plaintiff Radar Alt to take oath, which he did and the appeal of the defendant All Haman was dismissed by the learned District Judge, Gil git, vide his judgment dated 21-8-1983. 3. Radar Ali then filed an execution petition on 2-11-1983 before the Civil Judge, GPIS which was marked to Tonsilar Basin for compliance. The Tonsilar, in his turn further marked the same to Nail-Tehsildar for compliance. The Nail-Tehsildar submitted his report on 8-4-1984 and in the light of the same, the execution petition was partly accepted by the Executing Court, vide order, dated 15-7-1985. It may be mentioned here that no appeal whatsoever was filed by the decree-holder, before the District Judge against the order dated 15-7-85. It was after three years, 1e. on 21-5-1988, that the decree-holder Radar Ali field a second execution petition before the Executing Court which was accepted on 20-10-1988. 4. Against this order, All Haman, judgment-debtor filed an appeal before the District Judge, Guitar, but the same was dismissed on 10-10-1993. Hence the present second appeal. 5. It was contended by the learned counsel for the appellant, that the second execution application was clearly barred by time under Article 181 of the Limitation Act, as it was filed after four years 9 months of the first order of the Executing Court, which was passed on 15-7-1985 and as no appeal was filed against it, the same has attained finality in the eyes of law. He referred to case-law reported in M/s. National Bank of Pakistan v. MST. Praveen Akhtar PLD 1985 Keir. p.60, Syed Shaheed Hussain and others v. MST. Hawaiian Bibi and 3 others PLD 1990 LAH. p.222 and MST. Rabia Bibi and others v. Fate Muhammad through Legal Heirs 1994 CLC p. 1151 and argued that the appeal may be accepted, and the second execution application may be dismissed being barred by time and meritless. 6. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent contended that the WW. decree-holder was well within his legal rights to file a second execution application. He pressed into service section 48 of the Code of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 860?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 860 (CHIEF COURT GILGIT, 1995-04-11): the second execution application may be dismissed being barred by time and meritless. 6. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent contended that the WW. decree-holder was well within his legal rights to file a second execution application. He pressed into service section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure. He also contended that Article 183 of the Limitation Act provides a period of six years for the execution of a decree. 7. have given my anxious consideration to the arguments advanced by both the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the impugned judgment/orders of the lower forums and am of the considered option that the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant have no force while the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent has a clear edge over them. The authorities cited at the bar by learned counsel for the appellant are distinguishable on the period of limitation. Section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure clearly envisages that decree-holder can move the Court for a number of times for execution of a decree within a period of six years. Also Article 183 of the Limitation Act provides a period of six years to enforce a judge it, decree or order of any High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, or an order of the Supreme Court. It, therefore, becomes crystal clear that the decree-holder in this case was well within his legal rights to file as many execution applications as he wished within a period of six years. Admittedly the second execution application was filed after four years and nine months of the passing of the original order, therefore, the same was clearly with time. 8. Reverting to-the merits of the case, I am clear in my mind that plaintiff-respondent has Clearly given the boundaries of the disputed landed property and house in his plaint in an unambiguous manner and due to a clerical mistake of the petition-writer, the area of the land was given as 12 Canals where as the Nail-Tehsildar, who went to the spot for the execution of warrant of possession found it to be 36 Canals. Since entire Guitar District is unsettled, Revenue Record is not available, as such the disputed land could be more than 12 Canals. The duty of the Court is to execute a decree in its letter and spirit. In this case, the decree-holder was granted a decree for possession of half of the suit land. This decree was affirmed in the shape of oath taken by the plaintifffrespondent before the District Judge, Gil git, therefore, the decree-holder was legally entitled to get the possession of share of the total disputed landed property available at the spot, the boundaries of which were given in the heading of the plant, e.g. on the east river, on the west by road, on north by Sift Shah and on South by Reheat Al, situate in village Akash Basin. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 860?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 860 (CHIEF COURT GILGIT, 1995-04-11): share of the total disputed landed property available at the spot, the boundaries of which were given in the heading of the plant, e.g. on the east river, on the west by road, on north by Sift Shah and on South by Reheat Al, situate in village Akash Basin. WW. 9. No objection whatsoever, was taken by the defendant-appellant regarding the description of the disputed property during the course of proceedings of the case, with the result that the decree-holder was entitled to get possession of half of the suit property available on the spot. 10. In view of the legal and factual position, the impugned order of the learned District Judge, Guitar, is unexceptionable. The second appeal is, therefore, dismissed, but the parties are left to bear their own costs. A A/I /Gil git Ap peal dismissed. WWW.

Question: What is case 1996 MLD 1085 about?
Answer: Case 1996 MLD 1085 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1996-02-26. The case involved MUHAMMAD HUSSAIN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD J K, MUZAFFARABAD AND 12 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR REHABILITATION) ACT 1974 - S. 11 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44. The case was heard by CHAUDHARY MUHAMMAD TAJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1996 MLD 1085?
Answer: In case 1996 MLD 1085, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR REHABILITATION) ACT 1974 - S. 11 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1996-02-26.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1996 MLD 1085?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1996 MLD 1085 were: 'A.M. MALLICK FOR PETITIONERS. CH. SHAH WALI FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: CHAUDHARY MUHAMMAD TAJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1996 MLD 1085?
Answer: The parties in case 1996 MLD 1085 were: MUHAMMAD HUSSAIN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD J K, MUZAFFARABAD AND 12 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1996 MLD 1085.
Answer: This writ petition is addressed under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974, call mg in question the orders of Custodian of Evacuee Property, Azad Jammu and Kashmir, respondent No.], passed on October 31, 1991, and October 4, 1994, 2. The facts as disclosed in'the petition, are that the petitioners are in possession of land measuring 41 Canals 17 Marla's, comprising Survey Nos. 10, 11 and 16, situate in village Samantha, Thesis Radial, District Mirror, since Dogma Regime, and their possession remained continuous over the above land. The petition further disclosed that the allotment of said land was initially made in the name of the one Adam Shah and subsequently, the same was secured by Muhammad Nazi, ancestor of respondents Nos.3 to 13. The petitioners challenged the validity of this allotment before the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner through an appeal which was dismissed on July 7, 1964. The petitioners further challenged the aforesaid order before the Rehabilitation Commissioner through a revision petition but the Ritter was not heard nor the petitioners were conveyed any result of the above revision petition. It was further disclosed that the abovementioned allottee secured the provisional proprietary rights certificate from respondent No.|, on October 31, 1991, which was challenged through a review petition filed before respondent No.l and was disallowed vide his order, dated October 4, 1994. The above orders the. order of allotment in favor of predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.3 to 13, the order of issuance of provisional proprietary rights certificate and the order passed in review are subject of challenge before this Court, through this writ petition. 3. Mr. Abdul. Marked Wallick, the learned counsel for the petitioners raised the following points in support of the writ petition:- (1) That the allotment in favor of predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.3 to 13, has been made against law, without jurisdiction and lawful authority. It was explained that the land in dispute was initially allotted in favor of Adam Shah but without cancelling his allotment, the same was subsequently allotted in favor of above allottee (ancestor of respondents Nos.3 to 13); WW. (ii) that the petitioners are in possession of the above land since Dogma Regime as old tenants and also applied for the allotment of above land as local destitute, but were illegally denied their legal rights; (i!) that the allotment in favor of the respondents has been made in absence ' of the petitioners, without providing them any opportunity of hearing, as such they were condemned unheard; (iv) that at the time of grant of entitlement certificate, an objection was raised by the petitioners before the Rehabilitation Commissioner on which the case was remanded to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner but he, without adverting to the objection and hearing them, decided the matter against them; (v) that the allotment in favor of the allottee was made without ascertaining his entitlement, particularly without inquiring the fact whether the applicant was a refugee and as such was entitled to the allotment; and (vi) that the order passed by respondent No.|, in review, is illegal, without jurisdiction and lawful authority. 4. Controverting the arguments, Chaudhary Shah Walk, the learned counsel representing the respondents, addressed the following arguments:- (i) That the petitioners have challenged the findings of facts finally concluded by the competent authorities on the basis of material available with them which are not open to scrutiny through a Constitutional petition; (ii) that the allotment in favor of predecessor-in-interest of the respondents was made in 1959 which was challenged through an appeal filed by the petitioners and was dismissed by the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner in 1964 and a further revision petition before the_ Rehabilitation Commissioner was also disallowed. The provisional proprietary mights certificate was issued in favor of the allottee on the basis of valid allotment, as such the review petition, in the circumstances, did not merit any consideration which was rightly dismissed by respondent No.] after due appreciation of facts and law; (it) that the petitioners never applied for the allotment of the land in dispute till the same was finally allotted in favor of ancestor of respondents and the applications claimed to have been filed on behalf of the petitioners were made after the allotment made in favor of the respondents and finally concluded by all the forums, appellate or revisional; and (iv) that the assertion of the petitioners with regard to their claim of being old-tenants, was finally disallowed by the rehabilitation authorities and those findings could not be challenged in a writ petition. 5. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and also gone through the record, with care. The land in dispute was allotted in favor of Muhammad Nazi, predecessor-in- interest of respondents Nos.3 to 13, on August 28, 1959. The order was challenged through an appeal by the petitioner No.1 and ancestor of petitioners Nos.2 to but the same was dismissed by the< Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Mirror, on July 7, 1964. A further revision filed before the Rehabilitation Commissioner was also dismissed on February 25, 1967. The entitlement certificate on the basis of above allotment, was issued and the provisional proprietary rights certificate, later on, was also issued on October 31, 1991, which was challenged through a review petition dismissed by the Custodian, respondent No.], vide the impugned order. 6. It may be stated that all the applications claimed to have been filed on behalf of the petitioners for allotment of the land in dispute copies of which have been filed with the writ petition as Annexures P/14 to P/19, were made after the allotment was finally concluded by the rehabilitation authorities m favor of the allottee. The application, P/14 appears to have been filed on March 22, 1969, while P/15 was preferred on April 6, 1990. The application, Annexure P/16 is of October 4, 1980, while P/17 and P/18 are dated December 10, 1979. It follows that the petitioners initially though challenged the allotment but failed to apply for the allotment as none of the applications was of the date either prior to the date of allotment made in favor of allottee-respondent or at least on the date. the land was allotted m the name of respondent. The order passed by the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner in appeal preferred by the petitioners also supports the above state of facts wherein the petitioners have challenged the allotment of the allottee-respondent, on the ground of their possession over the land in dispute as old tenants but without asserting the claim of allotment. WW. 7. The petitioners have challenged the propriety of the allotment on the ground that the same was made without ascertain the entitlement of the allottee. The question raised with regard to entitlement has a little force at the stage of Constitutional petition as the same was finally concluded by the rehabilitation authorities on the basis of facts available with them and the finding relating to question of facts can hardly be raised in a writ petition, particularly when the above finding was also attacked through a review petition before respondent No.l who keeping in view the relevant facts and law disallowed the same. Reliance can also be placed on the case titled "Abdul Faiyum and another v. Custodian, Evacuee Property and others' decided by the Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir 1993 SCR 162, on October 5, 1992, wherein it was observed:- -The finding of question of fact cannot be resolved in exercise of writ jurisdiction. ” The proposition is also supported by the verdict of the Supreme Court of Pakistan recorded in the case titled "Muhammad Hussain Muir and others v. Skanda and others’ PLD 1974 SC 139, in the following words: Constitution of Pakistan (1973)- "--Art.98(1) (a)(u) Art. 199(1 )(a)(m)-Jurisdiction-Expression "without lawful authority and of no legal effect"-An expression of art and refers to jurisdictional defects as distinguished from a mere erroneous decision whether on question of fact or even law-High Court, in exercise of its writ jurisdiction, concerned only with question whether Court or Tribunal below had acted within its jurisdiction- Tribunal having jurisdiction to decide a matter is competent to decide it rightly or wrongly and mere fact that decision is incorrect does not render the decision as "without lawful authority"-High Court, in writ jurisdiction, not competent to interfere with order of Tribunal on purely equitable considerations.” 8. The other post raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners with regard to the non-issuance of any notice at the time of allotment made in favor of the allottee, also does not merit any consideration as the petitioners were not applicants for the allotment in question before the allotting authority, as such any notice in this regard was not necessarily required. The question of their being old tenants was dealt with by the rehabilitation authorities and can also be raised at the time *of ejectment proceedings. The relevant order ( ) guarantees the old tenants to retain the possession of evacuee land under certain conditions. This Court in its extraordinary Constitutional jurisdiction, on a question whether or not the petitioners are old-tenants and as such are entitled to retain their possession, cannot go into it as the same requires evidence. Reliance in this regard is placed on 'Mogul Tobacco Company’s case” PLD 1984 Keir. 155 wherein it was observed: » Art. 199-Writ-Question of fact required evidence for determination-Held, cannot be gone into in Constitutional petition". 9. The assertion with regard to the allotment of land in dispute having been earlier allotted in the name of one Adam Shah and thus claiming the allotment in dispute as nullity, is also without any substance. As the order of allotment claimed to have been made in the name of Adam Shah, has not been. Brought on record. Even otherwise, the petitioners can hardly claim any advantage of such allotment. It is claimed by the concerned authorities that the allotment in the name of Adam Shah was made after the order made in favor of Muhammad Nazi. Therefore, even if there was any allotment, that carries no validity in the eye of law and as such was rightly ignored by the concerned authorities. 10. The question of allotment in dispute has been thoroughly dealt with by the rehabilitation authorities and also by the Custodian, respondent No.|, in the impugned order passed in the review petition. Nothing has been brought on record to support the contention that the decisions by the rehabilitation authorities were illegal, without jurisdiction or lawful authority. This Court can only interfere with an order of the Special Tribunal if it reaches the conclusion that the said order is without jurisdiction or lawful authority. The expressions refer to jurisdictional defects as distinguished from a mere erroneous decision on a question of fact. It is well settled that where a Court or Tribunal has the jurisdiction, and it determined that question, it cannot be said that it acted illegally or with material regularity merely because it came to the erroneous decision on a question of fact. The provisions contained in section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act do not empower this Court to interfere with the decision of the Court or tribunal of inferior jurisdiction merely because the same is wrong on facts as in that case it would make the High Court's jurisdiction as that of appellate jurisdiction which is not the intention of the Legislature. m 11. Keeping in view the above discussion, the writ petition is found to have no substance in it which is hereby dismissed with costs. A.A./86/AJ&K. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1085?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1085 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-02-26): This writ petition is addressed under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974, call mg in question the orders of Custodian of Evacuee Property, Azad Jammu and Kashmir, respondent No.], passed on October 31, 1991, and October 4, 1994, 2. The facts as disclosed in'the petition, are that the petitioners are in possession of land measuring 41 Canals 17 Marla's, comprising Survey Nos. 10, 11 and 16, situate in village Samantha, Thesis Radial, District Mirror, since Dogma Regime, and their possession remained continuous over the above land. The petition further disclosed that the allotment of said land was initially made in the name of the one Adam Shah and subsequently, the same was secured by Muhammad Nazi, ancestor of respondents Nos.3 to 13. The petitioners challenged the validity of this allotment before the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner through an appeal which was dismissed on July 7, 1964. The petitioners further challenged the aforesaid order before the Rehabilitation Commissioner through a revision petition but the Ritter was not heard nor the petitioners were conveyed any result of the above revision petition. It was further disclosed that the abovementioned allottee secured the provisional proprietary rights certificate from respondent No.|, on October 31, 1991, which was challenged through a review petition filed before respondent No.l and was disallowed vide his order, dated October 4, 1994. The above orders the. order of allotment in favor of predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.3 to 13, the order of issuance of provisional proprietary rights certificate and the order passed in review are subject of challenge before this Court, through this writ petition. 3. Mr. Abdul. Marked Wallick, the learned counsel for the petitioners raised the following points in support of the writ petition:- (1) That the allotment in favor of predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.3 to 13, has been made against law, without jurisdiction and lawful authority. It was explained that the land in dispute was initially allotted in favor of Adam Shah but without cancelling his allotment, the same was subsequently allotted in favor of above allottee (ancestor of respondents Nos.3 to 13); WW. (ii) that the petitioners are in possession of the above land since Dogma Regime as old tenants and also applied for the allotment of above land as local destitute, but were illegally denied their legal rights; (i!) that the allotment in favor of the respondents has been made in absence ' of the petitioners, without providing them any opportunity of hearing, as such they were condemned unheard; (iv) that at the time of grant of entitlement certificate, an objection was raised by the petitioners before the Rehabilitation Commissioner on which the case was remanded to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner but he, without adverting to the objection and hearing them, decided the matter against them; (v) that the allotment in favor of the allottee was made without ascertaining his entitlement, particularly without inquiring the fact whether the applicant was a refugee and as such was entitled to the allotment; and (vi)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1085?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1085 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-02-26): he, without adverting to the objection and hearing them, decided the matter against them; (v) that the allotment in favor of the allottee was made without ascertaining his entitlement, particularly without inquiring the fact whether the applicant was a refugee and as such was entitled to the allotment; and (vi) that the order passed by respondent No.|, in review, is illegal, without jurisdiction and lawful authority. 4. Controverting the arguments, Chaudhary Shah Walk, the learned counsel representing the respondents, addressed the following arguments:- (i) That the petitioners have challenged the findings of facts finally concluded by the competent authorities on the basis of material available with them which are not open to scrutiny through a Constitutional petition; (ii) that the allotment in favor of predecessor-in-interest of the respondents was made in 1959 which was challenged through an appeal filed by the petitioners and was dismissed by the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner in 1964 and a further revision petition before the_ Rehabilitation Commissioner was also disallowed. The provisional proprietary mights certificate was issued in favor of the allottee on the basis of valid allotment, as such the review petition, in the circumstances, did not merit any consideration which was rightly dismissed by respondent No.] after due appreciation of facts and law; (it) that the petitioners never applied for the allotment of the land in dispute till the same was finally allotted in favor of ancestor of respondents and the applications claimed to have been filed on behalf of the petitioners were made after the allotment made in favor of the respondents and finally concluded by all the forums, appellate or revisional; and (iv) that the assertion of the petitioners with regard to their claim of being old-tenants, was finally disallowed by the rehabilitation authorities and those findings could not be challenged in a writ petition. 5. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and also gone through the record, with care. The land in dispute was allotted in favor of Muhammad Nazi, predecessor-in- interest of respondents Nos.3 to 13, on August 28, 1959. The order was challenged through an appeal by the petitioner No.1 and ancestor of petitioners Nos.2 to but the same was dismissed by the< Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Mirror, on July 7, 1964. A further revision filed before the Rehabilitation Commissioner was also dismissed on February 25, 1967. The entitlement certificate on the basis of above allotment, was issued and the provisional proprietary rights certificate, later on, was also issued on October 31, 1991, which was challenged through a review petition dismissed by the Custodian, respondent No.], vide the impugned order. 6. It may be stated that all the applications claimed to have been filed on behalf of the petitioners for allotment of the land in dispute copies of which have been filed with the writ petition as Annexures P/14 to P/19, were made after the allotment was finally concluded by the rehabilitation authorities m favor of the allottee. The application, P/14 appears to have been filed on

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1085?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1085 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-02-26): the petitioners for allotment of the land in dispute copies of which have been filed with the writ petition as Annexures P/14 to P/19, were made after the allotment was finally concluded by the rehabilitation authorities m favor of the allottee. The application, P/14 appears to have been filed on March 22, 1969, while P/15 was preferred on April 6, 1990. The application, Annexure P/16 is of October 4, 1980, while P/17 and P/18 are dated December 10, 1979. It follows that the petitioners initially though challenged the allotment but failed to apply for the allotment as none of the applications was of the date either prior to the date of allotment made in favor of allottee-respondent or at least on the date. the land was allotted m the name of respondent. The order passed by the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner in appeal preferred by the petitioners also supports the above state of facts wherein the petitioners have challenged the allotment of the allottee-respondent, on the ground of their possession over the land in dispute as old tenants but without asserting the claim of allotment. WW. 7. The petitioners have challenged the propriety of the allotment on the ground that the same was made without ascertain the entitlement of the allottee. The question raised with regard to entitlement has a little force at the stage of Constitutional petition as the same was finally concluded by the rehabilitation authorities on the basis of facts available with them and the finding relating to question of facts can hardly be raised in a writ petition, particularly when the above finding was also attacked through a review petition before respondent No.l who keeping in view the relevant facts and law disallowed the same. Reliance can also be placed on the case titled "Abdul Faiyum and another v. Custodian, Evacuee Property and others' decided by the Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir 1993 SCR 162, on October 5, 1992, wherein it was observed:- -The finding of question of fact cannot be resolved in exercise of writ jurisdiction. ” The proposition is also supported by the verdict of the Supreme Court of Pakistan recorded in the case titled "Muhammad Hussain Muir and others v. Skanda and others’ PLD 1974 SC 139, in the following words: Constitution of Pakistan (1973)- "--Art.98(1) (a)(u) Art. 199(1 )(a)(m)-Jurisdiction-Expression "without lawful authority and of no legal effect"-An expression of art and refers to jurisdictional defects as distinguished from a mere erroneous decision whether on question of fact or even law-High Court, in exercise of its writ jurisdiction, concerned only with question whether Court or Tribunal below had acted within its jurisdiction- Tribunal having jurisdiction to decide a matter is competent to decide it rightly or wrongly and mere fact that decision is incorrect does not render the decision as "without lawful authority"-High Court, in writ jurisdiction, not competent to interfere with order of Tribunal on purely equitable considerations.” 8. The other post raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners with

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1085?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1085 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-02-26): decide it rightly or wrongly and mere fact that decision is incorrect does not render the decision as "without lawful authority"-High Court, in writ jurisdiction, not competent to interfere with order of Tribunal on purely equitable considerations.” 8. The other post raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners with regard to the non-issuance of any notice at the time of allotment made in favor of the allottee, also does not merit any consideration as the petitioners were not applicants for the allotment in question before the allotting authority, as such any notice in this regard was not necessarily required. The question of their being old tenants was dealt with by the rehabilitation authorities and can also be raised at the time *of ejectment proceedings. The relevant order ( ) guarantees the old tenants to retain the possession of evacuee land under certain conditions. This Court in its extraordinary Constitutional jurisdiction, on a question whether or not the petitioners are old-tenants and as such are entitled to retain their possession, cannot go into it as the same requires evidence. Reliance in this regard is placed on 'Mogul Tobacco Company’s case” PLD 1984 Keir. 155 wherein it was observed: » Art. 199-Writ-Question of fact required evidence for determination-Held, cannot be gone into in Constitutional petition". 9. The assertion with regard to the allotment of land in dispute having been earlier allotted in the name of one Adam Shah and thus claiming the allotment in dispute as nullity, is also without any substance. As the order of allotment claimed to have been made in the name of Adam Shah, has not been. Brought on record. Even otherwise, the petitioners can hardly claim any advantage of such allotment. It is claimed by the concerned authorities that the allotment in the name of Adam Shah was made after the order made in favor of Muhammad Nazi. Therefore, even if there was any allotment, that carries no validity in the eye of law and as such was rightly ignored by the concerned authorities. 10. The question of allotment in dispute has been thoroughly dealt with by the rehabilitation authorities and also by the Custodian, respondent No.|, in the impugned order passed in the review petition. Nothing has been brought on record to support the contention that the decisions by the rehabilitation authorities were illegal, without jurisdiction or lawful authority. This Court can only interfere with an order of the Special Tribunal if it reaches the conclusion that the said order is without jurisdiction or lawful authority. The expressions refer to jurisdictional defects as distinguished from a mere erroneous decision on a question of fact. It is well settled that where a Court or Tribunal has the jurisdiction, and it determined that question, it cannot be said that it acted illegally or with material regularity merely because it came to the erroneous decision on a question of fact. The provisions contained in section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act do not empower

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1085?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1085 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-02-26): the jurisdiction, and it determined that question, it cannot be said that it acted illegally or with material regularity merely because it came to the erroneous decision on a question of fact. The provisions contained in section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act do not empower this Court to interfere with the decision of the Court or tribunal of inferior jurisdiction merely because the same is wrong on facts as in that case it would make the High Court's jurisdiction as that of appellate jurisdiction which is not the intention of the Legislature. m 11. Keeping in view the above discussion, the writ petition is found to have no substance in it which is hereby dismissed with costs. A.A./86/AJ&K. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1996 MLD 1265 about?
Answer: Case 1996 MLD 1265 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1994-10-27. The case involved ZAFAR HUSSAIN FARIDI (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARDAND 22 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 151 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. I, R.10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD ASLAM ARAIN AND DEEDAR HUSSAIN SHAH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: In case 1996 MLD 1265, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 151 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. I, R.10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1994-10-27.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1996 MLD 1265 were: M.G. DASTAGIR FOR RESPONDENTS NOS-1 AND 2.- S.H. KIZILBASH FOR RESPONDENT NO.3.RIZWAN AHMAD FOR THE INTERVENORS.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD ASLAM ARAIN AND DEEDAR HUSSAIN SHAH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: The parties in case 1996 MLD 1265 were: ZAFAR HUSSAIN FARIDI (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARDAND 22 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1996 MLD 1265.
Answer: 1. Miscellaneous Application No.2947 of 1994 MUHAMMAD ASLAM ARAIN, J.-This is an application under p* "section 151, C.P.C. moved jointly on behalf of the petitioner and the respondents Nos. and 2 and the prayer made in the application is that this Court may be pleased to determine the price of land or get it determined in any other manner as is deemed just and proper, in the circumstances of the case. Before dealing with this application on merits, it would be relevant to give the facts of case in brief: Land bearing Survey Nos.49 to 69, 72, 81 and 82 situated m Del Urban, Tape Man-hour, Karachi, originally belonged to Pinjrapur Association and the properties of said Association as well as the management thereof was taken over by committee known as Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee (D.E.T.C.). The respondents Nos.4 to 15 applied to the Secretary of D.E.T.C. Karachi for obtaining the lease of the above land. Under letter dated 21-11- 1963 an area measuring 314.18 acres of the said Survey numbers was granted on lease to the said respondents Mrs. Laila Saeed Karim and 11 others for a period of five years, renewable for further period of five years. The terms of lease were subsequently modified, and the lease was extended up to 30 years renewable at the option of the lessees, as 1s evident from letter, dated 9-1-1964. The Secretary of D.E.T.C. intimated the Mukhtarkar Karachi about the above leases and that Government dues should be recovered from lessees with effect from 1-1-1964. Accordingly, mutation was effected by the Mukhtarkar in favor of the lessees and the possession of land delivered. The lessees improved the land at huge cost to make it fit for the purpose of agriculture and poultry farms, for which the land was taken on lease. ' After the retirement of the then Secretary D.E.T.C. his successor, through a letter, dated 15-3-1965, intimated the petitioner that the Evacuee Trust Board hid changed its policy of grant of land for long term leases and that the period of lease would be restricted to ten years. The lease was however extended i up to the year 1988 and the land revenue and other charges recovered from lessees. By another letter, the third Secretary D.E.T.C. issued fresh notices to the lessees intimating that the lease was cancelled and to surrender the land in their possession by 1-1- 1969. The reason given for such cancellation was that (2) failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it or (3) acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. 5. Where the above conditions are not satisfied, the High Court would not interfere in its reversional jurisdiction. Section 1151) C.P.C. is only applicable to the erroneous exercise of jurisdiction and not to erroneous decision. If a Court has jurisdiction to decide, it can decide one way or the other. The learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to show that the lower Appellate Court had no jurisdiction to decide the appeal or that his decision is WW. against some mandatory provision of law and thus a nullity and accordingly label to be set aside. 6. Besides, the jurisdiction vested in the High Court under section 115, C.P.C. is discretionary in nature and, therefore, the High Court will not interfere under section 115, C.P.C. to correct every regularity in the exercise of jurisdiction except where grave injustice or hardship would result on account of its non-interference. The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to convince me as to what type of grave injustice has been caused or what type I of hardship would be faced by the petitioner if the revisional jurisdiction is not exercised. 7. On the other hand the conduct of the petitioner surely disentitled him to evoke the discretionary revisional jurisdiction of this Court because, in the first instance, he filed Civil Suit (No. on 2-10-1991) for specific performance of contract against respondent No.1 and others wherein he had prayed that respondent No.2, (father of respondent No.]) be directed to get respondent No.1 married to him. Petitioner's suit, in question, was dismissed by Civil Judge (II) Manner by his order, dated 22–10–1992. Again the petitioner filed a suit for the recovery of Rs.25,000 against respondent No.1 (MST. Altoona), who is working as a Lady Teacher in a girls school, and her father, respondent No.2. The suit was again contested by both of them all the allegations, contained in the plant, were denied on legal and factual sides. The respondents, in addition, filed an application before the learned trial Court on 19-5-1993 wherein they prayed for the rejection of the plaint under the provisions of Order II, Rule 2 read with Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. This application was contested by the petitioner. The trial Court, after gong through the record of the case, vide: its order dated 15-1-1994 held that the provisions of Order II, Rule 2, C.P.C. would apply in the circumstances and as such rejected the paint under Order VII, Rule 11 C.P.C. Against the said order, the appeal, filed the petitioner, was also dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge ‘;s order, dated 10-7-1994. 8. No reason exists and none indeed has been made out as to why this Court should interfere, in its revisional jurisdiction, with the findings of the previous Secretary, D.E.T.C. was not authorized to dispose of the land on lease, " The lessees filed Suit No.48 of 1969 for declaration, compensation and injunction which was decreed in their favor, and it was held, "as already discussed above, the Secretary was working on behalf of defendants, BMG their m responsible officer. Therefore, he had power to lease out the land for a period agreed as Exhibits and ". WW. Respondents Nos.] and 2 filed appeal against the judgment and decree before the District Judge, Karachi, which was transferred to Killed Additional District Judge, Karachi who dismissed the appeal vide judgment, dated 16-10-1982 and affirmed the decree, dated 6- 1-1980. The respondents then filed a Civil Revision No.296 of 1982 before this Court against the said concurrent findings which, as stated, is still pending. In the meanwhile the petitioner contacted the respondents and obtained the lease-hold rights, as also the other rights vesting in said lessees, to appear on their behalf in all Courts as an attorney. The petitioner then removed the encroachers from a portion of the land by paying huge compensation and even by filing ejectment proceedings. The petitioner thus acquired a right in the leased area. During this time, M.L.R. 57 was promulgated in order to get rid of the encroachers from the Evacuee Trust Lands. The respondent No.l was apported as 'an authority’ under Clause of M.L.R. 57 to exercise powers under said Regulation. During the absence of the petitioner from Pakistan, on a reference made by the respondent No.2, the respondent No.1 passed the impugned order, dated 29-1-1985, holding that the land in dispute belongs to Evacuee Trust. The respondent No.] through the impugned order declared the judgments of the Civil Court as well as of the 1st Appellate Court as null and void and also held that the revision pending before this Court shall abate. With regard to the lands covered under the lease, it was directed that the same be disposed of through open auction in similar lots. A Tribunal was thereafter constituted under M.L.R. 57 (Amendment) Ordinance, 1989 and the case of the petitioner herein, as also the cases of other applicants of the same nature came for hearing before the Tribunal. One of the cases dealt with by the Tribunal was that of Messes Landing Traders, Karachi v. Deputy Administrator, E.T.P. Karachi. In regard to certain cases, the Tribunal confirmed the transactions, while in respect of others, including the case of petitioner herein and Messes Landing Traders, Karachi, their applications were dismissed. Petitioner sought amendment to the petition so as to challenge the very constitution of Tribunal, its order and to job Federal Government as,party. Such amendment was allowed by order, dated 21-11-1990. In the meantime, Messes Landing Traders, Karachi, filed a Constitution petition before this Court, but the same was dismissed. Messes Landing Traders, Karachi, then filed Civil Appeal No.580-K of 1990 before the Supreme Court of Pakistan which was disposed of in the following terms, the judgment being reported in 1993 SCMR at p. 1707: "6. Mr.- Fatal-e-Hussain Chaudhary, WW. learned counsel for the respondent has contended that the disputed property is a valuable property, and it has been sold at a throwaway price. Be that as it may, he still makes an offer that if the! appellant is prepared to pay the present market price of the property the leasehold rights may be transferred to it on payment of such price. The offer made by the learned counsel for the respondent is fair and just. In the circumstances, we remand the case to the High Court to determine the present market value of the property and if the appellant is prepared to pay that price then after adjustment of the amount already paid by it, the leasehold rights may be transferred to it. However, in case the appellant is not prepared to pay the present market price as determined by the High Court, the respondents would be at liberty to dispose it of according to law." Another Civil Appeal No.522-K of 1990 (Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs Minorities and 2 others v. Syed Abdul Marked) was also filed before the Hobble Supreme Court of Pakistan which was decided, and the judgment is reported as 1993 SCMR 1*171. We would also like to reproduce the concluding paragraph of the judgment, which is as under:- - "At this stage the learned counsel for the appellants stated that if the respondent is prepared to pay the present market price of the land the same may be transferred to him. It is a fair and bold concession made by the learned counsel for the appellants which we expect to be followed by all the learned Advocates while discharging their duties in Court. Such attitude would help in determining the case m a realistic manner in the shortest possible time. Reference can be made to M/s. Punjab Engineering Co, v. Muhammad Yahoo PLD 1991 SC 799. We therefore allow the appeal and remand the case to the High Court to decide it on merits. If the transfer is found to be hit by M.L.R. 57, then the transferees in occupation may be allowed to retain lease-hold rights and possession, provided they pay the present market price of the land as determined by the High Court."' Listed application (M.A. 2947 of 1994) is moved in the background of the two decisions of the Hon'BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan, and it is jointly requested by the petitioner as well as the respondents Nos.| and 2 that this petition be disposed of in terms of the rule laid down by the Supreme Court of Pakistan.- Further, it is prayed that the price of land be determined or got determined in any other manner as is deemed, just and proper. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the two judgments, above referred. Mr. Aminuzzaman, Advocate for the petitioner and Mr. M.G. Distant, Advocate for respondents Nos.] and 2 have signed the application and have prayed for passing a consent order. Mr. S. Aziz Hassan Gil ani, respondent No.2, (Deputy WW. Administrator (Rural) Evacuee Trust Board Karachi) stated before us that the prevailing market rate of the land which is lying vacant and is not encroached upon, is between Rs.3,00,000 to Rs.5,00,000 per acre, whereas the price of the land which is under encroachment is between Rs.2,00,000 to Rs.3,00,000 per acre. The respondent No.2 also stated before us that instead of referred the matter to any other agency for the determination of the market value, this Court may take his above statement into consideration and pass an appropriate order, to which he would have no objection. He also stated that at the price determined by this Court, the land in dispute shall be transferred to the petitioner FHE makes the payment thereof. Mr. S.H. Kielbasa, learned Advocate for the respondent No.3 (K.D.A.) opposed this application on the ground that K.D.A. is not concerned with the entitlement of petitioner over the land or the fixation of price thereof, Because K.D.A. had been transferred some area, which it had disposed of, the nights of the K.D.A. or the auction purchasers may be protected. Dealing with the objection of Mr. S.H. Kielbasa, learned Advocate for the K.D.A. we may observe that the claim of K.D.A. was rejected under M.L.R. 57. Learned Advocate had also taken time to file counter-affidavit to this application but till date no such counter-affidavit is filed so as to medicate which land was claimed by K.D.A. His objection orally made cannot be considered. Mr. Rican Ahmad Siddiqui, Advocate for the Intervenors (Inhuman Bashing Farid Town) has also opposed this application and has argued that a vast area out of the disputed land is occupied by the members of the Inhuman, who have been agitating for their nights and that the consent order, as prayed in the application, may not be passed. With regard to the objection of the learned counsel for the Intervenors, we may observe that similar applications earlier moved by the intervenors were dismissed by this Court. The Intervenors have also filed Suit No.254 of 1994 for Specific Performance of contract and if the Intervenors have any right, they can agitate through the said suit. In view of the statement given by Mr. M.G. Despair, learned Advocate for the respondents Nos.] and 2 and by Mr. Aziz Hassan Gil ani (respondent No.2), we dispose of the application in the following terms:- (a) the price of the land involved m this petition, which 1s lying vacant, is fixed at Rs.5,00,000 per acre. WW. (b) The price of land involved in the petition, which TS under encroachment but is not lying vacant, is fixed at Rs.3,00,000 per acre. (c) On payment of the price worked at the above agreed rate, the leasehold rights shall be transferred to the petitioner. m 2. Miscellaneous Application No. 3995 of 1994 This is an application moved by the Intervenors Inhuman Bashindganl Farid Town under Order I, Rule 10, C.P.C. for Beng imp leaded as a party to this petition. Two similar applications earlier filed by the Intervenors have already been dismissed by this Court and this petition is not disputed by Mr. Rican Ahmed, Advocate. Learned counsel also admits that a suit is also filed by the Intervenors which is pending before this Court. In view of this position, the application is without merit and is dismissed accordingly. With disposal of the listed applications, the main petition also stands disposed of with no order as to costs. LER accordingly.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1265 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1994-10-27): 1. Miscellaneous Application No.2947 of 1994 MUHAMMAD ASLAM ARAIN, J.-This is an application under p* "section 151, C.P.C. moved jointly on behalf of the petitioner and the respondents Nos. and 2 and the prayer made in the application is that this Court may be pleased to determine the price of land or get it determined in any other manner as is deemed just and proper, in the circumstances of the case. Before dealing with this application on merits, it would be relevant to give the facts of case in brief: Land bearing Survey Nos.49 to 69, 72, 81 and 82 situated m Del Urban, Tape Man-hour, Karachi, originally belonged to Pinjrapur Association and the properties of said Association as well as the management thereof was taken over by committee known as Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee (D.E.T.C.). The respondents Nos.4 to 15 applied to the Secretary of D.E.T.C. Karachi for obtaining the lease of the above land. Under letter dated 21-11- 1963 an area measuring 314.18 acres of the said Survey numbers was granted on lease to the said respondents Mrs. Laila Saeed Karim and 11 others for a period of five years, renewable for further period of five years. The terms of lease were subsequently modified, and the lease was extended up to 30 years renewable at the option of the lessees, as 1s evident from letter, dated 9-1-1964. The Secretary of D.E.T.C. intimated the Mukhtarkar Karachi about the above leases and that Government dues should be recovered from lessees with effect from 1-1-1964. Accordingly, mutation was effected by the Mukhtarkar in favor of the lessees and the possession of land delivered. The lessees improved the land at huge cost to make it fit for the purpose of agriculture and poultry farms, for which the land was taken on lease. ' After the retirement of the then Secretary D.E.T.C. his successor, through a letter, dated 15-3-1965, intimated the petitioner that the Evacuee Trust Board hid changed its policy of grant of land for long term leases and that the period of lease would be restricted to ten years. The lease was however extended i up to the year 1988 and the land revenue and other charges recovered from lessees. By another letter, the third Secretary D.E.T.C. issued fresh notices to the lessees intimating that the lease was cancelled and to surrender the land in their possession by 1-1- 1969. The reason given for such cancellation was that (2) failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it or (3) acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. 5. Where the above conditions are not satisfied, the High Court would not interfere in its reversional jurisdiction. Section 1151) C.P.C. is only applicable to the erroneous exercise of jurisdiction and not to erroneous decision. If a Court has jurisdiction to decide, it can decide one way or the other. The learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to show that the lower Appellate Court had no jurisdiction to decide

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1265 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1994-10-27): C.P.C. is only applicable to the erroneous exercise of jurisdiction and not to erroneous decision. If a Court has jurisdiction to decide, it can decide one way or the other. The learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to show that the lower Appellate Court had no jurisdiction to decide the appeal or that his decision is WW. against some mandatory provision of law and thus a nullity and accordingly label to be set aside. 6. Besides, the jurisdiction vested in the High Court under section 115, C.P.C. is discretionary in nature and, therefore, the High Court will not interfere under section 115, C.P.C. to correct every regularity in the exercise of jurisdiction except where grave injustice or hardship would result on account of its non-interference. The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to convince me as to what type of grave injustice has been caused or what type I of hardship would be faced by the petitioner if the revisional jurisdiction is not exercised. 7. On the other hand the conduct of the petitioner surely disentitled him to evoke the discretionary revisional jurisdiction of this Court because, in the first instance, he filed Civil Suit (No. on 2-10-1991) for specific performance of contract against respondent No.1 and others wherein he had prayed that respondent No.2, (father of respondent No.]) be directed to get respondent No.1 married to him. Petitioner's suit, in question, was dismissed by Civil Judge (II) Manner by his order, dated 22–10–1992. Again the petitioner filed a suit for the recovery of Rs.25,000 against respondent No.1 (MST. Altoona), who is working as a Lady Teacher in a girls school, and her father, respondent No.2. The suit was again contested by both of them all the allegations, contained in the plant, were denied on legal and factual sides. The respondents, in addition, filed an application before the learned trial Court on 19-5-1993 wherein they prayed for the rejection of the plaint under the provisions of Order II, Rule 2 read with Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. This application was contested by the petitioner. The trial Court, after gong through the record of the case, vide: its order dated 15-1-1994 held that the provisions of Order II, Rule 2, C.P.C. would apply in the circumstances and as such rejected the paint under Order VII, Rule 11 C.P.C. Against the said order, the appeal, filed the petitioner, was also dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge ‘;s order, dated 10-7-1994. 8. No reason exists and none indeed has been made out as to why this Court should interfere, in its revisional jurisdiction, with the findings of the previous Secretary, D.E.T.C. was not authorized to dispose of the land on lease, " The lessees filed Suit No.48 of 1969 for declaration, compensation and injunction which was decreed in their favor, and it was held, "as already discussed above, the Secretary was working on behalf of defendants, BMG their m responsible officer. Therefore, he had power to lease out

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1265 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1994-10-27): land on lease, " The lessees filed Suit No.48 of 1969 for declaration, compensation and injunction which was decreed in their favor, and it was held, "as already discussed above, the Secretary was working on behalf of defendants, BMG their m responsible officer. Therefore, he had power to lease out the land for a period agreed as Exhibits and ". WW. Respondents Nos.] and 2 filed appeal against the judgment and decree before the District Judge, Karachi, which was transferred to Killed Additional District Judge, Karachi who dismissed the appeal vide judgment, dated 16-10-1982 and affirmed the decree, dated 6- 1-1980. The respondents then filed a Civil Revision No.296 of 1982 before this Court against the said concurrent findings which, as stated, is still pending. In the meanwhile the petitioner contacted the respondents and obtained the lease-hold rights, as also the other rights vesting in said lessees, to appear on their behalf in all Courts as an attorney. The petitioner then removed the encroachers from a portion of the land by paying huge compensation and even by filing ejectment proceedings. The petitioner thus acquired a right in the leased area. During this time, M.L.R. 57 was promulgated in order to get rid of the encroachers from the Evacuee Trust Lands. The respondent No.l was apported as 'an authority’ under Clause of M.L.R. 57 to exercise powers under said Regulation. During the absence of the petitioner from Pakistan, on a reference made by the respondent No.2, the respondent No.1 passed the impugned order, dated 29-1-1985, holding that the land in dispute belongs to Evacuee Trust. The respondent No.] through the impugned order declared the judgments of the Civil Court as well as of the 1st Appellate Court as null and void and also held that the revision pending before this Court shall abate. With regard to the lands covered under the lease, it was directed that the same be disposed of through open auction in similar lots. A Tribunal was thereafter constituted under M.L.R. 57 (Amendment) Ordinance, 1989 and the case of the petitioner herein, as also the cases of other applicants of the same nature came for hearing before the Tribunal. One of the cases dealt with by the Tribunal was that of Messes Landing Traders, Karachi v. Deputy Administrator, E.T.P. Karachi. In regard to certain cases, the Tribunal confirmed the transactions, while in respect of others, including the case of petitioner herein and Messes Landing Traders, Karachi, their applications were dismissed. Petitioner sought amendment to the petition so as to challenge the very constitution of Tribunal, its order and to job Federal Government as,party. Such amendment was allowed by order, dated 21-11-1990. In the meantime, Messes Landing Traders, Karachi, filed a Constitution petition before this Court, but the same was dismissed. Messes Landing Traders, Karachi, then filed Civil Appeal No.580-K of 1990 before the Supreme Court of Pakistan which was disposed of in the following terms, the judgment being reported in 1993 SCMR at p. 1707: "6. Mr.- Fatal-e-Hussain

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1265 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1994-10-27): filed a Constitution petition before this Court, but the same was dismissed. Messes Landing Traders, Karachi, then filed Civil Appeal No.580-K of 1990 before the Supreme Court of Pakistan which was disposed of in the following terms, the judgment being reported in 1993 SCMR at p. 1707: "6. Mr.- Fatal-e-Hussain Chaudhary, WW. learned counsel for the respondent has contended that the disputed property is a valuable property, and it has been sold at a throwaway price. Be that as it may, he still makes an offer that if the! appellant is prepared to pay the present market price of the property the leasehold rights may be transferred to it on payment of such price. The offer made by the learned counsel for the respondent is fair and just. In the circumstances, we remand the case to the High Court to determine the present market value of the property and if the appellant is prepared to pay that price then after adjustment of the amount already paid by it, the leasehold rights may be transferred to it. However, in case the appellant is not prepared to pay the present market price as determined by the High Court, the respondents would be at liberty to dispose it of according to law." Another Civil Appeal No.522-K of 1990 (Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs Minorities and 2 others v. Syed Abdul Marked) was also filed before the Hobble Supreme Court of Pakistan which was decided, and the judgment is reported as 1993 SCMR 1*171. We would also like to reproduce the concluding paragraph of the judgment, which is as under:- - "At this stage the learned counsel for the appellants stated that if the respondent is prepared to pay the present market price of the land the same may be transferred to him. It is a fair and bold concession made by the learned counsel for the appellants which we expect to be followed by all the learned Advocates while discharging their duties in Court. Such attitude would help in determining the case m a realistic manner in the shortest possible time. Reference can be made to M/s. Punjab Engineering Co, v. Muhammad Yahoo PLD 1991 SC 799. We therefore allow the appeal and remand the case to the High Court to decide it on merits. If the transfer is found to be hit by M.L.R. 57, then the transferees in occupation may be allowed to retain lease-hold rights and possession, provided they pay the present market price of the land as determined by the High Court."' Listed application (M.A. 2947 of 1994) is moved in the background of the two decisions of the Hon'BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan, and it is jointly requested by the petitioner as well as the respondents Nos.| and 2 that this petition be disposed of in terms of the rule laid down by the Supreme Court of Pakistan.- Further, it is prayed that the price of land be determined or got determined in any other manner as is

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1265 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1994-10-27): by the petitioner as well as the respondents Nos.| and 2 that this petition be disposed of in terms of the rule laid down by the Supreme Court of Pakistan.- Further, it is prayed that the price of land be determined or got determined in any other manner as is deemed, just and proper. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the two judgments, above referred. Mr. Aminuzzaman, Advocate for the petitioner and Mr. M.G. Distant, Advocate for respondents Nos.] and 2 have signed the application and have prayed for passing a consent order. Mr. S. Aziz Hassan Gil ani, respondent No.2, (Deputy WW. Administrator (Rural) Evacuee Trust Board Karachi) stated before us that the prevailing market rate of the land which is lying vacant and is not encroached upon, is between Rs.3,00,000 to Rs.5,00,000 per acre, whereas the price of the land which is under encroachment is between Rs.2,00,000 to Rs.3,00,000 per acre. The respondent No.2 also stated before us that instead of referred the matter to any other agency for the determination of the market value, this Court may take his above statement into consideration and pass an appropriate order, to which he would have no objection. He also stated that at the price determined by this Court, the land in dispute shall be transferred to the petitioner FHE makes the payment thereof. Mr. S.H. Kielbasa, learned Advocate for the respondent No.3 (K.D.A.) opposed this application on the ground that K.D.A. is not concerned with the entitlement of petitioner over the land or the fixation of price thereof, Because K.D.A. had been transferred some area, which it had disposed of, the nights of the K.D.A. or the auction purchasers may be protected. Dealing with the objection of Mr. S.H. Kielbasa, learned Advocate for the K.D.A. we may observe that the claim of K.D.A. was rejected under M.L.R. 57. Learned Advocate had also taken time to file counter-affidavit to this application but till date no such counter-affidavit is filed so as to medicate which land was claimed by K.D.A. His objection orally made cannot be considered. Mr. Rican Ahmad Siddiqui, Advocate for the Intervenors (Inhuman Bashing Farid Town) has also opposed this application and has argued that a vast area out of the disputed land is occupied by the members of the Inhuman, who have been agitating for their nights and that the consent order, as prayed in the application, may not be passed. With regard to the objection of the learned counsel for the Intervenors, we may observe that similar applications earlier moved by the intervenors were dismissed by this Court. The Intervenors have also filed Suit No.254 of 1994 for Specific Performance of contract and if the Intervenors have any right, they can agitate through the said suit. In view of the statement given by Mr. M.G. Despair, learned Advocate for the respondents Nos.] and 2 and by Mr. Aziz Hassan Gil ani (respondent No.2), we dispose of the application in the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 MLD 1265?
Answer: From case 1996 MLD 1265 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1994-10-27): of contract and if the Intervenors have any right, they can agitate through the said suit. In view of the statement given by Mr. M.G. Despair, learned Advocate for the respondents Nos.] and 2 and by Mr. Aziz Hassan Gil ani (respondent No.2), we dispose of the application in the following terms:- (a) the price of the land involved m this petition, which 1s lying vacant, is fixed at Rs.5,00,000 per acre. WW. (b) The price of land involved in the petition, which TS under encroachment but is not lying vacant, is fixed at Rs.3,00,000 per acre. (c) On payment of the price worked at the above agreed rate, the leasehold rights shall be transferred to the petitioner. m 2. Miscellaneous Application No. 3995 of 1994 This is an application moved by the Intervenors Inhuman Bashindganl Farid Town under Order I, Rule 10, C.P.C. for Beng imp leaded as a party to this petition. Two similar applications earlier filed by the Intervenors have already been dismissed by this Court and this petition is not disputed by Mr. Rican Ahmed, Advocate. Learned counsel also admits that a suit is also filed by the Intervenors which is pending before this Court. In view of this position, the application is without merit and is dismissed accordingly. With disposal of the listed applications, the main petition also stands disposed of with no order as to costs. LER accordingly.

Question: What is case 1996 PLD 149 about?
Answer: Case 1996 PLD 149 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1995-11-22. The case involved MST. JAM LAAKHTAR AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XXI, RR. 92, 94 AND 95 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - ARTICLES 142 AND 144. The case was heard by IHSAN-UL-HAQ CHAUDHRYAND AHMAD SAEEDAWAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1996 PLD 149?
Answer: In case 1996 PLD 149, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XXI, RR. 92, 94 AND 95 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - ARTICLES 142 AND 144. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1995-11-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1996 PLD 149?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1996 PLD 149 were: MIAN SAQIB NISAR FOR APPELLANTS. NEMO FOR RESPONDENT NO.L. -JAVED IQBAL FOR THE REMAINING RESPONDENTS.J.. The judges presiding were: IHSAN-UL-HAQ CHAUDHRYAND AHMAD SAEEDAWAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1996 PLD 149?
Answer: The parties in case 1996 PLD 149 were: MST. JAM LAAKHTAR AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1996 PLD 149.
Answer: IHSAN-UL-HAQ CHAUDHRY, J.-By this Single Judgment we propose to decide LPA No.152 of 1970 and LPA No.163 of 1970 because both the appeals are directed against the same judgment of the learned Single Judge in Chambers dated 15-5-1970. 2. The relevant facts for the decision of these appeals are that Amar Path resident of Village Bhagwan, District Gujrat along with his family members embraced Islam at the time of the partition of the sub-Continent and took up residence in Gujrat City, where he died in the year 1952 as Muslim and his name, was Akhtar Hussain. He did not migrate to India at any time. Akhtar Hussain had purchased property consisting of one house, one stable, two shops and two plots at a Court auction. The sale was made by the executing Court absolute. The property belonged to the. judgment-debtors Karma Singh and Uganda Singh who did not pursue the matter. The result was that the auction was made absolute and executing Court proceeded to grant certificate to Akhtar Hussain on 16-8- 1930. The property was treated as evacuee by the Rehabilitation Authorities after the creation of Pakistan. The appellants initially represented to the Rehabilitation Authorities for not treating the property as evacuee and ultimately moved an application on 18*10-1958 under PLD section 22 of Act XII of 1957. The application was dismissed by the Deputy Custodian vide order dated 15-8-1960 which was assailed by the appellants through an appeal The appeal was accepted vide order dated 7-1-1961 and the application was remanded for fresh decision to the Deputy Custodian. The application was accepted vide order dated 13-6-1961, and it was held that Akhtar Hussain was a full-fledged owner of the property and since he had not migrated to India, therefore, the property was not evacuee but as the value of the property was more than Rs.5,000.00, therefore, the proceedings were submitted for confirmation to the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property. The respondents Nos<2 to also filed appeals, which were accepted vide order dated 14-7- 1962. The application of the appellants was rejected on the ground that SME Akhtar Hussain had failed to assume possession, therefore, he lost title to the property. This order was assailed by the appellants through a revision before the learned Custodian, Evacuee Property. The same was dismissed vide order dated 26-11-1962. The appellants ultimately filed writ petition which was partially accepted by the learned Single Judge in Chambers vide judgment dated 15-5-1970. The result was that it was held that Akhtar Hussain had valid title to stable, two shops and two plots but in respect of the house the decision of the Custodian was upheld. Therefore, the appellants have filed the present appeal against the decision in respect of the house while respondent No.4 and the heirs of Rahman Khan respondent No.2 have filed the other connected appeal. The appeals were admitted to hearing and notices were issued to the respondents. 3. The learned counsel for the appellants argued that the auction was confirmed by the Civil Court and certificate as required under Order XXI, Rule 94, C.P.C. was issued in favor of Akhtar Hussain. This completed his title. The delivery of possession has nothing to do with passing of title. The auction-purchaser is neither under legal obligation to secure the possession through the Executing Court, nor it is a condition precedent for perfecting his title in the property. It is argued that there is a long chain of precedents of the superior Courts that issue of possession can be settled by the auction-purchaser with the judgment-debtor out of Court. In this behalf the learned counsel has referred to the cases reported as Pathaperumal v. Chidambaram AIR 1954 Madras 760 (Vol 41 C.N 246), Jada Chandra v. Akbar Chandra AIR 1930 Calcutta 586 and Ali Ahmad v. Muhammad Fatal PLD 1973 Lahore 207. section 2(3) of Act XII of 1957. It is, therefore, concluded that the Additional Custodian rightly refused to grant declaration. The appeal of the respondents, ' therefore, i label to be accepted and that of the appellants is without any merit. 5. The learned counsel for the appellants while summing up the. arguments submitted that section 28 of the Limitation Act has been declared against the Injunctions, of Islam, therefore, the findings recorded by the Additional Custodian are liable to be set aside on this ground alone. The. learned counsel in this behalf has referred to the case reported as MacBook Ahmad v. Government of Pakistan 1991 SCMR 2063. It is added that the issue of possession was settled by Akhtar Hussain out of Court and the possession of the house was delivered to Audit Singh who had embraced Islam and I- continued to reside in the village. He gave the house to Ch. Rahman Khan, therefore, the possession was not that of the judgment-debtors and lastly that none of the evacuees at any stage had claimed adverse possession, therefore, there is no question of their becoming owners of the property by way of adverse possession. The plea of adverse possession is no longer available in view of the judgment of the Hon’BLE Supreme Court in the case of MacBook Ahmad (supra). - 6. We have given our anxious consideration to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record. The learned Single Judge in Chambers has noted the case of Jada Chandra (supra) where it was held that it was. not necessary for the auction-purchaser to take possession through Court in every case and possession of the property purchased in execution of the decree’ can be obtained by him from the judgment-debtors by means of private arrangement. It is clear from the bare reading of Rules 92,94 and 95 of Order XXI, C.P.C. that the issue of delivery of possession has no bearing on the title which passes to auctioneer chaser with the issuance of sale certificate under Rule 94, therefore, the property vested in Akhtar Hussain on 16- 8-1930. suggest that posture of the judgment-debtors was hostile to the auction-purchaser. The mere possession of whatever length is not sufficient to divest the owner of the property of his title by way of adverse possession. We in this behalf may refer to section 28 of the Limitation Act which reads as under:- "At the determination of the period hereby limited to any person for instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right to such property shall be extinguished.” It is held that the owner has lost title on account of adverse possession and the possession of the persons must be hostile and continuous. We may in this behalf refer to the cases reported as Mir Lack Ali v. Standard Vacuum Oil Co. (ESO) PLD 1964 SC 220 and Sadhu Mia v. Rahimuddin PLD 1964 Dacca 655. The possession of the licensee, however long, unless adverse possession is asserted and proved to the licensor is of no legal consequences. Reference in this behalf may be made to cases reported as Shafter Rehman v. Jane Adam Do bash, Mutually WAAF Estate 1971 DLC 161, Abdul Hamid v. Custodian, Evacuee Property PLD 1969 Lahore 404, Video Asmara Joshi v. Kath Balkrishna White (1910) 35 Bombay 79, Ali Ahmad v. Muhammad Fatal PLD 1973 Lahore 207 and Habit-ur-Rehman v. Tiara GUL 1990 SCMR 1706, Bashiruddin Faraday v. Sardinia Narayan Roy CLJ 102 (LX PC) 1934. Section 28 is not independent. It has to be read subject to the provisions of Articles 141 to 144. In this behalf reference can be made to Abdul Hamid v. Custodian of Evacuee Property PLD 1969 Lahore 404. To the present controversy the relevant Article is 144 which reads as under:-- "For possession of Twenty years When the possession of immovable property or the defendant becomes any interest their adverse to the plaintiff" not hereby otherwise specially provided for. The cases of ISRO Nawab v. Khan mullah and others PLD 1962 Peshawar 124, Chandra Chandra Papal Chaudhary and another v. Arjun Chandra Papal and others PLD 1964 Dacca 498 and Duchy Mia and others v. Rahimuddin and others (supra) referred to by the learned Single Judge in Chambers, also support our view post. It is clear from the last column that. limitation would run from "when the possession of the defendant becomes adverse to the plaintiff" So mere possession for any length of time does not extinguish the title of the owner. Now the facts of the case m hand are that Akhtar Hussain was entitled to possession through Court but-he did next make any effort meaning thereby that the possession of the judgment-debtors thereafter was permissible. If in the property, the subject-matter of the application under section 22 of Act OH of 1957. 9. The upshot of the above discussion is that LPA No.152 of 1970 in allowed. The result is that the application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 of the appellants is accepted In toto while the appeal of the respondents is dismissed with no order WYP July am 4Pase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 PLD 149?
Answer: From case 1996 PLD 149 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1995-11-22): IHSAN-UL-HAQ CHAUDHRY, J.-By this Single Judgment we propose to decide LPA No.152 of 1970 and LPA No.163 of 1970 because both the appeals are directed against the same judgment of the learned Single Judge in Chambers dated 15-5-1970. 2. The relevant facts for the decision of these appeals are that Amar Path resident of Village Bhagwan, District Gujrat along with his family members embraced Islam at the time of the partition of the sub-Continent and took up residence in Gujrat City, where he died in the year 1952 as Muslim and his name, was Akhtar Hussain. He did not migrate to India at any time. Akhtar Hussain had purchased property consisting of one house, one stable, two shops and two plots at a Court auction. The sale was made by the executing Court absolute. The property belonged to the. judgment-debtors Karma Singh and Uganda Singh who did not pursue the matter. The result was that the auction was made absolute and executing Court proceeded to grant certificate to Akhtar Hussain on 16-8- 1930. The property was treated as evacuee by the Rehabilitation Authorities after the creation of Pakistan. The appellants initially represented to the Rehabilitation Authorities for not treating the property as evacuee and ultimately moved an application on 18*10-1958 under PLD section 22 of Act XII of 1957. The application was dismissed by the Deputy Custodian vide order dated 15-8-1960 which was assailed by the appellants through an appeal The appeal was accepted vide order dated 7-1-1961 and the application was remanded for fresh decision to the Deputy Custodian. The application was accepted vide order dated 13-6-1961, and it was held that Akhtar Hussain was a full-fledged owner of the property and since he had not migrated to India, therefore, the property was not evacuee but as the value of the property was more than Rs.5,000.00, therefore, the proceedings were submitted for confirmation to the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property. The respondents Nos<2 to also filed appeals, which were accepted vide order dated 14-7- 1962. The application of the appellants was rejected on the ground that SME Akhtar Hussain had failed to assume possession, therefore, he lost title to the property. This order was assailed by the appellants through a revision before the learned Custodian, Evacuee Property. The same was dismissed vide order dated 26-11-1962. The appellants ultimately filed writ petition which was partially accepted by the learned Single Judge in Chambers vide judgment dated 15-5-1970. The result was that it was held that Akhtar Hussain had valid title to stable, two shops and two plots but in respect of the house the decision of the Custodian was upheld. Therefore, the appellants have filed the present appeal against the decision in respect of the house while respondent No.4 and the heirs of Rahman Khan respondent No.2 have filed the other connected appeal. The appeals were admitted to hearing and notices were issued to the respondents. 3. The learned counsel for the appellants argued that the auction was confirmed by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 PLD 149?
Answer: From case 1996 PLD 149 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1995-11-22): decision in respect of the house while respondent No.4 and the heirs of Rahman Khan respondent No.2 have filed the other connected appeal. The appeals were admitted to hearing and notices were issued to the respondents. 3. The learned counsel for the appellants argued that the auction was confirmed by the Civil Court and certificate as required under Order XXI, Rule 94, C.P.C. was issued in favor of Akhtar Hussain. This completed his title. The delivery of possession has nothing to do with passing of title. The auction-purchaser is neither under legal obligation to secure the possession through the Executing Court, nor it is a condition precedent for perfecting his title in the property. It is argued that there is a long chain of precedents of the superior Courts that issue of possession can be settled by the auction-purchaser with the judgment-debtor out of Court. In this behalf the learned counsel has referred to the cases reported as Pathaperumal v. Chidambaram AIR 1954 Madras 760 (Vol 41 C.N 246), Jada Chandra v. Akbar Chandra AIR 1930 Calcutta 586 and Ali Ahmad v. Muhammad Fatal PLD 1973 Lahore 207. section 2(3) of Act XII of 1957. It is, therefore, concluded that the Additional Custodian rightly refused to grant declaration. The appeal of the respondents, ' therefore, i label to be accepted and that of the appellants is without any merit. 5. The learned counsel for the appellants while summing up the. arguments submitted that section 28 of the Limitation Act has been declared against the Injunctions, of Islam, therefore, the findings recorded by the Additional Custodian are liable to be set aside on this ground alone. The. learned counsel in this behalf has referred to the case reported as MacBook Ahmad v. Government of Pakistan 1991 SCMR 2063. It is added that the issue of possession was settled by Akhtar Hussain out of Court and the possession of the house was delivered to Audit Singh who had embraced Islam and I- continued to reside in the village. He gave the house to Ch. Rahman Khan, therefore, the possession was not that of the judgment-debtors and lastly that none of the evacuees at any stage had claimed adverse possession, therefore, there is no question of their becoming owners of the property by way of adverse possession. The plea of adverse possession is no longer available in view of the judgment of the Hon’BLE Supreme Court in the case of MacBook Ahmad (supra). - 6. We have given our anxious consideration to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record. The learned Single Judge in Chambers has noted the case of Jada Chandra (supra) where it was held that it was. not necessary for the auction-purchaser to take possession through Court in every case and possession of the property purchased in execution of the decree’ can be obtained by him from the judgment-debtors by means of private arrangement. It is clear from the bare reading of Rules

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 PLD 149?
Answer: From case 1996 PLD 149 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1995-11-22): held that it was. not necessary for the auction-purchaser to take possession through Court in every case and possession of the property purchased in execution of the decree’ can be obtained by him from the judgment-debtors by means of private arrangement. It is clear from the bare reading of Rules 92,94 and 95 of Order XXI, C.P.C. that the issue of delivery of possession has no bearing on the title which passes to auctioneer chaser with the issuance of sale certificate under Rule 94, therefore, the property vested in Akhtar Hussain on 16- 8-1930. suggest that posture of the judgment-debtors was hostile to the auction-purchaser. The mere possession of whatever length is not sufficient to divest the owner of the property of his title by way of adverse possession. We in this behalf may refer to section 28 of the Limitation Act which reads as under:- "At the determination of the period hereby limited to any person for instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right to such property shall be extinguished.” It is held that the owner has lost title on account of adverse possession and the possession of the persons must be hostile and continuous. We may in this behalf refer to the cases reported as Mir Lack Ali v. Standard Vacuum Oil Co. (ESO) PLD 1964 SC 220 and Sadhu Mia v. Rahimuddin PLD 1964 Dacca 655. The possession of the licensee, however long, unless adverse possession is asserted and proved to the licensor is of no legal consequences. Reference in this behalf may be made to cases reported as Shafter Rehman v. Jane Adam Do bash, Mutually WAAF Estate 1971 DLC 161, Abdul Hamid v. Custodian, Evacuee Property PLD 1969 Lahore 404, Video Asmara Joshi v. Kath Balkrishna White (1910) 35 Bombay 79, Ali Ahmad v. Muhammad Fatal PLD 1973 Lahore 207 and Habit-ur-Rehman v. Tiara GUL 1990 SCMR 1706, Bashiruddin Faraday v. Sardinia Narayan Roy CLJ 102 (LX PC) 1934. Section 28 is not independent. It has to be read subject to the provisions of Articles 141 to 144. In this behalf reference can be made to Abdul Hamid v. Custodian of Evacuee Property PLD 1969 Lahore 404. To the present controversy the relevant Article is 144 which reads as under:-- "For possession of Twenty years When the possession of immovable property or the defendant becomes any interest their adverse to the plaintiff" not hereby otherwise specially provided for. The cases of ISRO Nawab v. Khan mullah and others PLD 1962 Peshawar 124, Chandra Chandra Papal Chaudhary and another v. Arjun Chandra Papal and others PLD 1964 Dacca 498 and Duchy Mia and others v. Rahimuddin and others (supra) referred to by the learned Single Judge in Chambers, also support our view post. It is clear from the last column that. limitation would run from "when the possession of the defendant becomes adverse to the plaintiff" So mere possession for any length of time does not extinguish the title of the owner. Now

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1996 PLD 149?
Answer: From case 1996 PLD 149 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1995-11-22): learned Single Judge in Chambers, also support our view post. It is clear from the last column that. limitation would run from "when the possession of the defendant becomes adverse to the plaintiff" So mere possession for any length of time does not extinguish the title of the owner. Now the facts of the case m hand are that Akhtar Hussain was entitled to possession through Court but-he did next make any effort meaning thereby that the possession of the judgment-debtors thereafter was permissible. If in the property, the subject-matter of the application under section 22 of Act OH of 1957. 9. The upshot of the above discussion is that LPA No.152 of 1970 in allowed. The result is that the application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 of the appellants is accepted In toto while the appeal of the respondents is dismissed with no order WYP July am 4Pase.com

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by  on ORDER. The case involved . The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by .

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in  and decided on ORDER.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: . The judges presiding were: .

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: . This case was heard in .

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: 1991 SC MR 1688 Present: Akmal Main and RUSTA S. Schwa, JJ Reyna MUHAMMAD AKRAM through Legal Heirs---Petitioner versus TUFAIL AHMED and others---Respondents Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.78-R of 1988, decided on 26th March, 1990 Date of hearing: 26th March, 1990. ORDER AJMAL MIAN, J.---Leave to appeal is sought against the judgment dated 7-3-1988 passed by a learned Single Judge of the Lahore High Court in Civil Revision No.511- D of 1987 filed by the petitioner, dismissing the same and maintaining the judgments and decrees dated 21-12-1982 and 7-6-1987 passed by the learned Civil Judge, find Class, Rawalpindi, and the learned Additional District Judge, Rawalpindi, in Suit No. Nil and Civil Appeal No. 64 of 1986, respectively, decreeing the suit of specific performance of the respondent in the following terms:-- 27. On the basis of my fore-discussion, I hereby pass a decree for the Specific Performance of the Contract of suit House No.U -A Bazaar Talleyrand, Rawalpindi, in favor of the plaintiffs against the defendants. The plaintiff(s) have already paid sale price to defendant No.1. Anyhow they will pay Rs.1,35,200 to defendants Nos.2 and 3 as costs of reconstruction of suit house. The plaintiffs are directed to deposit said amount of Rs.1,35,200 on or up to 15-2-1983 in the Court otherwise their suit will be deemed to be dismissed with costs. After the deposit of said amount the plaintiffs will be entitled to get registered sale-deed in their favor by the defendants or with the assistance of this Court on their own costs. However parties are left to bear their own costs in the present instance." The brief facts to be noted are that respondent No.1], who was defendant No.1 in the suit, was in possession of house bearing No.U/11-11-A Bar Talleyrand, Rawalpindi, hereinafter referred to as the house. He applied for the Transfer of the house under the Settlement Scheme which application was accepted. The respondent No.1 in order to pay the price of the house entered into an agreement of association on 10-9-1964 with the predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.1 to 10, namely, late Sh. Bashir Ahmad, hereinafter referred to as the deceased, for using his compensation book. He also executed another agreement on the above date i.e. 10-9-1964 and got it registered in which it was agreed that in case respondent No.11 would not pay four consecutive installments of the price of the amount of compensation book used, deceased would Eros e2 SETRRE 8 A So a FA CE ego > 2g 2 SE 2% Los OT meta D GY 2 Bo acetate BERS ERE SS” BOM TT RB S EO SB 2 a9 o> P&S 268 OO are 5&8 CMA ~a 828 BORGES OF p o2upPp pea OTA Sex kn Ea as GIR OE m 99 OF LY 3 6 in as AO @ OO FP OB oO OD GQ OB2srx XS 00 A OO or, © ) MA Ho oo. A Fe) OO ® a GF, a OF Ne Psst O 3x8 +o PON PR NM 2. Sm Nag flash r ans 72a» sos SERBS OE See, A Beg DEAE © OO ® @. a ¢. Bees Me we © BEE Be Bo SES of ie PS PAO g ® Bat S@REREE as Fe) HOB ® OSA WY S a AEE? NW SR series TS Prefers EE Se Te! OE sh SEB diet Bee ore: 225 neg OS ERLE SE: 53 POS as Cr's P Flagg lens g Carr RAR Se RS of Bo SESS mage BERR Sorry Ere IEEE airs ware) a< 8 on 260% RO SERS OE LR op Pa Po gag Peg BF ANE new g Ty oo EE get ERT Signal co Pete EO: b O Beebe an — PRB at AS iron SOE ms 5 BO § 2 GG 3 f EB 64 AOE, épée?s? Servo Se a © SOA a Bon 8 g a8 28 > 5 For so area G mood ns S28 NE PP Eyes EI RE pgeaeUegel used =a. EE QF OO re I'm OO © up. o) WW an O a F Q'd Few Gas Q 7, 2 OO ems up ES 7 yes 5 2 ape KO 5 OS Comer SESE S Be ok AC AG ES o Fee OO 8 ES a 2 3 8 BREE ES BA Ge See gases Base: CE OSP OE 8 ANE BB § EG RE TRE GE OE Sg -8 e8ee% a GE i Oaf EEK: s PCE see or OT AO AG in Os coo 5 AOR or ATEE a MO a Ah EX co Fe Gas a EE Age z a 6 2 To Se GS DES are ere RCA sees ORB EERE SEE FY to, 45 OO So -~ © KG OE a of.p 822 me Bo ARY © PR Nag OE O a) of 2 a in a yes EO) Fe) 5 2 So FHE ox a6 e< FN? OO op o SPE PES 8 AA RES: or AMA RO So 8 BEARER OE re DESE GRE TARE Bo GE often Bags SF Rees Ea ES Merely Ea OE GE: 32. of 8g 2 Bao EE OSZ8 Be BS PEEECEETAT ELE z SLR EE F a SE>NR5 8 Be Sees geeks a BE ST aw EU. e). ) Zoey a o) EU. a. Fe Q, ® o) & as) Tom ¥2>had on D ¢ & 5 OO free Teepee yes OT RM STRATOS ESR EE So FS SOB G 5 TO. a5 2% eye RD Shiloh EE c BP Red 25 5 Pp 2S a2o70 OC 5 Boe ES IES 2 C 23 BOP EB PR EE Roe AB BSEE ES AF 2 9. g FPO Sea SARS ERS FES Seems Tone DC ss SBF HAS. Eye in 8 SEG ZO 8 RO BOE OO —- O Basso g FAE s © a MH 2 @m 7a so PS. FO ere For ere Sac EAS Pe Sea 8: 2. S Roe ® Io - » BO OSHS SG Sans. EO OE 2 f ms AR OE her Be Bars oil SZERBQS Fe}, &. 2B o 8G OE Based RSs Sg TELE CTE Op OE. gee i Beech IEEE SG Bee SESS pogrom Ste. 88 Or OO SG He. BNONSE a F BPS, Key SERS EOR I. Pete a2 £3388 §! +o BOP er AOE A ZEE Ss » OB? OF SRE RET DAA 3223 F a of 27 2 ® 2 Preset S22 G SRRACE a EAE ere: er SS were Ry 655588 OF Oops ca: 5 BBQs wage see] Go SEM S ct PES Shea! EB BG 97 2 7. eye 4 BECE RS OO a 8 e GK S528 Earshot. FBO ZS 8 4.5868 © Ce -) T+ S Ching Bee BG or =o Six Ry eyes EO) SESE SS 3 EY : "ESE: OT 6. EEE Ha Sa2e@ By OO 5 5 SE SR 88 8S EEE the o> SA 38 OG SY MCA ans ire Send 5A 2 30. BP SZS ESR: for AA EU 9 Fe) DS a 2 SF a2 5 EEE g on a ty NBER: try OO (ap) 1.» goo y Page Gees a BS > F Sr EC ORS FO “SE GH Rey! ft ; 25H FARES ='U a5 eye >. s28 B. eye TO one BG i Acres 5 ET RAB >! Says GG AGG ° BP RRG 3 SRS EZ EE F 2 a FT re a eye _ TTEL as De 2A.5 3 yes : BERGE. B2 ‘@ eye OO ® 47 broke: M of OO, S BS =e © sf by 2! CES or SY Q SES EL? Phi Phi: - 6° 8886 F Go Ea ORES on Same GS Engagée - ear SB Se for BS SE 8 for} Ry IAEA! <a 3 A : BSR REE R © RO £ race 7H : Gao ES eyes Hale i PS EEE, o) » 2 : ; BSED ERE E ‘ BREE Om OD 28222523 Res EE HS OS SBE ESS RS Q e EES GSES

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ORDER): 1991 SC MR 1688 Present: Akmal Main and RUSTA S. Schwa, JJ Reyna MUHAMMAD AKRAM through Legal Heirs---Petitioner versus TUFAIL AHMED and others---Respondents Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.78-R of 1988, decided on 26th March, 1990 Date of hearing: 26th March, 1990. ORDER AJMAL MIAN, J.---Leave to appeal is sought against the judgment dated 7-3-1988 passed by a learned Single Judge of the Lahore High Court in Civil Revision No.511- D of 1987 filed by the petitioner, dismissing the same and maintaining the judgments and decrees dated 21-12-1982 and 7-6-1987 passed by the learned Civil Judge, find Class, Rawalpindi, and the learned Additional District Judge, Rawalpindi, in Suit No. Nil and Civil Appeal No. 64 of 1986, respectively, decreeing the suit of specific performance of the respondent in the following terms:-- 27. On the basis of my fore-discussion, I hereby pass a decree for the Specific Performance of the Contract of suit House No.U -A Bazaar Talleyrand, Rawalpindi, in favor of the plaintiffs against the defendants. The plaintiff(s) have already paid sale price to defendant No.1. Anyhow they will pay Rs.1,35,200 to defendants Nos.2 and 3 as costs of reconstruction of suit house. The plaintiffs are directed to deposit said amount of Rs.1,35,200 on or up to 15-2-1983 in the Court otherwise their suit will be deemed to be dismissed with costs. After the deposit of said amount the plaintiffs will be entitled to get registered sale-deed in their favor by the defendants or with the assistance of this Court on their own costs. However parties are left to bear their own costs in the present instance." The brief facts to be noted are that respondent No.1], who was defendant No.1 in the suit, was in possession of house bearing No.U/11-11-A Bar Talleyrand, Rawalpindi, hereinafter referred to as the house. He applied for the Transfer of the house under the Settlement Scheme which application was accepted. The respondent No.1 in order to pay the price of the house entered into an agreement of association on 10-9-1964 with the predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.1 to 10, namely, late Sh. Bashir Ahmad, hereinafter referred to as the deceased, for using his compensation book. He also executed another agreement on the above date i.e. 10-9-1964 and got it registered in which it was agreed that in case respondent No.11 would not pay four consecutive installments of the price of the amount of compensation book used, deceased would Eros e2 SETRRE 8 A So a FA CE ego > 2g 2 SE 2% Los OT meta D GY 2 Bo acetate BERS ERE SS” BOM TT RB S EO SB 2 a9 o> P&S 268 OO are 5&8 CMA ~a 828 BORGES OF p o2upPp pea OTA Sex kn Ea as GIR OE m 99 OF LY 3 6 in as AO @ OO FP OB oO OD GQ OB2srx XS 00 A OO or, © ) MA Ho oo. A Fe) OO ® a GF, a OF Ne Psst O 3x8 +o PON

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ORDER): o2upPp pea OTA Sex kn Ea as GIR OE m 99 OF LY 3 6 in as AO @ OO FP OB oO OD GQ OB2srx XS 00 A OO or, © ) MA Ho oo. A Fe) OO ® a GF, a OF Ne Psst O 3x8 +o PON PR NM 2. Sm Nag flash r ans 72a» sos SERBS OE See, A Beg DEAE © OO ® @. a ¢. Bees Me we © BEE Be Bo SES of ie PS PAO g ® Bat S@REREE as Fe) HOB ® OSA WY S a AEE? NW SR series TS Prefers EE Se Te! OE sh SEB diet Bee ore: 225 neg OS ERLE SE: 53 POS as Cr's P Flagg lens g Carr RAR Se RS of Bo SESS mage BERR Sorry Ere IEEE airs ware) a< 8 on 260% RO SERS OE LR op Pa Po gag Peg BF ANE new g Ty oo EE get ERT Signal co Pete EO: b O Beebe an — PRB at AS iron SOE ms 5 BO § 2 GG 3 f EB 64 AOE, épée?s? Servo Se a © SOA a Bon 8 g a8 28 > 5 For so area G mood ns S28 NE PP Eyes EI RE pgeaeUegel used =a. EE QF OO re I'm OO © up. o) WW an O a F Q'd Few Gas Q 7, 2 OO ems up ES 7 yes 5 2 ape KO 5 OS Comer SESE S Be ok AC AG ES o Fee OO 8 ES a 2 3 8 BREE ES BA Ge See gases Base: CE OSP OE 8 ANE BB § EG RE TRE GE OE Sg -8 e8ee% a GE i Oaf EEK: s PCE see or OT AO AG in Os coo 5 AOR or ATEE a MO a Ah EX co Fe Gas a EE Age z a 6 2 To Se GS DES are ere RCA sees ORB EERE SEE FY to, 45 OO So -~ © KG OE a of.p 822 me Bo ARY © PR Nag OE O a) of 2 a in a yes EO) Fe) 5 2 So FHE ox a6 e< FN? OO op o SPE PES 8 AA RES: or AMA RO So 8 BEARER OE re DESE GRE TARE Bo GE often Bags SF Rees Ea ES Merely Ea OE GE: 32. of 8g 2 Bao EE OSZ8 Be BS PEEECEETAT ELE z SLR EE F a SE>NR5 8 Be Sees geeks a BE ST aw EU. e). ) Zoey a o) EU. a. Fe Q, ® o) & as) Tom ¥2>had on D ¢ & 5 OO free Teepee yes OT RM STRATOS ESR EE So FS SOB G 5 TO. a5 2% eye RD Shiloh EE c BP Red 25 5 Pp 2S a2o70 OC 5 Boe ES IES 2 C 23 BOP EB PR EE Roe AB BSEE ES AF 2 9. g FPO Sea SARS ERS FES Seems Tone

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ORDER): STRATOS ESR EE So FS SOB G 5 TO. a5 2% eye RD Shiloh EE c BP Red 25 5 Pp 2S a2o70 OC 5 Boe ES IES 2 C 23 BOP EB PR EE Roe AB BSEE ES AF 2 9. g FPO Sea SARS ERS FES Seems Tone DC ss SBF HAS. Eye in 8 SEG ZO 8 RO BOE OO —- O Basso g FAE s © a MH 2 @m 7a so PS. FO ere For ere Sac EAS Pe Sea 8: 2. S Roe ® Io - » BO OSHS SG Sans. EO OE 2 f ms AR OE her Be Bars oil SZERBQS Fe}, &. 2B o 8G OE Based RSs Sg TELE CTE Op OE. gee i Beech IEEE SG Bee SESS pogrom Ste. 88 Or OO SG He. BNONSE a F BPS, Key SERS EOR I. Pete a2 £3388 §! +o BOP er AOE A ZEE Ss » OB? OF SRE RET DAA 3223 F a of 27 2 ® 2 Preset S22 G SRRACE a EAE ere: er SS were Ry 655588 OF Oops ca: 5 BBQs wage see] Go SEM S ct PES Shea! EB BG 97 2 7. eye 4 BECE RS OO a 8 e GK S528 Earshot. FBO ZS 8 4.5868 © Ce -) T+ S Ching Bee BG or =o Six Ry eyes EO) SESE SS 3 EY : "ESE: OT 6. EEE Ha Sa2e@ By OO 5 5 SE SR 88 8S EEE the o> SA 38 OG SY MCA ans ire Send 5A 2 30. BP SZS ESR: for AA EU 9 Fe) DS a 2 SF a2 5 EEE g on a ty NBER: try OO (ap) 1.» goo y Page Gees a BS > F Sr EC ORS FO “SE GH Rey! ft ; 25H FARES ='U a5 eye >. s28 B. eye TO one BG i Acres 5 ET RAB >! Says GG AGG ° BP RRG 3 SRS EZ EE F 2 a FT re a eye _ TTEL as De 2A.5 3 yes : BERGE. B2 ‘@ eye OO ® 47 broke: M of OO, S BS =e © sf by 2! CES or SY Q SES EL? Phi Phi: - 6° 8886 F Go Ea ORES on Same GS Engagée - ear SB Se for BS SE 8 for} Ry IAEA! <a 3 A : BSR REE R © RO £ race 7H : Gao ES eyes Hale i PS EEE, o) » 2 : ; BSED ERE E ‘ BREE Om OD 28222523 Res EE HS OS SBE ESS RS Q e EES GSES

Question: What is case 1991 MLD 2093 about?
Answer: Case 1991 MLD 2093 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K)| on 1991-06-30. The case involved BASHIR AHMAD KHAN—PETITIONER VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, MUZAFFARABADAND ANOTHER—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN REHABILITATION) ACT (XLII OF 1956) - 8.12 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - 8.44 PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S.43(4) PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.43-A. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD SAJAWAL KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1991 MLD 2093?
Answer: In case 1991 MLD 2093, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN REHABILITATION) ACT (XLII OF 1956) - 8.12 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - 8.44 PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S.43(4) PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.43-A. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)| and decided on 1991-06-30.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1991 MLD 2093?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1991 MLD 2093 were: M. TABBASUM AFTAB ALVI FOR PETITIONER. RAJA SHER MUHAMMAD KHAN FOR RESPONDENT NO.2.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD SAJAWAL KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1991 MLD 2093?
Answer: The parties in case 1991 MLD 2093 were: BASHIR AHMAD KHAN—PETITIONER VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, MUZAFFARABADAND ANOTHER—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)|.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1991 MLD 2093.
Answer: This constitutional writ petition is directed against the order dated 5-5-1981 of learned Custodian of Evacuee Property Azad Jammu and Kashmir whereby he set aside the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner, Pooch dated 28-11-1969 pertaining to the allotment of the suit land in the name of petitioner. 2. Brief facts of the case are that a piece of land measuring 26 canals out of Survey Nos. 804 and 806 situate in village Jaguar, Thesis Bag, District Pooch stood allotted in the name of one Bashir Ahmad Khan s/o Kala Khan. The said allottee surrendered his above allotment m favor of Noor Ahmad Khan, the father of the petitioner by making an application on 7-9-1963 in a case pending in the Court of Deputy Custodian Bag in respect of the said land after which the same was allotted to the petitioner by the Rehabilitation Commissioner vide his order dated 28-11-1969. 3. The above allotment in the name of the petitioner was challenged by Her DU Khan, respondent in a revision petition before Rehabilitation Commissioner who dismissed the same vide his order dated 30-9-1980 on the ground that the allotment having been made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner was not revisable by him. Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid order Her DIL Khan (respondent No.2) filed a revision petition before the learned Custodian against the orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 28-11-1969 and 30-9-1989 respectively. The revision petition was accepted and the allotment of the suit land in the name of petitioner made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner was set aside by the learned Custodian vide his order dated 28-11- 1969 and the Nail-Tehsildar was directed to take necessary action against the unauthorized occupants of the aforesaid land. Hence the petitioner evoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Section 44 of the Inter Constitution Act, 1974. This writ petition was previously heard and disposed of by Mr. Justice Vardar Mohammad Ashraf Khan a learned Single Judge of this Court and was dismissed by him vide his order dated 28-4- 1985. But on appeal, the order of the learned Single Judge was set aside, and the petition was remanded to this Court for a fresh decision in the light of the observations of the Hon’BLE Supreme Court. 4. The file was made over to me for hearing and disposal under special orders of the Government. I have considered the arguments as were addressed by the learned counsel for each party. I have also examined the writ petition and the objections filed by the non- petitioners thereon. In para 2 of the writ petition, it is submitted by the petitioner that the WW. suit land was allotted to him by the Rehabilitation Department quite in accordance with the provisions of rules prescribed for making such allotments of land. Since no appeal was brought by the non-petitioners within the time provided for revision petition, the order of his allotment had become final. The revision petition brought at a belated stage by Her DIL Khan (non-petitioner No.2) was time-barred and was not main tamable, still the allotment of the suit land in his name was cancelled under the impugned order by the learned Custodian. According to the petitioner the period provided for revision petition against the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner was 15 days and not 45 days. It is also submitted by the petitioner that his allotment file was not summoned by the learned Custodian and allotment order of the suit land in his name was cancelled under the impugned order without examining the Revenue Record placed by him on that file. Her DIL Khan, non-petitioner No.2 was not a party to the allotment proceedings which were earlier initiated by the petitioner before the Rehabilitation authorities for the allotment of the suit land in his favor and as such he held no locus standi to bring a revision petition against the orders of Rehabilitation authorities before the learned Custodian. In their written objections the non- petitioners submitted to this Court that the allotment of the suit land in the name of petitioner was illegally maneuvered by the father of the petitioner who held a portion of that land in his possession. At the relevant time, the petitioner was the minor son of his father and was unable to take part in the allotment proceedings which were actually initiated and executed by his father. According to the non-petitioners, the allotment of suit in favor of the petitioner was forged one and the allotment order being void ab initio was not hit by the law of limitation. For reasons that the limitation does not run against such an order and hence the revision petition brought by them before the learned Custodian was attainable even if it was brought after the expiry of the period of limitation prescribed in the Rehabilitation Rules. 5. I have gone through the record placed on the file by either parties. The allotment file prepared by the Rehabilitation authorities is also available in this record and after perusing the same I have failed to come across any document which may be showing possession of the petitioner on the allotted piece of land before its allotment to the petitioner. In fact the suit land was previously allotted to Muhammad Bashir s/o Kala who is stated to have abandoned that land for being allotted to the petitioner or his father. I quite agree with this argument that the suit land was not legally allotted to the petitioner and as a matter of fact the father of the petitioner had illegally procured the order of allotment of the suit land in favor of petitioner, his Moor son. Hence the conclusion arrived at by the learned Custodian is quite correct and cannot be disturbed.’ 6. The next important post for determination by this Court is that of limitation. There is, no doubt, in it that under the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, Pakistan Rehabilitation Rules, 1951 are adapted to be followed in the territory of Azad Jammu and Kashmir with respect to the revision petitions to be brought before the learned Custodian against an order passed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. The period of limitation provided in these rules is 15 days. Unfortunately Her DIL Khan (non-petitioner No.2) was not a party to the allotment proceedings, but he brought a revision petition before the learned Custodian on 25-10-1980 against the orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 30-9-1980 and 28-11-1969 respectively. The first order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner was challenged through that petition after a long interval of more than ten years and the second was challenged after 33 days when it was made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. There is nothing on the record that the petitioner Her DIL Khan had made any application for condoning the delay in submission of his petition before the learned Custodian and as such in the given circumstances, the revision petition brought by Hirst before the learned Custodian was time-barred in both the cases. The learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to entertain a time-barred revision petition and for that reason the impugned order is also to be held as without jurisdiction. It is next argued that the orders of Rehabilitation Commissioner were ab initio void and the period of. Limitation prescribed does not run against passing of such an order. There can BER*no objection to it that the Rehabilitation Commissioner held the powers to make allotment of the suit land to anybody after it was abandoned by its previous allottee Muhammad Bashir s/o Kala. The order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner may be declared illegal by the competent authority but TT cannot be termed as void ab initio. Hence I find no force in this argument and the objection is brushed aside. There is yet another argument advanced on behalf of the non-petitioners that the learned Custodian was competent to revise the orders of Rehabilitation Commissioner so moth and the question of period of limitation was not involved to be decided by the learned Custodian. To answer this argument, it seems plausible that the relevant piece of law under which a revision petition before a Custodian against the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner has been allowed should be reproduced below for reference purposes:- SECTION 43. SUBSECTION The Custodian may, at any time, either of his WW. own motion or on an application made to him within the prescribed period in this behalf call for the record of any proceedings for the administration of evacuee property, which is pending before or has been disposed of BV. an Officer subordinate to him, including an Additional Custodian, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed in the said proceedings, and may pass such order MN relation thereto as he thinks fit: Provided that the Custodian shall not pass an order revising or modifying any order affecting any person without giving such person and the Rehabilitation Authority an opportunity of beg heard. A plain reading of the above section makes it clear that the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property has got the so moth powers to revise an order of Rehabilitation Commissioner even if an application has been brought before him challenging the allotment order of a Rehabilitation Commissioner and that petition is held as time-barred. If the impugned order of the learned Custodian is set aside for the simple reasons that the application brought before him was time-barred, it would amount placing an embargo on the so moth powers of the learned Custodian because the word ‘so moth’ gives unfettered powers to the learned Custodian and the period of limitation having run out in any case is of no legal consequence. 7. It is argued on behalf of the non-petitioners that under the provisions of section 43(A), the petitioner had a legal remedy available to him besides this petition and since he has not availed of that remedy, the present writ petition was without jurisdiction. I am afraid, cannot contribute to this view because under section 43(A) of Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 a revision petition before the High Court is competent only in those cases when the subject-matter of that petition is per taming to a declaration by the Custodian as to the character of certain property to be an evacuee property or non-evacuee property. In the instant case, the character of the suit land is not challenged. The suit land is the evacuee property and the parties arc litigating for its allotment. Accordingly, the objection has no force to stand upon despite the fact that the result of the present writ petition is not against the non-petitioners. 8. The upshot of the above discussion is that, the writ petition is dismissed. No order as to the costs. AA./472/H.C.A. Petition dismissed. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2093?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2093 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)|, 1991-06-30): This constitutional writ petition is directed against the order dated 5-5-1981 of learned Custodian of Evacuee Property Azad Jammu and Kashmir whereby he set aside the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner, Pooch dated 28-11-1969 pertaining to the allotment of the suit land in the name of petitioner. 2. Brief facts of the case are that a piece of land measuring 26 canals out of Survey Nos. 804 and 806 situate in village Jaguar, Thesis Bag, District Pooch stood allotted in the name of one Bashir Ahmad Khan s/o Kala Khan. The said allottee surrendered his above allotment m favor of Noor Ahmad Khan, the father of the petitioner by making an application on 7-9-1963 in a case pending in the Court of Deputy Custodian Bag in respect of the said land after which the same was allotted to the petitioner by the Rehabilitation Commissioner vide his order dated 28-11-1969. 3. The above allotment in the name of the petitioner was challenged by Her DU Khan, respondent in a revision petition before Rehabilitation Commissioner who dismissed the same vide his order dated 30-9-1980 on the ground that the allotment having been made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner was not revisable by him. Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid order Her DIL Khan (respondent No.2) filed a revision petition before the learned Custodian against the orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 28-11-1969 and 30-9-1989 respectively. The revision petition was accepted and the allotment of the suit land in the name of petitioner made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner was set aside by the learned Custodian vide his order dated 28-11- 1969 and the Nail-Tehsildar was directed to take necessary action against the unauthorized occupants of the aforesaid land. Hence the petitioner evoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Section 44 of the Inter Constitution Act, 1974. This writ petition was previously heard and disposed of by Mr. Justice Vardar Mohammad Ashraf Khan a learned Single Judge of this Court and was dismissed by him vide his order dated 28-4- 1985. But on appeal, the order of the learned Single Judge was set aside, and the petition was remanded to this Court for a fresh decision in the light of the observations of the Hon’BLE Supreme Court. 4. The file was made over to me for hearing and disposal under special orders of the Government. I have considered the arguments as were addressed by the learned counsel for each party. I have also examined the writ petition and the objections filed by the non- petitioners thereon. In para 2 of the writ petition, it is submitted by the petitioner that the WW. suit land was allotted to him by the Rehabilitation Department quite in accordance with the provisions of rules prescribed for making such allotments of land. Since no appeal was brought by the non-petitioners within the time provided for revision petition, the order of his allotment had become final. The revision petition brought at a belated stage by Her DIL Khan (non-petitioner No.2) was time-barred

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2093?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2093 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)|, 1991-06-30): the provisions of rules prescribed for making such allotments of land. Since no appeal was brought by the non-petitioners within the time provided for revision petition, the order of his allotment had become final. The revision petition brought at a belated stage by Her DIL Khan (non-petitioner No.2) was time-barred and was not main tamable, still the allotment of the suit land in his name was cancelled under the impugned order by the learned Custodian. According to the petitioner the period provided for revision petition against the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner was 15 days and not 45 days. It is also submitted by the petitioner that his allotment file was not summoned by the learned Custodian and allotment order of the suit land in his name was cancelled under the impugned order without examining the Revenue Record placed by him on that file. Her DIL Khan, non-petitioner No.2 was not a party to the allotment proceedings which were earlier initiated by the petitioner before the Rehabilitation authorities for the allotment of the suit land in his favor and as such he held no locus standi to bring a revision petition against the orders of Rehabilitation authorities before the learned Custodian. In their written objections the non- petitioners submitted to this Court that the allotment of the suit land in the name of petitioner was illegally maneuvered by the father of the petitioner who held a portion of that land in his possession. At the relevant time, the petitioner was the minor son of his father and was unable to take part in the allotment proceedings which were actually initiated and executed by his father. According to the non-petitioners, the allotment of suit in favor of the petitioner was forged one and the allotment order being void ab initio was not hit by the law of limitation. For reasons that the limitation does not run against such an order and hence the revision petition brought by them before the learned Custodian was attainable even if it was brought after the expiry of the period of limitation prescribed in the Rehabilitation Rules. 5. I have gone through the record placed on the file by either parties. The allotment file prepared by the Rehabilitation authorities is also available in this record and after perusing the same I have failed to come across any document which may be showing possession of the petitioner on the allotted piece of land before its allotment to the petitioner. In fact the suit land was previously allotted to Muhammad Bashir s/o Kala who is stated to have abandoned that land for being allotted to the petitioner or his father. I quite agree with this argument that the suit land was not legally allotted to the petitioner and as a matter of fact the father of the petitioner had illegally procured the order of allotment of the suit land in favor of petitioner, his Moor son. Hence the conclusion arrived at by the learned Custodian is quite correct and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2093?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2093 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)|, 1991-06-30): land was not legally allotted to the petitioner and as a matter of fact the father of the petitioner had illegally procured the order of allotment of the suit land in favor of petitioner, his Moor son. Hence the conclusion arrived at by the learned Custodian is quite correct and cannot be disturbed.’ 6. The next important post for determination by this Court is that of limitation. There is, no doubt, in it that under the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, Pakistan Rehabilitation Rules, 1951 are adapted to be followed in the territory of Azad Jammu and Kashmir with respect to the revision petitions to be brought before the learned Custodian against an order passed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. The period of limitation provided in these rules is 15 days. Unfortunately Her DIL Khan (non-petitioner No.2) was not a party to the allotment proceedings, but he brought a revision petition before the learned Custodian on 25-10-1980 against the orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 30-9-1980 and 28-11-1969 respectively. The first order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner was challenged through that petition after a long interval of more than ten years and the second was challenged after 33 days when it was made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. There is nothing on the record that the petitioner Her DIL Khan had made any application for condoning the delay in submission of his petition before the learned Custodian and as such in the given circumstances, the revision petition brought by Hirst before the learned Custodian was time-barred in both the cases. The learned Custodian had no jurisdiction to entertain a time-barred revision petition and for that reason the impugned order is also to be held as without jurisdiction. It is next argued that the orders of Rehabilitation Commissioner were ab initio void and the period of. Limitation prescribed does not run against passing of such an order. There can BER*no objection to it that the Rehabilitation Commissioner held the powers to make allotment of the suit land to anybody after it was abandoned by its previous allottee Muhammad Bashir s/o Kala. The order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner may be declared illegal by the competent authority but TT cannot be termed as void ab initio. Hence I find no force in this argument and the objection is brushed aside. There is yet another argument advanced on behalf of the non-petitioners that the learned Custodian was competent to revise the orders of Rehabilitation Commissioner so moth and the question of period of limitation was not involved to be decided by the learned Custodian. To answer this argument, it seems plausible that the relevant piece of law under which a revision petition before a Custodian against the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner has been allowed should be reproduced below for reference purposes:- SECTION 43. SUBSECTION The Custodian may, at any time, either of his WW. own motion or on an application made to him within the prescribed period in this behalf call for the record of any proceedings for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2093?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2093 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)|, 1991-06-30): of Rehabilitation Commissioner has been allowed should be reproduced below for reference purposes:- SECTION 43. SUBSECTION The Custodian may, at any time, either of his WW. own motion or on an application made to him within the prescribed period in this behalf call for the record of any proceedings for the administration of evacuee property, which is pending before or has been disposed of BV. an Officer subordinate to him, including an Additional Custodian, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed in the said proceedings, and may pass such order MN relation thereto as he thinks fit: Provided that the Custodian shall not pass an order revising or modifying any order affecting any person without giving such person and the Rehabilitation Authority an opportunity of beg heard. A plain reading of the above section makes it clear that the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property has got the so moth powers to revise an order of Rehabilitation Commissioner even if an application has been brought before him challenging the allotment order of a Rehabilitation Commissioner and that petition is held as time-barred. If the impugned order of the learned Custodian is set aside for the simple reasons that the application brought before him was time-barred, it would amount placing an embargo on the so moth powers of the learned Custodian because the word ‘so moth’ gives unfettered powers to the learned Custodian and the period of limitation having run out in any case is of no legal consequence. 7. It is argued on behalf of the non-petitioners that under the provisions of section 43(A), the petitioner had a legal remedy available to him besides this petition and since he has not availed of that remedy, the present writ petition was without jurisdiction. I am afraid, cannot contribute to this view because under section 43(A) of Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 a revision petition before the High Court is competent only in those cases when the subject-matter of that petition is per taming to a declaration by the Custodian as to the character of certain property to be an evacuee property or non-evacuee property. In the instant case, the character of the suit land is not challenged. The suit land is the evacuee property and the parties arc litigating for its allotment. Accordingly, the objection has no force to stand upon despite the fact that the result of the present writ petition is not against the non-petitioners. 8. The upshot of the above discussion is that, the writ petition is dismissed. No order as to the costs. AA./472/H.C.A. Petition dismissed. WW.

Question: What is case 1991 MLD 2102 about?
Answer: Case 1991 MLD 2102 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] on 1991-06-27. The case involved PURVAIZ AKHTAR—PETITIONER VERSUS MST. SALMA MUMTAZ— RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.IX, R.13 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.V, RR.10, 12, 13 AND 15 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.TX, R.6 MAXIM ISLAMIC JURISPRUDENCE. The case was heard by ABDUL MAJEED MALLICK, CJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: In case 1991 MLD 2102, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.IX, R.13 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.V, RR.10, 12, 13 AND 15 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O.TX, R.6 MAXIM ISLAMIC JURISPRUDENCE. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] and decided on 1991-06-27.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1991 MLD 2102 were: RIAZALAM FOR PETITIONER. AURANGZEB KHAN FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: ABDUL MAJEED MALLICK, CJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: The parties in case 1991 MLD 2102 were: PURVAIZ AKHTAR—PETITIONER VERSUS MST. SALMA MUMTAZ— RESPONDENT. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)].

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1991 MLD 2102.
Answer: The petition is addressed against the order of learned Sub-Judge, Mirror, passed on May 30, 1990, whereby ex parte decree passed in favor of the petitioner and against the respondent on January 17, 1989, was set aside. WW. 2. Purview Akhtar brought a suit for restitution of conjugal rights and perpetual junction against MST. Salma Mumbai, Fatal, her father and MST. Fatima Bibi, grandmother, in the Court of Sub-Judge, Mirror, on August 6,1985. It was averred that the manage of Purview Akhtar with MST. Salma Mumbai took place on July 15, 1985. A sum of Rs.8,000 was fixed and paid as dower money. MST. Salma Mumbai lived with Purview Akhtar as his wife for a week after the marriage when she visited the house of her parents and thereafter declined to come back. The defendants repudiated the aforesaid averments in their written statement and further alleged that MST. Salma Mumbai was not wife* of Purview Akhtar. The suit was male FIDE and no cause of action was available to the plaintiff’ The written statement was filed on December 3, 1985, through Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate. On that day, the Presiding Officer was on leave, therefore, the case was adjourned to January 9, 1986. On that day, the parties were summoned for their statements prior to framing of issues. On March 4,1986, the day when the parties had to appear for their statements before framing of issues, no one appeared before the Court, as such the suit was dismissed for want of prosecution. An application for restoration was moved in consequence of which the suit was restored on April 25, 1987. The parties were directed to appear before the Court on June 19. As June 19, was a closed day, the case was taken up on the next day. The defendants and their counsel were absent on that day, as such it was deemed expedient to issue notices to the defendants. After various adjournments, Fatal, respondent No.2 alone was served for his appearance before the Court, on December 26. MST. Salma Mumbai and MST. Fatima Bibi were not served, and Process Server made a report accordingly. On December 26, the Presiding Officer was on leave, presence of the Counsel for the parties was recorded. The proceedings, were adjourned for 11 times when on September 27, 1988, plaintiff was present, but none of the defendants appeared before the Court, as such ex parte order was made. The plaintiff was directed to lead ex parte evidence. Ex parte evidence was closed on January 16, 1989 and ex parte decree was passed on January 17, 1989, the next day. On September 10, 1989, an application to set aside the ex parte decree was moved by MST. Salma Mumbai alone. It was averred that the ex parte decree was passed in absence of due service of summons on the defendant-applicant. She came to know of the ex parte decree immediately before WW. filing of the application, as such, the same was desired to be set aside. The application was opposed by the present petitioner. The learned Sub-Judge framed issues. The onus of issues was on MST. Salma Mumbai. She appeared as a witness on January 25, 1990 and testified that the suit instituted against her was dismissed for want of prosecution. It was restored without her knowledge. As she was not duly served, she could not appear before the Court, in consequence of which ex parte decree was passed against her. In answer to a question in cross-examination, she was unable to identify her thumb-impression on the power of attorney executed in favor of her counsel. She was also unable to explain whether she was represented by Mr, Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate, before the dismissal of the suit for non-prosecution. It was further explained that her father regularly appeared in the Court to defend the suit. No evidence was led in rebuttal. The learned Sub-Judge relying on the testimony of MST. Salma Mumbai, fell persuaded to set aside the ex parte decree. and reopened the case for its decision on merits. This order has been assailed in the present petition. 3. On the last date, after partly harem the arguments, it was deemed expedient to examine Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate as a Court witness so as to enable this Court to resolve the controversy conclusively. The statement of Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate was recorded. He testified that he was engaged by the defendants to defend the suit of Purview Akhtar. The suit was dismissed for want of prosecution. Thereafter, he received no notice from the Court for his appearance on behalf of defendants. He received no instructions from the defendants to defend them m the suit. He denied his appearance in the Court, after the restoration of the suit. In answer lo a question in cross-examination, he emphatically denied having appeared in the Court on July 6, 1988. For this was the date when the interim order showing the presence of the counsel for the parties was recorded in the hand of the Presiding Officer himself’ Much emphasis was laid on the aforesaid order as all other term orders except the order of September 26, were recorded in the hand of the Clerk of Court. 4. Mr. Diaz Adam, the learned counsel for the petitioner assailed the finding of the learned Sub-Judge and argued that the learned Sub-Judge acted wrongly in setting aside the ex parte decree. In presence of service of summons on Fatal, father of MST. Salma Mumbai, for his appearance on December 26, 1987, Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate who represented all the defendants, appeared in the case under the instructions of his cents. As the appearance of the counsel was repeatedly endorsed in all the interim orders, including the order of July 6, 1988, there was a definite presumption to believe that the Counsel representing the defendants had appeared in the case. In this view of the matter, it was argued that the notice was duly served on the defendants and their absence to appear was a willful fault, as such ex parte order passed on September 27 and ex parte decree of January 17, 1989 were valid in the eye of law. In order to set aside ex parte decree, heavy onus was placed on the defendant respondent to satisfy the Court that she was not duly served or there was sufficient cause by which she was prevented to appear in the Court when the case was called on for harem. Such onus was not discharged in the eye of law. Mr. Aurangzeb, the learned counsel representing the respondent, controverted the aforesaid objections and supported the impugned order with reference to the evidence of MST. Salma Mumbai. 5. The rules of procedure attracted in the proposition to seek setting aside of ex parte decree as contemplated under Rule 13 of Order 9, C.P.C. postulate that the defendant may apply to the Court by which decree was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he satisfies the Court that summons was not duly served or that he was prevented BV any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on for harem the Court was empowered to set aside the decree as against him upon reasonable terms. The provisos described therein are not applicable to the proposition under consideration, as such they need not be reiterated. 6. A defendant seeking setting aside of ex parte decree has to satisfy the Court that:-— (i) summons was not duly served on him; or (1) that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on for hearing. Either of the aforesaid 2 conditions is to be fulfilled to set aside the ex parte decree. It TS not essential that both the conditions should be satisfied simultaneously as satisfaction of either of the conditions was sufficient in the eye of law, to recall the ex parte decree. In the WW. present case, the ground alleged by the defendant to set aside the ex parte decree rested on the former condition, viz. that the summons was not duly served upon the defendant. 7. Before taking up the point of,due service of summons on TNE defendant-respondent, it is relevant to state as to what is the ‘due service of summons on a party’. The mode of effecting service of summons has been evolved within the framework of the provisions of Order 5, C.P.C. Rules 10, 12, 13 and 15 are relevant rules to the mode of service. Rule 10 precisely provides that service of the summons shall be made by delivering or tendering a copy thereof to the defendant. When summons is served personally on the defendant by delivering or tendering its copy to him, ordinarily, it is deemed a substantial compliance with the provisions relating to do service of the summons. Rules 12 and 13 provide a scheme of service through agent of defendant. Rules 15 next, lays down that where the defendant cannot be found, and he has no agent to accept service, in that position, service may be made on any adult male member of his family who resided with him In present case, the summons addressed to defendant-respondent, admittedly, was not served on her IA either of the aforesaid manners. Therefore, there is no way out except to hold that the defendant-respondent was not duly served to appear before the Court. 8. The other aspect of the proposition as suggested by the learned counsel for the petitioner, is that Fatal, one of the defendants was properly served. He informed the counsel who represented all the defendants, including the respondent and the counsel put up his appearance before the Court. Thus, appearance of the counsel in the Court was a sufficient compliance with the provisions laid down under Order 5 of the Code. The question relating to appearance of the counsel is a question of fact. The term orders showing the presence of the counsel of the defendants, were recorded by the Clerk of Court/ Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, the learned counsel who represented the respondent, appeared as a witness and testified that he never appeared MN the trial Court after the dismissal of the suit in default. His testimony was tested by cross-examination. On going through his testimony, there is no reason to disbelieve him in order to sustain the objection. The position is rather otherwise as against the testimony of an Advocate, there is no counter-evidence to neutralize the stand taken by the Advocate. The Clerk who recorded the interim orders, was readily available, but he was not produced to rebut the testimony of Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate. 9. The interim order recorded by the Presiding Officer, of course, carries initial presumption in its favor, but such presumption is rebuttable. Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin who appeared as a Court witness, emphatically denied having ever appeared in the Court of Sub-Judge after dismissal of the suit for want of prosecution. Therefore, MN presence of tangible evidence of an Advocate, the initial presumption attached to the order of the Presiding Officer stands rebutted. Moreover, the defendant-respondent cannot be punished on account of knowledge of one of the defendants, relating to hearing of the suit. This is so as a defendant is not presumed to have knowledge of the proceedings on account of knowledge of its relative or a co-defendant. In such situation, it is seldom deemed expedient to decline to set aside ex parte decree. The refusal on the basis of such circumstances is least justified. In an identical situation in Heidi Abdul Radar’s case (1980 CLC 1206), Mr. Justice Hushed Ahmad OL served that refusal to set aside ex parte decree on the basis of knowledge of the proceedings on account of relationship, in the circumstances of the case, was not justified. 110. The other limb of the argument as analyzed earlier, relates to appearance of the Advocate, on account of service of the summons on Fatal, a co-defendant. It is already observed that Mr. M.Y. Arvin emphatically denied his knowledge of service of summons through co-defendant. He also denied having received instructions from the defendants to appear in the case. In Malik Muhammad Nazi’s case (PLD 1968 LAH. 792), the Presiding Officer, in addition to defendants, also issued notice to their Counsel for appearing in the Court. Notice was not served on the defendants but the counsel who received the notice, failed to appear in the Court on the due date. Service of summons on the counsel was not deemed sufficient compliance with the rules of procedure. In that case, as the defendant was not duly served in ordinary manner, substituted service was effected by issuing proclamation in one of the Daily newspapers. The learned Judge arrived at the conclusion that neither the service on the counsel nor the substituted service was sufficient compliance of the provisions in the eye of law, as such ex parte decree passed thereafter was set aside. 11. Mr. Justice Dora Patel, an eminent Judge of the country, observed in M/s. S.M. Raft Alleyway’s case (PLD 1971 Keir. 756) that when the defendant was not found guilty of gross negligence, cx part decree could not sustain. The learned Judge was of the view that mere negligence of defendant to appear in the Court did not warrant a severe action in the manner of ex parte decree unless Court was satisfied that he was guilty of gross negligence. 12. The rule of ‘audi alteram partem’, as a salutary rule, has gained much importance in civilized States of the world. It is equally a weighty rule in the administration of justice contemplated by injunctions of Islam. This is how it is listed upon that no one should be deprived of civil liberties and property unless provided due opportunity of harem. In presence of consensus of superior judiciary of the Sub-Continent, it is invariably deemed expedient not to punish a party on account of its minor negligence in defending an action in the Court of law unless such negligence was found accompanied by willful and deliberate act of defendant. The rules of procedure lay emphasis on due service of summons on a party so that such party was not deprived of its valuable right without provide an opportunity of defense. In the present case, as noticed earlier, the suit was dismissed for want of prosecution and thereafter it was duly restored. Ordinarily, [ it was advisable to provide an opportunity to defendants to defend the cause. Undoubtedly, summons was issued on various dates, but the same was not proved to have been duly served on the respondent. In such situation the respondent cannot be burdened with the liability of cx part decree for restitution of conjugal rights and perpetual junction. Here, it is relevant to mention that MST. Salma Mumbai admittedly, was married to one Affair Khan and there were already 3 children out of the wedlock. In such circumstances, if the ex parte decree passed against her is allowed to continue, it was going to bring disastrous effect on her life including the lives of the children. Therefore, the interest of justice demands that she should be afforded an adequate opportunity to defend the action brought against her. For it is always deemed fair and just to decide a case on merits instead of deciding it ex parte. 13. The learned Sub-Judge rightly set aside cx Paris decree and re-opened the case for its decision on merits. There is no defect in the impugned order. It 1s, therefore, upheld. The petition is dismissed. However, no order as to costs. Revision dismissed. AA /469/H.C.A. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2102 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 1991-06-27): The petition is addressed against the order of learned Sub-Judge, Mirror, passed on May 30, 1990, whereby ex parte decree passed in favor of the petitioner and against the respondent on January 17, 1989, was set aside. WW. 2. Purview Akhtar brought a suit for restitution of conjugal rights and perpetual junction against MST. Salma Mumbai, Fatal, her father and MST. Fatima Bibi, grandmother, in the Court of Sub-Judge, Mirror, on August 6,1985. It was averred that the manage of Purview Akhtar with MST. Salma Mumbai took place on July 15, 1985. A sum of Rs.8,000 was fixed and paid as dower money. MST. Salma Mumbai lived with Purview Akhtar as his wife for a week after the marriage when she visited the house of her parents and thereafter declined to come back. The defendants repudiated the aforesaid averments in their written statement and further alleged that MST. Salma Mumbai was not wife* of Purview Akhtar. The suit was male FIDE and no cause of action was available to the plaintiff’ The written statement was filed on December 3, 1985, through Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate. On that day, the Presiding Officer was on leave, therefore, the case was adjourned to January 9, 1986. On that day, the parties were summoned for their statements prior to framing of issues. On March 4,1986, the day when the parties had to appear for their statements before framing of issues, no one appeared before the Court, as such the suit was dismissed for want of prosecution. An application for restoration was moved in consequence of which the suit was restored on April 25, 1987. The parties were directed to appear before the Court on June 19. As June 19, was a closed day, the case was taken up on the next day. The defendants and their counsel were absent on that day, as such it was deemed expedient to issue notices to the defendants. After various adjournments, Fatal, respondent No.2 alone was served for his appearance before the Court, on December 26. MST. Salma Mumbai and MST. Fatima Bibi were not served, and Process Server made a report accordingly. On December 26, the Presiding Officer was on leave, presence of the Counsel for the parties was recorded. The proceedings, were adjourned for 11 times when on September 27, 1988, plaintiff was present, but none of the defendants appeared before the Court, as such ex parte order was made. The plaintiff was directed to lead ex parte evidence. Ex parte evidence was closed on January 16, 1989 and ex parte decree was passed on January 17, 1989, the next day. On September 10, 1989, an application to set aside the ex parte decree was moved by MST. Salma Mumbai alone. It was averred that the ex parte decree was passed in absence of due service of summons on the defendant-applicant. She came to know of the ex parte decree immediately before WW. filing of the application, as such, the same was desired to be

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2102 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 1991-06-27): moved by MST. Salma Mumbai alone. It was averred that the ex parte decree was passed in absence of due service of summons on the defendant-applicant. She came to know of the ex parte decree immediately before WW. filing of the application, as such, the same was desired to be set aside. The application was opposed by the present petitioner. The learned Sub-Judge framed issues. The onus of issues was on MST. Salma Mumbai. She appeared as a witness on January 25, 1990 and testified that the suit instituted against her was dismissed for want of prosecution. It was restored without her knowledge. As she was not duly served, she could not appear before the Court, in consequence of which ex parte decree was passed against her. In answer to a question in cross-examination, she was unable to identify her thumb-impression on the power of attorney executed in favor of her counsel. She was also unable to explain whether she was represented by Mr, Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate, before the dismissal of the suit for non-prosecution. It was further explained that her father regularly appeared in the Court to defend the suit. No evidence was led in rebuttal. The learned Sub-Judge relying on the testimony of MST. Salma Mumbai, fell persuaded to set aside the ex parte decree. and reopened the case for its decision on merits. This order has been assailed in the present petition. 3. On the last date, after partly harem the arguments, it was deemed expedient to examine Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate as a Court witness so as to enable this Court to resolve the controversy conclusively. The statement of Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate was recorded. He testified that he was engaged by the defendants to defend the suit of Purview Akhtar. The suit was dismissed for want of prosecution. Thereafter, he received no notice from the Court for his appearance on behalf of defendants. He received no instructions from the defendants to defend them m the suit. He denied his appearance in the Court, after the restoration of the suit. In answer lo a question in cross-examination, he emphatically denied having appeared in the Court on July 6, 1988. For this was the date when the interim order showing the presence of the counsel for the parties was recorded in the hand of the Presiding Officer himself’ Much emphasis was laid on the aforesaid order as all other term orders except the order of September 26, were recorded in the hand of the Clerk of Court. 4. Mr. Diaz Adam, the learned counsel for the petitioner assailed the finding of the learned Sub-Judge and argued that the learned Sub-Judge acted wrongly in setting aside the ex parte decree. In presence of service of summons on Fatal, father of MST. Salma Mumbai, for his appearance on December 26, 1987, Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate who represented all the defendants, appeared in the case under the instructions of his cents. As the appearance of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2102 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 1991-06-27): aside the ex parte decree. In presence of service of summons on Fatal, father of MST. Salma Mumbai, for his appearance on December 26, 1987, Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate who represented all the defendants, appeared in the case under the instructions of his cents. As the appearance of the counsel was repeatedly endorsed in all the interim orders, including the order of July 6, 1988, there was a definite presumption to believe that the Counsel representing the defendants had appeared in the case. In this view of the matter, it was argued that the notice was duly served on the defendants and their absence to appear was a willful fault, as such ex parte order passed on September 27 and ex parte decree of January 17, 1989 were valid in the eye of law. In order to set aside ex parte decree, heavy onus was placed on the defendant respondent to satisfy the Court that she was not duly served or there was sufficient cause by which she was prevented to appear in the Court when the case was called on for harem. Such onus was not discharged in the eye of law. Mr. Aurangzeb, the learned counsel representing the respondent, controverted the aforesaid objections and supported the impugned order with reference to the evidence of MST. Salma Mumbai. 5. The rules of procedure attracted in the proposition to seek setting aside of ex parte decree as contemplated under Rule 13 of Order 9, C.P.C. postulate that the defendant may apply to the Court by which decree was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he satisfies the Court that summons was not duly served or that he was prevented BV any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on for harem the Court was empowered to set aside the decree as against him upon reasonable terms. The provisos described therein are not applicable to the proposition under consideration, as such they need not be reiterated. 6. A defendant seeking setting aside of ex parte decree has to satisfy the Court that:-— (i) summons was not duly served on him; or (1) that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on for hearing. Either of the aforesaid 2 conditions is to be fulfilled to set aside the ex parte decree. It TS not essential that both the conditions should be satisfied simultaneously as satisfaction of either of the conditions was sufficient in the eye of law, to recall the ex parte decree. In the WW. present case, the ground alleged by the defendant to set aside the ex parte decree rested on the former condition, viz. that the summons was not duly served upon the defendant. 7. Before taking up the point of,due service of summons on TNE defendant-respondent, it is relevant to state as to what is the ‘due service of summons on a party’. The mode of effecting service of summons has been evolved within

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2102 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 1991-06-27): the summons was not duly served upon the defendant. 7. Before taking up the point of,due service of summons on TNE defendant-respondent, it is relevant to state as to what is the ‘due service of summons on a party’. The mode of effecting service of summons has been evolved within the framework of the provisions of Order 5, C.P.C. Rules 10, 12, 13 and 15 are relevant rules to the mode of service. Rule 10 precisely provides that service of the summons shall be made by delivering or tendering a copy thereof to the defendant. When summons is served personally on the defendant by delivering or tendering its copy to him, ordinarily, it is deemed a substantial compliance with the provisions relating to do service of the summons. Rules 12 and 13 provide a scheme of service through agent of defendant. Rules 15 next, lays down that where the defendant cannot be found, and he has no agent to accept service, in that position, service may be made on any adult male member of his family who resided with him In present case, the summons addressed to defendant-respondent, admittedly, was not served on her IA either of the aforesaid manners. Therefore, there is no way out except to hold that the defendant-respondent was not duly served to appear before the Court. 8. The other aspect of the proposition as suggested by the learned counsel for the petitioner, is that Fatal, one of the defendants was properly served. He informed the counsel who represented all the defendants, including the respondent and the counsel put up his appearance before the Court. Thus, appearance of the counsel in the Court was a sufficient compliance with the provisions laid down under Order 5 of the Code. The question relating to appearance of the counsel is a question of fact. The term orders showing the presence of the counsel of the defendants, were recorded by the Clerk of Court/ Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, the learned counsel who represented the respondent, appeared as a witness and testified that he never appeared MN the trial Court after the dismissal of the suit in default. His testimony was tested by cross-examination. On going through his testimony, there is no reason to disbelieve him in order to sustain the objection. The position is rather otherwise as against the testimony of an Advocate, there is no counter-evidence to neutralize the stand taken by the Advocate. The Clerk who recorded the interim orders, was readily available, but he was not produced to rebut the testimony of Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin, Advocate. 9. The interim order recorded by the Presiding Officer, of course, carries initial presumption in its favor, but such presumption is rebuttable. Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin who appeared as a Court witness, emphatically denied having ever appeared in the Court of Sub-Judge after dismissal of the suit for want of prosecution. Therefore, MN presence of tangible evidence of an Advocate, the initial presumption attached to the order of the Presiding

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2102 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 1991-06-27): is rebuttable. Mr. Muhammad Yunus Arvin who appeared as a Court witness, emphatically denied having ever appeared in the Court of Sub-Judge after dismissal of the suit for want of prosecution. Therefore, MN presence of tangible evidence of an Advocate, the initial presumption attached to the order of the Presiding Officer stands rebutted. Moreover, the defendant-respondent cannot be punished on account of knowledge of one of the defendants, relating to hearing of the suit. This is so as a defendant is not presumed to have knowledge of the proceedings on account of knowledge of its relative or a co-defendant. In such situation, it is seldom deemed expedient to decline to set aside ex parte decree. The refusal on the basis of such circumstances is least justified. In an identical situation in Heidi Abdul Radar’s case (1980 CLC 1206), Mr. Justice Hushed Ahmad OL served that refusal to set aside ex parte decree on the basis of knowledge of the proceedings on account of relationship, in the circumstances of the case, was not justified. 110. The other limb of the argument as analyzed earlier, relates to appearance of the Advocate, on account of service of the summons on Fatal, a co-defendant. It is already observed that Mr. M.Y. Arvin emphatically denied his knowledge of service of summons through co-defendant. He also denied having received instructions from the defendants to appear in the case. In Malik Muhammad Nazi’s case (PLD 1968 LAH. 792), the Presiding Officer, in addition to defendants, also issued notice to their Counsel for appearing in the Court. Notice was not served on the defendants but the counsel who received the notice, failed to appear in the Court on the due date. Service of summons on the counsel was not deemed sufficient compliance with the rules of procedure. In that case, as the defendant was not duly served in ordinary manner, substituted service was effected by issuing proclamation in one of the Daily newspapers. The learned Judge arrived at the conclusion that neither the service on the counsel nor the substituted service was sufficient compliance of the provisions in the eye of law, as such ex parte decree passed thereafter was set aside. 11. Mr. Justice Dora Patel, an eminent Judge of the country, observed in M/s. S.M. Raft Alleyway’s case (PLD 1971 Keir. 756) that when the defendant was not found guilty of gross negligence, cx part decree could not sustain. The learned Judge was of the view that mere negligence of defendant to appear in the Court did not warrant a severe action in the manner of ex parte decree unless Court was satisfied that he was guilty of gross negligence. 12. The rule of ‘audi alteram partem’, as a salutary rule, has gained much importance in civilized States of the world. It is equally a weighty rule in the administration of justice contemplated by injunctions of Islam. This is how it is listed upon that no one should be deprived of civil liberties and property unless

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2102?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2102 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 1991-06-27): partem’, as a salutary rule, has gained much importance in civilized States of the world. It is equally a weighty rule in the administration of justice contemplated by injunctions of Islam. This is how it is listed upon that no one should be deprived of civil liberties and property unless provided due opportunity of harem. In presence of consensus of superior judiciary of the Sub-Continent, it is invariably deemed expedient not to punish a party on account of its minor negligence in defending an action in the Court of law unless such negligence was found accompanied by willful and deliberate act of defendant. The rules of procedure lay emphasis on due service of summons on a party so that such party was not deprived of its valuable right without provide an opportunity of defense. In the present case, as noticed earlier, the suit was dismissed for want of prosecution and thereafter it was duly restored. Ordinarily, [ it was advisable to provide an opportunity to defendants to defend the cause. Undoubtedly, summons was issued on various dates, but the same was not proved to have been duly served on the respondent. In such situation the respondent cannot be burdened with the liability of cx part decree for restitution of conjugal rights and perpetual junction. Here, it is relevant to mention that MST. Salma Mumbai admittedly, was married to one Affair Khan and there were already 3 children out of the wedlock. In such circumstances, if the ex parte decree passed against her is allowed to continue, it was going to bring disastrous effect on her life including the lives of the children. Therefore, the interest of justice demands that she should be afforded an adequate opportunity to defend the action brought against her. For it is always deemed fair and just to decide a case on merits instead of deciding it ex parte. 13. The learned Sub-Judge rightly set aside cx Paris decree and re-opened the case for its decision on merits. There is no defect in the impugned order. It 1s, therefore, upheld. The petition is dismissed. However, no order as to costs. Revision dismissed. AA /469/H.C.A. WW.

Question: What is case 1991 MLD 2353 about?
Answer: Case 1991 MLD 2353 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1991-06-10. The case involved DIN MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS—APPELLANTSVERSUS EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST BOARD AND OTHERS —RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIIL OF 1958) - S. 444) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.10. The case was heard by KHALIL-UR-REHMAN KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1991 MLD 2353?
Answer: In case 1991 MLD 2353, the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIIL OF 1958) - S. 444) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.10. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1991-06-10.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1991 MLD 2353?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1991 MLD 2353 were: CH. MUHAMMAD HUSSAIN FOR APPELLANTS. MALIK AZAM RASOOL FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: KHALIL-UR-REHMAN KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1991 MLD 2353?
Answer: The parties in case 1991 MLD 2353 were: DIN MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS—APPELLANTSVERSUS EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST BOARD AND OTHERS —RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1991 MLD 2353.
Answer: The facts necessary for the disposal of this Settlement Appeal under section 4(4) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, are that Evacuee Trust Property Board, respondent No.], instituted a reference dated 10-7-1965 against the appellants in the Court of the then 11 Settlement Commissioner, Lahore, under section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act as amended by Ordinance XIII of 1964 for a declaration that Property NOA/165, Bazaar Hakim an, Inside Bhakti Gate, Lahore, was evacuee property and as such could not legally be transferred to the appellants. The learned Settlement Commissioner after framing necessary issues and recording evidence of the parties answered the reference by declaring the property in question as evacuee trust property. It was further held that the property having not gone to the compensation pool constituted under the Act, could not be transferred to any refugee against his claim. This declaration was made vide order, dated 13-4- 1967, which was then challenged by filing the present appeal. ' 2. The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act was repealed by Evacuee Property and Displaced Persons Laws (Repeal) Ordinance, 1974 which was then repealed by the Evacuee Property and Displaced Persons Laws (Repeal) Act, 1975, with effect from IST July, 1974. Simultaneously with the repeal of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act another Act namely the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Ordinance, 1974 was promulgated and enforced. This Ordinance was then repealed by the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 (XIII of 1975). Section 10 of the same is to the following effect-—— "10(1) An immovable evacuee trust property,— (a) if situated in a rural area and utilized bona fide under any Act prior to June, 1964, for allotment against the satisfaction of verified claims; and (b) if situated in an urban area and utilized bona fide under any Act for transfer against the satisfaction of verified claims in respect of which Permanent Transfer Deeds were issued prior to June, 1968, shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and the sale proceeds thereof shall be reimbursed to the Board and shall form part of the Trust Pool. (2) If a question arises whether a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is bona fide or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (3) 3. Learned counsel for the appellants while arguing the appeal on 20th February, 1991, represented that a P.T.O. issued before the terminal date 1e. 30th June, 1968, was held to be effective in law and that the transfer was treated to have stood validated under section WW. 10’ of the above Act in Tapir Ali v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1987 Keir. 290. In view of the aforesaid representation this Court TN its order dated 11th March, 1991 observed that the respondent-Board can examine the transfer for the purpose of seeing that it was made bona fide in pursuance of a verified claim and accordingly the Chairman of the respondent-Board was directed to take up this exercise and make a report by 14th April, 1991. The validity of the transfer was examined by the Chairman after affording hearing to the parties and vide order dated 6-6-1991 rejected the request of the transferees for validation of transfer of property in question observing that there was nothing on record about conditions (b) and (c) 1e. bona fide transfer and the transfer having been effected in satisfaction of verified claims. 4. The Settlement Appeal was filed to assail the order, dated 13th April, 1967, whereby the Settlement Commissioner had, on a reference under section 4(3) of the Act, held the property to be WAAF property. The question whether the property is not a WAAF property is not being urged now as at this stage the plea of the appellants is that the transfer made to them of the property in dispute stands validated under section 10(1) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975. If that is the situation then the order dated 13-4-1967 impugned in this petition is no longer in challenge. The question now is whether the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board has rightly and validly held that the transaction of transfer was bona fide or not or that whether the transfer was made against a verified claim. A fresh cause of action has as such accrued to the appellants with the passing of the order dated 6-6-1991. This order can be assailed by filing a revision petition before the Federal Government under section 17 of Act XIII of 1975. 5. Before parting with this judgment I may add that the learned Chairman should have himself called for the record for receiving satisfaction on whether the transfer in question was bona fide and had been obtained against verified claim and should not have answered the reference with the observation that there was nothing on record to enable him to give any finding regarding the existence of these two ingredients. The statutory functionaries have to keep in mind that the proceedings before them are quasi-judicial proceedings and as pointed out by the Supreme Court in Chief Administrator of Sugar v. Muhammad Roman PLD 1991 SC 102 it is the legal and religious obligation BMG functionaries of an Islamic State to see that no person is deprived of his property otherwise than in due course of law and inability of a party to adduce a particular piece of evidence WW. would not absolve the statutory functionaries of the duty to obtain relevant evidence, from the concerned quarters and then to decide the matter in accordance with law. Had the learned Chairman summoned the record from the settlement office the question of bona fide of the transfer and also whether the same had been obtained m satisfaction of verified claim could easily be determined. It is hoped that now if the appellants approach the Federal Government this exercise will be undertaken in letter and spirit and the rights of the parties will be determined MN accordance with law as expeditiously as possible keeping in mind that the appellants have been pursuing the matter since 1959 with the submission of the form seeking transfer of the property. Their misery must come to an end within the shortest possible time. 6. With this observation this Settlement Appeal stands disposed of ™P#!cealdatabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2353?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2353 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1991-06-10): The facts necessary for the disposal of this Settlement Appeal under section 4(4) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, are that Evacuee Trust Property Board, respondent No.], instituted a reference dated 10-7-1965 against the appellants in the Court of the then 11 Settlement Commissioner, Lahore, under section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act as amended by Ordinance XIII of 1964 for a declaration that Property NOA/165, Bazaar Hakim an, Inside Bhakti Gate, Lahore, was evacuee property and as such could not legally be transferred to the appellants. The learned Settlement Commissioner after framing necessary issues and recording evidence of the parties answered the reference by declaring the property in question as evacuee trust property. It was further held that the property having not gone to the compensation pool constituted under the Act, could not be transferred to any refugee against his claim. This declaration was made vide order, dated 13-4- 1967, which was then challenged by filing the present appeal. ' 2. The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act was repealed by Evacuee Property and Displaced Persons Laws (Repeal) Ordinance, 1974 which was then repealed by the Evacuee Property and Displaced Persons Laws (Repeal) Act, 1975, with effect from IST July, 1974. Simultaneously with the repeal of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act another Act namely the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Ordinance, 1974 was promulgated and enforced. This Ordinance was then repealed by the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 (XIII of 1975). Section 10 of the same is to the following effect-—— "10(1) An immovable evacuee trust property,— (a) if situated in a rural area and utilized bona fide under any Act prior to June, 1964, for allotment against the satisfaction of verified claims; and (b) if situated in an urban area and utilized bona fide under any Act for transfer against the satisfaction of verified claims in respect of which Permanent Transfer Deeds were issued prior to June, 1968, shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and the sale proceeds thereof shall be reimbursed to the Board and shall form part of the Trust Pool. (2) If a question arises whether a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is bona fide or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (3) 3. Learned counsel for the appellants while arguing the appeal on 20th February, 1991, represented that a P.T.O. issued before the terminal date 1e. 30th June, 1968, was held to be effective in law and that the transfer was treated to have stood validated under section WW. 10’ of the above Act in Tapir Ali v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1987 Keir. 290. In view of the aforesaid representation this Court TN its order dated 11th March, 1991 observed that the respondent-Board can examine the transfer for the purpose of seeing that it

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2353?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2353 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1991-06-10): validated under section WW. 10’ of the above Act in Tapir Ali v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1987 Keir. 290. In view of the aforesaid representation this Court TN its order dated 11th March, 1991 observed that the respondent-Board can examine the transfer for the purpose of seeing that it was made bona fide in pursuance of a verified claim and accordingly the Chairman of the respondent-Board was directed to take up this exercise and make a report by 14th April, 1991. The validity of the transfer was examined by the Chairman after affording hearing to the parties and vide order dated 6-6-1991 rejected the request of the transferees for validation of transfer of property in question observing that there was nothing on record about conditions (b) and (c) 1e. bona fide transfer and the transfer having been effected in satisfaction of verified claims. 4. The Settlement Appeal was filed to assail the order, dated 13th April, 1967, whereby the Settlement Commissioner had, on a reference under section 4(3) of the Act, held the property to be WAAF property. The question whether the property is not a WAAF property is not being urged now as at this stage the plea of the appellants is that the transfer made to them of the property in dispute stands validated under section 10(1) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975. If that is the situation then the order dated 13-4-1967 impugned in this petition is no longer in challenge. The question now is whether the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board has rightly and validly held that the transaction of transfer was bona fide or not or that whether the transfer was made against a verified claim. A fresh cause of action has as such accrued to the appellants with the passing of the order dated 6-6-1991. This order can be assailed by filing a revision petition before the Federal Government under section 17 of Act XIII of 1975. 5. Before parting with this judgment I may add that the learned Chairman should have himself called for the record for receiving satisfaction on whether the transfer in question was bona fide and had been obtained against verified claim and should not have answered the reference with the observation that there was nothing on record to enable him to give any finding regarding the existence of these two ingredients. The statutory functionaries have to keep in mind that the proceedings before them are quasi-judicial proceedings and as pointed out by the Supreme Court in Chief Administrator of Sugar v. Muhammad Roman PLD 1991 SC 102 it is the legal and religious obligation BMG functionaries of an Islamic State to see that no person is deprived of his property otherwise than in due course of law and inability of a party to adduce a particular piece of evidence WW. would not absolve the statutory functionaries of the duty to obtain relevant evidence, from the concerned quarters and then to decide the matter in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 MLD 2353?
Answer: From case 1991 MLD 2353 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1991-06-10): person is deprived of his property otherwise than in due course of law and inability of a party to adduce a particular piece of evidence WW. would not absolve the statutory functionaries of the duty to obtain relevant evidence, from the concerned quarters and then to decide the matter in accordance with law. Had the learned Chairman summoned the record from the settlement office the question of bona fide of the transfer and also whether the same had been obtained m satisfaction of verified claim could easily be determined. It is hoped that now if the appellants approach the Federal Government this exercise will be undertaken in letter and spirit and the rights of the parties will be determined MN accordance with law as expeditiously as possible keeping in mind that the appellants have been pursuing the matter since 1959 with the submission of the form seeking transfer of the property. Their misery must come to an end within the shortest possible time. 6. With this observation this Settlement Appeal stands disposed of ™P#!cealdatabase.com

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1991-02-10. The case involved SECRETARY DISTRICT EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY VERSUS QAZI HABIBULLAH AND OTHERS. The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT 1958 - S.4 (3). The case was heard by DR. NASIM HASAN SHAH AND RUSTAM S.SIDHWA.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT 1958 - S.4 (3). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1991-02-10.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANTS: CH.FAZAI-I-HUSSAIN, ASC, INSTRUCTED BY MUHAMMAD ASLAM CH. AOR.FOR THE RESPONDENT NO.L: A.R.SHAUBAT, SR. ASC, MOHAMMAD IQBAL, ASC AND MIAN ATAUR RAHMAN, AOR.. The judges presiding were: DR. NASIM HASAN SHAH AND RUSTAM S.SIDHWA.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: SECRETARY DISTRICT EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY VERSUS QAZI HABIBULLAH AND OTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: NASIM HASAN SHAH, J.- The relevant facts are that respondent No.l (Nazi Abdullah), a claimant displaced person, was allotted a garden measuring 29 canals 8 WW. Marley (constituting a part of Kara No.9663) situate in the urban area of Asur vide order of the Garden Allotment Committee dated 27.6.1955. (This area is now being described as Kara No. ). 2. However, sometimes in 3960, the Kara in question was taken over by the Evacuee Trust Board (hereafter called the Board) and the allotment of respondent No.! was cancelled on the ground that it was an evacuee property vide order of the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner (Land) dated 3.11.1960. Subsequently, the land in question along with some other land was auctioned by the Board in open auction and Muhammad Kiddie son of Nazi Abdullah, respondent No.], was the highest bidder at the auction of this land for Sharif 1963 to Rabbi 1965 and came into possession of the land under the auction. His father, (respondent No.]), however being desirous of retaining the allotment earlier made in his favor filed a writ petition in the High Court of West Pakistan for this purpose, but the same was dismissed as withdrawn with observations that the writ petitioner may file an appeal before the Chief Settlement Commissioner under Section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act 1958 seeking a declaration that the land in question was not an evacuee trust property, if so advised. An appeal under Section 4(3) of the said Act was, accordingly, filed by him before the Chief Settlement Commissioner which was entrusted to Mr. Muhammad Shall Afar, Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Lahore exercising the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, but he dismissed the appeal vide order dated 23.1.1970 with the following observations: "The documents produced by the petitioner as well as the respondent show that State is the owner of the disputed land. Salad Ram Cheka Sowarsati Days Said Bragi was recorded as Dakhilkar under a Committee in the year 1891-92. Mahan GOP Days Cheka Sowarsati Days Said Bragi was recorded as Dakhilkar MN 1911-12. Mutation No.1707 medicates that Batsman Days Cheka of Mahan GOP Days was recorded as ‘Dakhilkar’ and he was replaced by Manner Hard Heir by means of this mutation. Manner Hard Heir continued to be recorded as *Dakhilkar’ in the subsequent registers Mandarin Gamin 1938-39 and 1945-46 through Mahan Ramzi Days Baja Johan Days, detailed report of the Tonsilar dated 22.10.1936 exists on Mutation No.1707 on which this mutation in favor of Manner Hard Heir was sanctioned by the Collector. A perusal of this report indicates that certain persons had instituted a suit in the Civil Court claiming ownership of the disputed land; but the suit was dismissed, and it was also held by the Civil Court that the Manager could be selected by the public. It was held by the Tonsilar that the property belonged to Manner Hard Heir. The WW. petitioner argues that a Major part of the land under the occupancy tenancy of Manner Hard Heir has been allotted by the Border Allotment Committee to one Col. Names-ud-Din An sari and Ex.P.10 has been produced in support of this contention. It is argued that the allotment of other land of Manner Hard Heir to the said Colonel is proof that the land is not Evacuee Trust Property. The other land is not subjudicc before me at present, and it is’ for the Evacuee rust Committee authorities to take necessary action in respect of its allotment. The documents produced by each side clearly establish that Manner Hard Heir is the occupancy tenant of the disputed land and there is therefore no doubt left that this land is attached to a religious institution as a Manor is nothing but a religious institution. In view of this, this petition is rejected, and the declaration asked for is refused". 3. Dissatisfied with this order, the respondents filed an appeal under Section 4(4) of the Act praying for setting aside of the above order passed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner and for restoration of the order of the Garden Allotment Committee dated 27.6.1955. This appeal was accepted by a learned Single Judge of the High Court who observed, interalar, as follows: "All the documents which have been placed on record by the contesting parties go to show that the property is otherwise owned by the State and, as mentioned above, till 1936 it was in the name of different Mah ants and Gurus as Railcars, but later on vide Mutation No.1707 Dakhilkari rights their were transferred in the name of Manner Hard Heir. I am afraid, the material on record, which has been relied upon by the learned Chief Settlement Commissioner in declaring the property to be evacuee trust property is not sufficient to declare it as such. According to Hindu Law in order to constitute a public trust the author or authors of the same must be ascertained and the mention to create a trust must be indicated by words or acts with reasonable certainty. Moreover, the purpose of trust, the trust property and the beneficiaries must be indicated so as to enable the Court to adm mister trust, if required". 4. In reaching his decision the learned Judge relied upon a judgment earlier delivered by him in a case wherein he had elaborately dealt with this subject namely S. Abdus Saleem and 153 others Vs. Chairman Evacuee Property Trust Board and another (PU 1975 Lahore 105). On account of his view, as expressed in the aforesaid judgment and reiterated by him in the present case, the learned Judge was pleased to allow the appeal and to set-aside the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23.1.1970. This appeal, WW. by leave of this Court, is directed against the aforesaid judgment of the learned Single Judge of the High Court dated 4.6.1974. Learned counsel for the parties have been heard. 5. We observe that the judgment relied upon by the learned Single Judge namely Abdul Saleem and 153 others Vs. Chairman. Evacuee Property Trust Board and another (PU 1975 Lahore 105) has been expressly set-aside by this Court in Evacuee Trust Property Board. Lahore and another Vs. Sved Abdul Saleem and others (1990 S.C.M.R. 143). In fact, this Court has had occasion to deal with the question arising in this case, in some other judgments as well. Thus, in the case of District Evacuee Trust Committee Vs. Ashraf Khan and 3 others (1989 S.C.M.R. 1636) where the question was whether in the absence of any deed of trust indicating the real purpose of trust, mere production of the extract from the Record of Rights or City Surveys which describe a property as "Dharamshala" "Piano" or by other similar expression, any such property can be declared to be attached to a religious, charitable or educational trust for the purpose of Section of Act XXVIII of 1958, it was held that the entries in the official record taken as a whole leave no measure of doubt that the property was conveyed by endowment for the charitable purpose of Dharamshala and there is no medication or any other evidence produced to show that the property was privately owned by any person. Therefore, applying the rule of preponderance of evidence the issue was decided in favor of the appellant that the property was attached to a religious and charitable trust. Similarly, this Court in District Evacuee Trust Committee Vs. Muhammad Umar others (Civil Appeal No.K-31 of 1973) vide judgment delivered on 25.4.1989 observed:- v' "It is difficult to subscribe to the view taken by the High Court that in the absence of the trust deed a property could not be declared to be attached to a religious or charitable trust. It is to be noticed that a document creating a trust under the Hindu Laws docs not require registration. In this case, all the trustees were Hindus who left Pakistan at about the time of Independence. The trust deed must have been in their possession. That being so, to demand that the trust deed must be produced before a property can be declared as attached to a religious or charitable trust is in the circumstances a tall order. On the other hand, there is no reason why the presumption of correctness which attaches to official records from TT remains unrebutted, should not be given effect in deciding the nature of the property.” 6. WW. Thus, the view of this Court on this question is that if sufficient prima-phatic evidence is adduced for showing that the property in question was attached to a religious or charitable institution and this evidence is not displaced by any other reliable evidence, the burden of showing actual creation of trust on the party asserting that the properly is attached to a religious or charitable trust is not essential and the matter can be decided on the rule of preponderance of evidence. 7. In the present case, the entries in the revenue record from 1936 onwards consistently show that the property belonged to Manner Hard Heir. The conduct, user and treatment of the property also indicate that the property was attached to the said Manner and no cogent evidence posting to the contrary has been shown to us. In these circumstances, the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23.1.1970 declaring that the property was an evacuee trust property and, therefore, could not be allotted to a displaced person was correct. 8. The upshot is that the judgment of the High Court dated 4.6.1974 must be set-aside and the order of the Additional Commissioner (Revenue) exercising the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23.1.1970 restored. This appeal is allowed. Since a complicated question of law arose for adjudication, the parties shall be left to bear their own costs.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-02-10): NASIM HASAN SHAH, J.- The relevant facts are that respondent No.l (Nazi Abdullah), a claimant displaced person, was allotted a garden measuring 29 canals 8 WW. Marley (constituting a part of Kara No.9663) situate in the urban area of Asur vide order of the Garden Allotment Committee dated 27.6.1955. (This area is now being described as Kara No. ). 2. However, sometimes in 3960, the Kara in question was taken over by the Evacuee Trust Board (hereafter called the Board) and the allotment of respondent No.! was cancelled on the ground that it was an evacuee property vide order of the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner (Land) dated 3.11.1960. Subsequently, the land in question along with some other land was auctioned by the Board in open auction and Muhammad Kiddie son of Nazi Abdullah, respondent No.], was the highest bidder at the auction of this land for Sharif 1963 to Rabbi 1965 and came into possession of the land under the auction. His father, (respondent No.]), however being desirous of retaining the allotment earlier made in his favor filed a writ petition in the High Court of West Pakistan for this purpose, but the same was dismissed as withdrawn with observations that the writ petitioner may file an appeal before the Chief Settlement Commissioner under Section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act 1958 seeking a declaration that the land in question was not an evacuee trust property, if so advised. An appeal under Section 4(3) of the said Act was, accordingly, filed by him before the Chief Settlement Commissioner which was entrusted to Mr. Muhammad Shall Afar, Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Lahore exercising the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, but he dismissed the appeal vide order dated 23.1.1970 with the following observations: "The documents produced by the petitioner as well as the respondent show that State is the owner of the disputed land. Salad Ram Cheka Sowarsati Days Said Bragi was recorded as Dakhilkar under a Committee in the year 1891-92. Mahan GOP Days Cheka Sowarsati Days Said Bragi was recorded as Dakhilkar MN 1911-12. Mutation No.1707 medicates that Batsman Days Cheka of Mahan GOP Days was recorded as ‘Dakhilkar’ and he was replaced by Manner Hard Heir by means of this mutation. Manner Hard Heir continued to be recorded as *Dakhilkar’ in the subsequent registers Mandarin Gamin 1938-39 and 1945-46 through Mahan Ramzi Days Baja Johan Days, detailed report of the Tonsilar dated 22.10.1936 exists on Mutation No.1707 on which this mutation in favor of Manner Hard Heir was sanctioned by the Collector. A perusal of this report indicates that certain persons had instituted a suit in the Civil Court claiming ownership of the disputed land; but the suit was dismissed, and it was also held by the Civil Court that the Manager could be selected by the public. It was held by the Tonsilar that the property belonged to Manner Hard Heir. The WW. petitioner argues that a Major part of the land under the occupancy tenancy of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-02-10): was dismissed, and it was also held by the Civil Court that the Manager could be selected by the public. It was held by the Tonsilar that the property belonged to Manner Hard Heir. The WW. petitioner argues that a Major part of the land under the occupancy tenancy of Manner Hard Heir has been allotted by the Border Allotment Committee to one Col. Names-ud-Din An sari and Ex.P.10 has been produced in support of this contention. It is argued that the allotment of other land of Manner Hard Heir to the said Colonel is proof that the land is not Evacuee Trust Property. The other land is not subjudicc before me at present, and it is’ for the Evacuee rust Committee authorities to take necessary action in respect of its allotment. The documents produced by each side clearly establish that Manner Hard Heir is the occupancy tenant of the disputed land and there is therefore no doubt left that this land is attached to a religious institution as a Manor is nothing but a religious institution. In view of this, this petition is rejected, and the declaration asked for is refused". 3. Dissatisfied with this order, the respondents filed an appeal under Section 4(4) of the Act praying for setting aside of the above order passed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner and for restoration of the order of the Garden Allotment Committee dated 27.6.1955. This appeal was accepted by a learned Single Judge of the High Court who observed, interalar, as follows: "All the documents which have been placed on record by the contesting parties go to show that the property is otherwise owned by the State and, as mentioned above, till 1936 it was in the name of different Mah ants and Gurus as Railcars, but later on vide Mutation No.1707 Dakhilkari rights their were transferred in the name of Manner Hard Heir. I am afraid, the material on record, which has been relied upon by the learned Chief Settlement Commissioner in declaring the property to be evacuee trust property is not sufficient to declare it as such. According to Hindu Law in order to constitute a public trust the author or authors of the same must be ascertained and the mention to create a trust must be indicated by words or acts with reasonable certainty. Moreover, the purpose of trust, the trust property and the beneficiaries must be indicated so as to enable the Court to adm mister trust, if required". 4. In reaching his decision the learned Judge relied upon a judgment earlier delivered by him in a case wherein he had elaborately dealt with this subject namely S. Abdus Saleem and 153 others Vs. Chairman Evacuee Property Trust Board and another (PU 1975 Lahore 105). On account of his view, as expressed in the aforesaid judgment and reiterated by him in the present case, the learned Judge was pleased to allow the appeal and to set-aside the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23.1.1970.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-02-10): Evacuee Property Trust Board and another (PU 1975 Lahore 105). On account of his view, as expressed in the aforesaid judgment and reiterated by him in the present case, the learned Judge was pleased to allow the appeal and to set-aside the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23.1.1970. This appeal, WW. by leave of this Court, is directed against the aforesaid judgment of the learned Single Judge of the High Court dated 4.6.1974. Learned counsel for the parties have been heard. 5. We observe that the judgment relied upon by the learned Single Judge namely Abdul Saleem and 153 others Vs. Chairman. Evacuee Property Trust Board and another (PU 1975 Lahore 105) has been expressly set-aside by this Court in Evacuee Trust Property Board. Lahore and another Vs. Sved Abdul Saleem and others (1990 S.C.M.R. 143). In fact, this Court has had occasion to deal with the question arising in this case, in some other judgments as well. Thus, in the case of District Evacuee Trust Committee Vs. Ashraf Khan and 3 others (1989 S.C.M.R. 1636) where the question was whether in the absence of any deed of trust indicating the real purpose of trust, mere production of the extract from the Record of Rights or City Surveys which describe a property as "Dharamshala" "Piano" or by other similar expression, any such property can be declared to be attached to a religious, charitable or educational trust for the purpose of Section of Act XXVIII of 1958, it was held that the entries in the official record taken as a whole leave no measure of doubt that the property was conveyed by endowment for the charitable purpose of Dharamshala and there is no medication or any other evidence produced to show that the property was privately owned by any person. Therefore, applying the rule of preponderance of evidence the issue was decided in favor of the appellant that the property was attached to a religious and charitable trust. Similarly, this Court in District Evacuee Trust Committee Vs. Muhammad Umar others (Civil Appeal No.K-31 of 1973) vide judgment delivered on 25.4.1989 observed:- v' "It is difficult to subscribe to the view taken by the High Court that in the absence of the trust deed a property could not be declared to be attached to a religious or charitable trust. It is to be noticed that a document creating a trust under the Hindu Laws docs not require registration. In this case, all the trustees were Hindus who left Pakistan at about the time of Independence. The trust deed must have been in their possession. That being so, to demand that the trust deed must be produced before a property can be declared as attached to a religious or charitable trust is in the circumstances a tall order. On the other hand, there is no reason why the presumption of correctness which attaches to official records from TT remains unrebutted, should not be given effect in deciding the nature of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-02-10): be declared as attached to a religious or charitable trust is in the circumstances a tall order. On the other hand, there is no reason why the presumption of correctness which attaches to official records from TT remains unrebutted, should not be given effect in deciding the nature of the property.” 6. WW. Thus, the view of this Court on this question is that if sufficient prima-phatic evidence is adduced for showing that the property in question was attached to a religious or charitable institution and this evidence is not displaced by any other reliable evidence, the burden of showing actual creation of trust on the party asserting that the properly is attached to a religious or charitable trust is not essential and the matter can be decided on the rule of preponderance of evidence. 7. In the present case, the entries in the revenue record from 1936 onwards consistently show that the property belonged to Manner Hard Heir. The conduct, user and treatment of the property also indicate that the property was attached to the said Manner and no cogent evidence posting to the contrary has been shown to us. In these circumstances, the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23.1.1970 declaring that the property was an evacuee trust property and, therefore, could not be allotted to a displaced person was correct. 8. The upshot is that the judgment of the High Court dated 4.6.1974 must be set-aside and the order of the Additional Commissioner (Revenue) exercising the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23.1.1970 restored. This appeal is allowed. Since a complicated question of law arose for adjudication, the parties shall be left to bear their own costs.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1991-03-18. The case involved MAULA BAKHSH ETC VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ETC. The relevant statutes include LAND REVENUE ACT 1887 - S.71. The case was heard by SAAD SAOOD JAN, RUSTAM S. SIDKVVA AND MUHAMMAD AFZAL LONE.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: LAND REVENUE ACT 1887 - S.71. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1991-03-18.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANTS: CLI. MUSHTAQ AHMAD KHAN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BYS. ABULAASIM JAFRI, ADVOCATE- ON-RECORD.FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. 1: EX-PARTE.. The judges presiding were: SAAD SAOOD JAN, RUSTAM S. SIDKVVA AND MUHAMMAD AFZAL LONE.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: MAULA BAKHSH ETC VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ETC. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: MUHAMMAD AFZAL LONE, J.- This appeal by leave to appeal arises out of the judgment dated 20-5-1978 rendered by a Division Bench of the Lahore High Court, whereby order dated 24-6-1976 passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, declaring the land in dispute as non-evacuee properly, was set aside. 2. The dispute between the parties relates to the land, measuring 1741 canals, 16 Marley, situate in village Made Hassan, Thesis and District Railcar Khan, which, according to the jacaranda for the year 1904, was owned by the non-Muslims to the extent OL share and the rest of it belonged to the predecessors-in-interest OL the appellants, the details whereof arc given as under: "Karim Baths and Shawano Dicta in equal shares, Jangle shares, Sold and Rattan in equal shares, Haman Mai, Animal Naval and NAD Ram non-Muslims in equal shares, shares, and Manu Ram non-Muslim shares." 3. It is discernible from the record before us that, vide Mutation No.71 attested on 26-10-1903, share of the land owned by Karim Baths and Shawano Delta, who were then minors, was sold to Haman Mai conditionally till they at tamed majority and ratified the sale. In those proceedings, before the Revenue Officer, Karim Baths was represented by his mother MST. Fail and Shawano Delta by his uncle Ila hi Baths. Evidently, the sale on behalf of the Moors was void. Presumably, for this reason, as indicated by the mutation proceedings dated 29-6-1904, this mutation was acted upon in the revenue record "Basis Malabar". Likewise, i respect of share owned by Jangle, Sold and Rattan, Mutation No.124 was sanctioned on 28-4-1904 in favor of Haman Mai holding that they were absconders. This mutation was also sanctioned Basis Malabar" obviously in pursuance of section 71 of the Punjab Revenue Act 1887. Under this section, after the land revenue of a holding is in arrears, the Collector may transfer the holding to some other landowner of the estate, who is not a defaulter on the condition of his paying arrears before being put into possession of the land. The transfer has to either till the end of the agricultural year in which the defaulter pays to the transferee the amount of the arrears, which the latter paid to the Collector, or for a term not exceeding 15 years from the commencement of the agricultural year next following the dale of the transfer. Seemingly, recourse to section 71 had to be made by the land revenue authorities for the reason that Muslim owners aforesaid were absent from the village, and payment of the land revenue fell into arrears. It appears that the land continued to remain in possession of Haman Mai even long after the expiry of the period envisaged by section 71, but throughout, the names of the Muslim owners were shown in the revenue record in the column relating to ownership. 4. In the context OL the controversy raised before us another event worth consideration is the commencement of proceedings under section 145 Cr.P.C. by Essay Mai, a nephew of Haman Mai against Room Ali s/o Jangle, resulting in affirmation of the possession OL the non-Muslims, by order dated 23-6-1930 passed by the Criminal Court. Thereafter, the non-Muslims brought a criminal case under section 447 PPC. against Room Ali, who was convicted on 14-12-1932. This conviction resulted in reaffirmation of the possession OL the non-Muslim. Another transaction worth mentioning is the sale by Haman Mai to Major Sahib YAR Khan of share of his proprietary rights in the land and of the possessory rights. This sale was evidenced by Mutation No.], entered on 6-7-1934, and sanctioned on 25-11-1935. On the death of Major Sahib YAR Khan, the land devolved on his two sons, namely, Muhammad Ibrahim, respondent No.2 harm, and Alta Muhammad. The latter sold his share to respondent Nos.3 N. 4. 5. It will be seen, as observed earlier, that all along in the land revenue record in the "ownership column" the name sol the appellants predecessors-in-interest continued to figure. The non-Muslims made an effort to have their names deleted and also succeeded in gelling mutation No.4 entered in this behalf, but it was cancelled on 15-12-1938. Earlier, on 2-2-1936 Sold and others filed a suit against Major Sahib YAR Khan, on the basis of their title, for possession of the land measuring 346 canals, Marley, forming part of joint that. It was claimed that they left their village m search of work and 11 years ago gave their land to Asir Mai defendant, for cultivation, subject to the condition that he would pay the land revenue and further pay their share of income to then on their return to the village, but in their absence he alongside Hainan Mai made unsuccessful attempt to get the land alienated in their names. This suit was dismissed on 19-12-1938, and a finding given that the land was in adverse possession of non-Muslims. Sold and others did not challenge the dismissal of their suit through appeal. This decree, thus, at tamed finality. However, it was not given affect in the revenue record and the names of the Muslim owner continued to appear therein. It is to be noticed that respondent No.2 and others also made a move to have their names substituted for that of RCM Ali and others on the plea that they were out of possession since long, the possession of Human Mai, and for that matter of the Vendée from him became adverse to them and matured MTO title in their favor by prescription. But, Mutation No.404 got entered by them in this respect was rejected by the Assistant Commissioner, Railcar Khan, vide his detailed order dated 16-4- 1956. 6. One Heidi Muhammad Qatar, who is not a party to the appeal before us, moved the Collector, Railcar Khan, that the appellants'were in possession of the evacuee property unauthoryeilly. This application was forwarded by him to the Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property under section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and his opinion solicited whether the land could be allotted to the former. The Deputy Custodian returned the file to the Collector and maintained that the matter pertained to the Settlement and Rehabilitation Department. The Deputy Custodian's order is dated 17-1-1961. Earner on 9-5-1960, the joint that of the Muslims and non-Muslims was partitioned, with the result that the entire area covered by Mutations Nos.71 124 was treated as evacuee property. This led the appellants to apply on 11-1-1961 to the Deputy Custodian, under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Properly) Act for declaration that the agricultural land, measuring 1741 canals and 16 Marley, comprising their share in the that was not an evacuee property. On the basis of the material before him, the Deputy Custodian held that the appellants* rights in the land in dispute were not affected by Mutations Nos.71 124; sale made by Haman Mai, in so far as it related to the land claimed by the appellants, was declared void and his possession not considered adverse to the appellants. The Deputy Custodian's decision is dated 14-4-1962, which was referred by him to the learned Custodian for confirmation. 7. Respondent No.2 and the vendees from Alta Muhammad preferred two separate appeals against the orders of the Deputy Custodian. These appeals and Reference made by the Deputy Custodian were heard together. The learned Custodian largely relied upon the Civil Court's judgment dated 19-12-1938, and came to the conclusion that the Muslim share-holders 1. predecessors-in-interest of the appellants lost their title i the land long before partition due to adverse possession of the non-Muslims. Consequently, by his order dated 27-5-1963 the learned Custodian accepted the appeals, declined to confirm the order of the Deputy Custodian and dismissed the appellants* application under section 22 of the Act. 8. Aggrieved by the order dated 27-5-1963, the appellants filed Writ Petition No.671- R/63, which was accepted on 6-4-1973 by a Division Bench of Bahawalpur Circuit of the Lahore High Court, and the order of the learned Custodian declared as without lawful authority and of no legal effect. Resultantly, it became incumbent upon the Custodian to decide the appeals and the Reference afresh. The reasons which prevailed with the High Court in interfering with the orders of the Custodian were that the land had been transferred to the non-Muslims "Basis Malta/ARI". but no finding was recorded on the issue whether such transfer at its exception was lawful and if it was lawful when did the transferee's possession became adverse to the real owners. The High Court noticed that section 71 was never adverted to by any of the authorities below at any stage of this protracted litigation and the fact that the non-Muslims, who were co-stars and held possession within defined limits, was ignored. 9. Pursuant to the remand order, after rehearing the case, the learned Custodian vide his order dated 24-6-1976 confirmed the Deputy Custodian s order dated 14-4-1962 and dismissed the appeal of the respondents on the ground that Mutation Nos.71 124 having been sanctioned "Basis Majgazari" the possession of Human Mai was permissive and not on account of trespass into the land. It was maintained that real owners neither abandoned the land permanently nor the non-Muslims occupied the same against their wishes, but held it on payment of land revenue, on their behalf, and consequently their names continued to be entered in the revenue record, as owners. 10. Muhammad Ibrahim, respondent and the two vendees from Alta Muhammad, then filed Writ Petition No.lI8/R/76 to assail the validity of the Custodian's order. In the opinion OL the learned Division Bench, which heard it, the possession of the non-Muslims was open, hostile and stood established by the Civil Court's judgment dated 19-12-1938, even if the initial possession was permissive and as co-sharers, by hostile steps of the non-Muslims, TT became adverse to the real owners. It was held that though the Civil Court's decree related to the land measure 346 canals, Marley, its rationale would apply to the rest of the land as well. It was further observed that some land in the meanwhile was allotted to non-Muslims against which the appellants never agitated. This factor also influenced the decision of the High Court to draw an inference as to the loss of title of the real owners. 11. It is evident from the record before us, that Haman Mai acquired the possession of the land by virtue of Mutations Nos.71 124 "Basis Malabar envisaged by section 71 of the Land Revenue Act. Even if he was already in possession, under a different character, upon his eduction into the land Basis Malabar" his possession became relatable to subsistence of a lawful title in the predecessors-in-interest of the appellants. Sub- section of section 71 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, lays down: "When the transfer was for a term, the holding shall, on the expiration of the term, be rested by the Collector to the defaulter free of any claim on the part of the Government or the transferee for any arrear of land-revenue or rates and ceases due in respect thereof." Sub-section (2) specifics the period of transfer, which as already observed, may be till the end of the agricultural year in which the defaulter-landlord pays the amount of arrears to the transferee. If it is not so, the transfer can last for a maximum period of 15 years. 12. Sub-section (6) enjoys a duty upon the Collector to take back the possession from the transferee after the expiry of the term, and restore it to the landowner. Anomalously, the period of transfer is not specified in the two mutations. This was an omission on the part of the Collector. But, the landowners could hardly be blamed for this failure of the Collector, nor would it is immune him to carry into effect the provisions as to the restoration of possession. At the most, the transfer would be deemed to have endured for the maximum period of 15 years and thereafter in no case the Collector could disregard his statutory obligation, resulting in deprivation of the landowners of the possession. The true owners, who had no control over the exercise of powers by the Collector, could not be made to suffer an injury for his neglect. The provisions of section 71 are confiscatory in character and in derogation of right to possess and enjoy one's property. In this view of the matter, it is abhorrent to permit generation of mischievous consequences of the Collector's inaction, resulting in destruction of the rights of true owner in his property by setting up a title in the transferee through adverse possession. The question is, what is the nature of the possession of a "transferee" of the holding under section 71. It is obvious that the possession is taken over from the landowner by the Collector and passed on by him to the "transferee", who has to clear the arrears of land revenue. After the expiry of the term of transfer, the Collector is required to retrieve the possession and restore it to the landowner. TlicnScfaulter land-owner can pay to the transferee the arrears and get back the possession through the Collector at the end of the agricultural year in which payment is made. Upon the scheme of the section it can well be presumed that the "transferee" holds tie land on behalf of the Collector; his possession is permissive and arises out of his agreement with the Collector, in pursuance of section 71. The possession commencing under the authority of Collector does not transform into hostile one and ripen into title by mere length of occupation. Thus, the possession which in its inception is referable to operation of law and subservient to the title of the real owner, is to be presumed to continue as it began. 13. Even if it is assumed that a licensee can buy prescription convert his permissive possession into an absolute ownership of the property, then a very clear-cut and a positive disclaimer OL title OL the real owner and an adverse clam to his knowledge is essential. Such evidence is not forthcoming from the record, for throughout, in the revenue record the appellants* predecessors-in-interest were continuously shown as owners of the land; the attempts made for deletion of their names failed, and the possession of the non-Muslims all along bare the character of "Basin Male/ARI". The High Court has not at all attended to the provisions of section 71 and wrongly considered the Criminal Court's decision, in the proceedings under section 145 Cr.P.C, and in the case under section 445 PPC. as evidence of such disclaimer completely divorced from the vivid restrictions under section 71 on the transferee's possession. It also overlooked the object and ingredients underlying the criminal proceedings under these provisions. It is correct that there was also a decree of the Civil Court holding the non-Muslim in adverse possession, but that decree was in respect of an area measuring 346 canals, 14 Marley only. We are unable to understand as to how the rationale of the decree could be extended to rest of the land, which was not subject of the suit and the title of the real owners extinguished. We regret our inability to subscribe to the reasoning in this respect, which prevailed with the learned Judges in the High Court. It is clear to us that regarding the land other than the one covered by the Civil Court's decree, there was no clog on the title of the appellants. As regards the allotments, WC are formed that these were made pendent elite and not confirmed. For all these reasons, the impugned judgment is set aside, and the order of the learned Custodian dated 24-0-1676, in so far as it relates to land other than one covered by the Civil Court's decree dated 19-12-1938, is restored. The parties are left to bear their own costs.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-03-18): MUHAMMAD AFZAL LONE, J.- This appeal by leave to appeal arises out of the judgment dated 20-5-1978 rendered by a Division Bench of the Lahore High Court, whereby order dated 24-6-1976 passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, declaring the land in dispute as non-evacuee properly, was set aside. 2. The dispute between the parties relates to the land, measuring 1741 canals, 16 Marley, situate in village Made Hassan, Thesis and District Railcar Khan, which, according to the jacaranda for the year 1904, was owned by the non-Muslims to the extent OL share and the rest of it belonged to the predecessors-in-interest OL the appellants, the details whereof arc given as under: "Karim Baths and Shawano Dicta in equal shares, Jangle shares, Sold and Rattan in equal shares, Haman Mai, Animal Naval and NAD Ram non-Muslims in equal shares, shares, and Manu Ram non-Muslim shares." 3. It is discernible from the record before us that, vide Mutation No.71 attested on 26-10-1903, share of the land owned by Karim Baths and Shawano Delta, who were then minors, was sold to Haman Mai conditionally till they at tamed majority and ratified the sale. In those proceedings, before the Revenue Officer, Karim Baths was represented by his mother MST. Fail and Shawano Delta by his uncle Ila hi Baths. Evidently, the sale on behalf of the Moors was void. Presumably, for this reason, as indicated by the mutation proceedings dated 29-6-1904, this mutation was acted upon in the revenue record "Basis Malabar". Likewise, i respect of share owned by Jangle, Sold and Rattan, Mutation No.124 was sanctioned on 28-4-1904 in favor of Haman Mai holding that they were absconders. This mutation was also sanctioned Basis Malabar" obviously in pursuance of section 71 of the Punjab Revenue Act 1887. Under this section, after the land revenue of a holding is in arrears, the Collector may transfer the holding to some other landowner of the estate, who is not a defaulter on the condition of his paying arrears before being put into possession of the land. The transfer has to either till the end of the agricultural year in which the defaulter pays to the transferee the amount of the arrears, which the latter paid to the Collector, or for a term not exceeding 15 years from the commencement of the agricultural year next following the dale of the transfer. Seemingly, recourse to section 71 had to be made by the land revenue authorities for the reason that Muslim owners aforesaid were absent from the village, and payment of the land revenue fell into arrears. It appears that the land continued to remain in possession of Haman Mai even long after the expiry of the period envisaged by section 71, but throughout, the names of the Muslim owners were shown in the revenue record in the column relating to ownership. 4. In the context OL the controversy raised before us another event worth consideration is the commencement of proceedings under section 145 Cr.P.C. by Essay

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-03-18): period envisaged by section 71, but throughout, the names of the Muslim owners were shown in the revenue record in the column relating to ownership. 4. In the context OL the controversy raised before us another event worth consideration is the commencement of proceedings under section 145 Cr.P.C. by Essay Mai, a nephew of Haman Mai against Room Ali s/o Jangle, resulting in affirmation of the possession OL the non-Muslims, by order dated 23-6-1930 passed by the Criminal Court. Thereafter, the non-Muslims brought a criminal case under section 447 PPC. against Room Ali, who was convicted on 14-12-1932. This conviction resulted in reaffirmation of the possession OL the non-Muslim. Another transaction worth mentioning is the sale by Haman Mai to Major Sahib YAR Khan of share of his proprietary rights in the land and of the possessory rights. This sale was evidenced by Mutation No.], entered on 6-7-1934, and sanctioned on 25-11-1935. On the death of Major Sahib YAR Khan, the land devolved on his two sons, namely, Muhammad Ibrahim, respondent No.2 harm, and Alta Muhammad. The latter sold his share to respondent Nos.3 N. 4. 5. It will be seen, as observed earlier, that all along in the land revenue record in the "ownership column" the name sol the appellants predecessors-in-interest continued to figure. The non-Muslims made an effort to have their names deleted and also succeeded in gelling mutation No.4 entered in this behalf, but it was cancelled on 15-12-1938. Earlier, on 2-2-1936 Sold and others filed a suit against Major Sahib YAR Khan, on the basis of their title, for possession of the land measuring 346 canals, Marley, forming part of joint that. It was claimed that they left their village m search of work and 11 years ago gave their land to Asir Mai defendant, for cultivation, subject to the condition that he would pay the land revenue and further pay their share of income to then on their return to the village, but in their absence he alongside Hainan Mai made unsuccessful attempt to get the land alienated in their names. This suit was dismissed on 19-12-1938, and a finding given that the land was in adverse possession of non-Muslims. Sold and others did not challenge the dismissal of their suit through appeal. This decree, thus, at tamed finality. However, it was not given affect in the revenue record and the names of the Muslim owner continued to appear therein. It is to be noticed that respondent No.2 and others also made a move to have their names substituted for that of RCM Ali and others on the plea that they were out of possession since long, the possession of Human Mai, and for that matter of the Vendée from him became adverse to them and matured MTO title in their favor by prescription. But, Mutation No.404 got entered by them in this respect was rejected by the Assistant Commissioner, Railcar Khan, vide his detailed order dated 16-4- 1956. 6. One Heidi Muhammad Qatar, who

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-03-18): matter of the Vendée from him became adverse to them and matured MTO title in their favor by prescription. But, Mutation No.404 got entered by them in this respect was rejected by the Assistant Commissioner, Railcar Khan, vide his detailed order dated 16-4- 1956. 6. One Heidi Muhammad Qatar, who is not a party to the appeal before us, moved the Collector, Railcar Khan, that the appellants'were in possession of the evacuee property unauthoryeilly. This application was forwarded by him to the Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property under section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, and his opinion solicited whether the land could be allotted to the former. The Deputy Custodian returned the file to the Collector and maintained that the matter pertained to the Settlement and Rehabilitation Department. The Deputy Custodian's order is dated 17-1-1961. Earner on 9-5-1960, the joint that of the Muslims and non-Muslims was partitioned, with the result that the entire area covered by Mutations Nos.71 124 was treated as evacuee property. This led the appellants to apply on 11-1-1961 to the Deputy Custodian, under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Properly) Act for declaration that the agricultural land, measuring 1741 canals and 16 Marley, comprising their share in the that was not an evacuee property. On the basis of the material before him, the Deputy Custodian held that the appellants* rights in the land in dispute were not affected by Mutations Nos.71 124; sale made by Haman Mai, in so far as it related to the land claimed by the appellants, was declared void and his possession not considered adverse to the appellants. The Deputy Custodian's decision is dated 14-4-1962, which was referred by him to the learned Custodian for confirmation. 7. Respondent No.2 and the vendees from Alta Muhammad preferred two separate appeals against the orders of the Deputy Custodian. These appeals and Reference made by the Deputy Custodian were heard together. The learned Custodian largely relied upon the Civil Court's judgment dated 19-12-1938, and came to the conclusion that the Muslim share-holders 1. predecessors-in-interest of the appellants lost their title i the land long before partition due to adverse possession of the non-Muslims. Consequently, by his order dated 27-5-1963 the learned Custodian accepted the appeals, declined to confirm the order of the Deputy Custodian and dismissed the appellants* application under section 22 of the Act. 8. Aggrieved by the order dated 27-5-1963, the appellants filed Writ Petition No.671- R/63, which was accepted on 6-4-1973 by a Division Bench of Bahawalpur Circuit of the Lahore High Court, and the order of the learned Custodian declared as without lawful authority and of no legal effect. Resultantly, it became incumbent upon the Custodian to decide the appeals and the Reference afresh. The reasons which prevailed with the High Court in interfering with the orders of the Custodian were that the land had been transferred to the non-Muslims "Basis Malta/ARI". but no finding was recorded on the issue whether such transfer at

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-03-18): the Custodian to decide the appeals and the Reference afresh. The reasons which prevailed with the High Court in interfering with the orders of the Custodian were that the land had been transferred to the non-Muslims "Basis Malta/ARI". but no finding was recorded on the issue whether such transfer at its exception was lawful and if it was lawful when did the transferee's possession became adverse to the real owners. The High Court noticed that section 71 was never adverted to by any of the authorities below at any stage of this protracted litigation and the fact that the non-Muslims, who were co-stars and held possession within defined limits, was ignored. 9. Pursuant to the remand order, after rehearing the case, the learned Custodian vide his order dated 24-6-1976 confirmed the Deputy Custodian s order dated 14-4-1962 and dismissed the appeal of the respondents on the ground that Mutation Nos.71 124 having been sanctioned "Basis Majgazari" the possession of Human Mai was permissive and not on account of trespass into the land. It was maintained that real owners neither abandoned the land permanently nor the non-Muslims occupied the same against their wishes, but held it on payment of land revenue, on their behalf, and consequently their names continued to be entered in the revenue record, as owners. 10. Muhammad Ibrahim, respondent and the two vendees from Alta Muhammad, then filed Writ Petition No.lI8/R/76 to assail the validity of the Custodian's order. In the opinion OL the learned Division Bench, which heard it, the possession of the non-Muslims was open, hostile and stood established by the Civil Court's judgment dated 19-12-1938, even if the initial possession was permissive and as co-sharers, by hostile steps of the non-Muslims, TT became adverse to the real owners. It was held that though the Civil Court's decree related to the land measure 346 canals, Marley, its rationale would apply to the rest of the land as well. It was further observed that some land in the meanwhile was allotted to non-Muslims against which the appellants never agitated. This factor also influenced the decision of the High Court to draw an inference as to the loss of title of the real owners. 11. It is evident from the record before us, that Haman Mai acquired the possession of the land by virtue of Mutations Nos.71 124 "Basis Malabar envisaged by section 71 of the Land Revenue Act. Even if he was already in possession, under a different character, upon his eduction into the land Basis Malabar" his possession became relatable to subsistence of a lawful title in the predecessors-in-interest of the appellants. Sub- section of section 71 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, lays down: "When the transfer was for a term, the holding shall, on the expiration of the term, be rested by the Collector to the defaulter free of any claim on the part of the Government or the transferee for any arrear of land-revenue or rates and ceases due in respect thereof."

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-03-18): "When the transfer was for a term, the holding shall, on the expiration of the term, be rested by the Collector to the defaulter free of any claim on the part of the Government or the transferee for any arrear of land-revenue or rates and ceases due in respect thereof." Sub-section (2) specifics the period of transfer, which as already observed, may be till the end of the agricultural year in which the defaulter-landlord pays the amount of arrears to the transferee. If it is not so, the transfer can last for a maximum period of 15 years. 12. Sub-section (6) enjoys a duty upon the Collector to take back the possession from the transferee after the expiry of the term, and restore it to the landowner. Anomalously, the period of transfer is not specified in the two mutations. This was an omission on the part of the Collector. But, the landowners could hardly be blamed for this failure of the Collector, nor would it is immune him to carry into effect the provisions as to the restoration of possession. At the most, the transfer would be deemed to have endured for the maximum period of 15 years and thereafter in no case the Collector could disregard his statutory obligation, resulting in deprivation of the landowners of the possession. The true owners, who had no control over the exercise of powers by the Collector, could not be made to suffer an injury for his neglect. The provisions of section 71 are confiscatory in character and in derogation of right to possess and enjoy one's property. In this view of the matter, it is abhorrent to permit generation of mischievous consequences of the Collector's inaction, resulting in destruction of the rights of true owner in his property by setting up a title in the transferee through adverse possession. The question is, what is the nature of the possession of a "transferee" of the holding under section 71. It is obvious that the possession is taken over from the landowner by the Collector and passed on by him to the "transferee", who has to clear the arrears of land revenue. After the expiry of the term of transfer, the Collector is required to retrieve the possession and restore it to the landowner. TlicnScfaulter land-owner can pay to the transferee the arrears and get back the possession through the Collector at the end of the agricultural year in which payment is made. Upon the scheme of the section it can well be presumed that the "transferee" holds tie land on behalf of the Collector; his possession is permissive and arises out of his agreement with the Collector, in pursuance of section 71. The possession commencing under the authority of Collector does not transform into hostile one and ripen into title by mere length of occupation. Thus, the possession which in its inception is referable to operation of law and subservient to the title of the real owner, is to be presumed to continue

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1991-03-18): possession commencing under the authority of Collector does not transform into hostile one and ripen into title by mere length of occupation. Thus, the possession which in its inception is referable to operation of law and subservient to the title of the real owner, is to be presumed to continue as it began. 13. Even if it is assumed that a licensee can buy prescription convert his permissive possession into an absolute ownership of the property, then a very clear-cut and a positive disclaimer OL title OL the real owner and an adverse clam to his knowledge is essential. Such evidence is not forthcoming from the record, for throughout, in the revenue record the appellants* predecessors-in-interest were continuously shown as owners of the land; the attempts made for deletion of their names failed, and the possession of the non-Muslims all along bare the character of "Basin Male/ARI". The High Court has not at all attended to the provisions of section 71 and wrongly considered the Criminal Court's decision, in the proceedings under section 145 Cr.P.C, and in the case under section 445 PPC. as evidence of such disclaimer completely divorced from the vivid restrictions under section 71 on the transferee's possession. It also overlooked the object and ingredients underlying the criminal proceedings under these provisions. It is correct that there was also a decree of the Civil Court holding the non-Muslim in adverse possession, but that decree was in respect of an area measuring 346 canals, 14 Marley only. We are unable to understand as to how the rationale of the decree could be extended to rest of the land, which was not subject of the suit and the title of the real owners extinguished. We regret our inability to subscribe to the reasoning in this respect, which prevailed with the learned Judges in the High Court. It is clear to us that regarding the land other than the one covered by the Civil Court's decree, there was no clog on the title of the appellants. As regards the allotments, WC are formed that these were made pendent elite and not confirmed. For all these reasons, the impugned judgment is set aside, and the order of the learned Custodian dated 24-0-1676, in so far as it relates to land other than one covered by the Civil Court's decree dated 19-12-1938, is restored. The parties are left to bear their own costs.

Question: What is case 1991 PLD 586 about?
Answer: Case 1991 PLD 586 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1991-02-02. The case involved SECRETARY. DISTRICT EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (APPELLANT) VERSUS QAZI HABIBULLAH AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVII OF 1958) - S. 4(3) AND (4) DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 4. The case was heard by NASIM HASAN SHAH AND RUSTAM S. SIDHWA.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1991 PLD 586?
Answer: In case 1991 PLD 586, the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVII OF 1958) - S. 4(3) AND (4) DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 4. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1991-02-02.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1991 PLD 586?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1991 PLD 586 were: CH. FAZAL-I-HUSSAIN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY MUHAMMADASLAM CH. ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR APPELLANT. A.R. SHAUKAT, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT, MUHAMMAD IQBAL,AD VOCATE SUPREME COURT AND MIAN ATAUR RAHMAN, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FORRESPONDENT NO.L.. The judges presiding were: NASIM HASAN SHAH AND RUSTAM S. SIDHWA.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1991 PLD 586?
Answer: The parties in case 1991 PLD 586 were: SECRETARY. DISTRICT EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (APPELLANT) VERSUS QAZI HABIBULLAH AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1991 PLD 586.
Answer: NAS1IM HASAN SHAH, J.-The relevant facts are that respondent No.1 (Nazi Abdullah), a claimant displaced person, was allotted a garden measuring 29 canals 8 Marley (consisting a part of Kara No.9663) situate in the urban area of Asur vide order of the Garden Allotment Committee dated 27-6-1955. (This area is now BMG described as Kara No. ). However, sometimes in 1960, the Kara in question was taken over byte Evacuee Trust Board (hereinafter called the Board) and the allotment of respondent No.1 was cancelled on the ground that it was an evacuee property vide order of the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner (Land) dated 3-11-1960. Subsequently, the land in question alongside some other land was auctioned byte Board in open auction and Muhammad Kiddie son of Nazi Abdullah,respondent No.l, was the highest bidder at the auction of this land for Kharif1963 to Rabbi 1965 and came into possession of the And under the auction. His father, (respondent No.]), however being desirous of renaming the allotment earlier made in his favor filed a writ petition in the High Court of West Pakistan for this purpose, but the same was dismissed as withdrawn with the observations that the writ petitioner may file an appeal before the Chief under section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement)Act, 1958 seeking a declaration that the land in question was not an evacuee trust properly, if so advised. An appeal under section 4(3) of the said Act was,accordingly, filed by him before the Chief Settlement Commissioner which was entrusted to Mr. Muhammad Shaft Afar, Additional Commissioner(Revenue), Lahore exercising the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner,but he dismissed the appeal vide order dated 23-1-1970 with the : "The documents produced by the petitioner as well as the respondent show that State is the owner of the disputed land. Salad Ram ChelaSowarsati Days Said Bragi was recorded as Dakhilkkar under ACOMMITTEE in the year 1891-92. Mahan GOP Days Cheka SowarsatiDass Said Bragi was recorded as Dakhilkar in 1911-12. Mutation No.1707 indicates that Batsman Days Cheka of Mahan GOP Days was recorded as ‘Dakhilkar’ and he was replaced by Manner Hard Heir by means of this mutation. Manner Han Heir continued to be recorded as*Dakhilkar’ in the subsequent registers Mandarin Gamin 1938–39 and1945-46 through Mahan Raji Days Baja Johan Days, detailed report of the Tonsilar dated 22-10-1936 exists on Mutation No.1707 on which this mutation in favor of Manner Hard Heir was sanctioned by the Collector. A perusal of this report indicates that certain persons had instituted a suit in the Civil Court claim mg ownership of the disputed land; but the suit was dismissed, and it was also held by the Civil Court that the Manager could be selected by the public. It was held by theTehsildar that the property belonged to Manner Hard Heir. The petitioner argues that a major part of the land under the occupancy tenancy of Manner Hard Heir has been allotted by the Border Allotment Committee to one Col. Na fees-ud- Din An sari and Ex.P. 10 has been produced in support of this contention. It is argued that the allotment of other land of Manner Hard Heir to the said Colonel is proof that the Landis not Evacuee Trust Property. The other land is not sub judice before me at present, and it is for the Evacuee Trust Committee authorities to take necessary action in respect of its allotment. The documents produced by each side clearly establish that Manner Hard Heir is the occupancy tenant of the disputed land and there 1s therefore no doubt left that this land is attached to a religious institution as a Manner is nothing but a religious institution. In view of this, this petition is rejected and the declaration asked for is refused." Dissatisfied with this order, the respondents filed an appeal undersection 4(4) of the Act praying for setting aside of the above order passed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner and for restoration of the order of the Garden Allotment Committee dated 27-6-1955. This appeal was accepted by a learned Single Judge of the High Court who observed, inter alia, as follows:- All the documents which have been placed on record by the contesting parties go to show that the property is otherwise owned by the State and,as mentioned above, till 1936 it was in the name of different Mahantsand Gurus as Dakhilkars, but later on vide Mutation No.1707 Dakhilkarirights therein were transferred in the name of Manner Hard Heir. I am afraid, the material on record, which has been relied upon by the learned Chief Settlement Commissioner in declaring the property to be evacuectrust property is not sufficient to declare it as such. According to Hindu Law mm order to constitute a public trust the author or authors of the same must be ascertained and the intention to create a trust must be indicated by words or acts with reasonable certainty. Moreover, the purpose of trust, the trust property and the beneficiaries must be indicated so as to enable the Court to administer trust, if required." In reaching his decision the learned Judge relied upon a judgment earlier delivered by him in a case wherein he had elaborately dealt with this subject namely S. Abdus Saleem and 153 others v. Chairman, Evacuee Property Trust Board and another PLD 1975 LAH. 960. On account of his view, as expressed Anthe aforesaid judgment and reiterated by him in the present case, the learned Judge was pleased to allow the appeal and to set aside the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23-1-1970. This appeal by leave of this Court, misdirected against the aforesaid judgment of the learned Single Judge of the High Court dated 4-6-1974. Learned counsel for the parties have been heard. We observe that the judgment relied upon by the learned Single Judge namely S. Abdul Saleem and 153 others v. Chairman, Evacuee Property Trust Board and another PLD 1975 LAH. 960 has been expressly set aside by this Court in Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore and another v. Syed Abdus Salam and others 1990 S C M R 143. In fact, this Court has had occasion to deal with the question arise in this case, m some other judgments as well. Thus, Anthe case of District Evacuee Trust Committee v. Ashraf Khan and 3 others 1989S C M R 1636 where the question was whether in the absence of any deed of trust indicating the real purpose of trust, mere production of the extracts from the Record of Rights or City Surveys which describe a property as "Dharamshala","Piano" or by other similar expression, any such property can be declared to reattached to a religious, charitable or educational trust for the purpose of section 4of Act (XXVIII of 1958), it was held that "the entries in the official record taken as a whole leave no measure of doubt that the property was conveyed by endowment for the charitable purpose of Dharamshala and there is no medication any other evidence produced to show that the property was privately owned by any person". Therefore, applying the rule of preponderance of evidence the issue was decided in favor of the appellant that the property was attached to religious and charitable trust. Similarly, this Court in District Evacuee Trust Committee v. Muhammad Umar and others (Civil Appeal No. K-31 of 1973) 1990 S C M R 25 vide judgment delivered on 25-4- 1989 observed:- "TT is difficult to subscribe to the view taken by the High Court that in the absence of the trust deed a property could not be declared to be attached to a religious or charitable trust. It 1s to be noticed that a document creating a trust under the Hindu Laws does not require registration. In this case, all the trustees were Hindus who left Pakistan at about the time of Independence. The trust deed must have been in their possession. That BMG so, to demand that the trust deed must be produced before a property can be declared as attached to a religious or charitable trust ism the circumstances a tall order. On the other hand, there is no reason why the presumption of correctness which attaches to official records from it remains unrebutted, should not be given effect in deciding the nature of the property.” Thus, the view of this Court on this question is that if sufficient primacies evidence is adduced for show mg that the property in question was attached to a religious or charitable institution and this evidence is not displaced by another reliable evidence, the burden of showing actual creation of trust on the party asserting that the property is attached to a religious or charitable trust is nonessential and the matter can be decided on the rule of preponderance of evidence. A In the present case, the entries in the Revenue Record from 1936 onwards consistently show that the property belonged to Manner Hart Heir. The conduct, user and treatment of the property also indicate that the property was attached to the said Manner and no cogent evidence pointing to the contrary has been shown to us. In these circumstances, the order of the Chief dated 23-1-1970 declaring that the property was an evacuee trust property, and therefore, could not be allotted to a displaced person, was correct. The upshot is that the judgment of the High Court dated 4-6-1974 mus the set aside and the order of the Additional Commissioner (Revenue) exercising the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23-1-1970 restored. This appeal is allowed. Since a complicated question of law arose for adjudication, the parties shall be left to bear their own costs. Ap peal allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 586?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 586 (SUPREME COURT, 1991-02-02): NAS1IM HASAN SHAH, J.-The relevant facts are that respondent No.1 (Nazi Abdullah), a claimant displaced person, was allotted a garden measuring 29 canals 8 Marley (consisting a part of Kara No.9663) situate in the urban area of Asur vide order of the Garden Allotment Committee dated 27-6-1955. (This area is now BMG described as Kara No. ). However, sometimes in 1960, the Kara in question was taken over byte Evacuee Trust Board (hereinafter called the Board) and the allotment of respondent No.1 was cancelled on the ground that it was an evacuee property vide order of the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner (Land) dated 3-11-1960. Subsequently, the land in question alongside some other land was auctioned byte Board in open auction and Muhammad Kiddie son of Nazi Abdullah,respondent No.l, was the highest bidder at the auction of this land for Kharif1963 to Rabbi 1965 and came into possession of the And under the auction. His father, (respondent No.]), however being desirous of renaming the allotment earlier made in his favor filed a writ petition in the High Court of West Pakistan for this purpose, but the same was dismissed as withdrawn with the observations that the writ petitioner may file an appeal before the Chief under section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement)Act, 1958 seeking a declaration that the land in question was not an evacuee trust properly, if so advised. An appeal under section 4(3) of the said Act was,accordingly, filed by him before the Chief Settlement Commissioner which was entrusted to Mr. Muhammad Shaft Afar, Additional Commissioner(Revenue), Lahore exercising the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner,but he dismissed the appeal vide order dated 23-1-1970 with the : "The documents produced by the petitioner as well as the respondent show that State is the owner of the disputed land. Salad Ram ChelaSowarsati Days Said Bragi was recorded as Dakhilkkar under ACOMMITTEE in the year 1891-92. Mahan GOP Days Cheka SowarsatiDass Said Bragi was recorded as Dakhilkar in 1911-12. Mutation No.1707 indicates that Batsman Days Cheka of Mahan GOP Days was recorded as ‘Dakhilkar’ and he was replaced by Manner Hard Heir by means of this mutation. Manner Han Heir continued to be recorded as*Dakhilkar’ in the subsequent registers Mandarin Gamin 1938–39 and1945-46 through Mahan Raji Days Baja Johan Days, detailed report of the Tonsilar dated 22-10-1936 exists on Mutation No.1707 on which this mutation in favor of Manner Hard Heir was sanctioned by the Collector. A perusal of this report indicates that certain persons had instituted a suit in the Civil Court claim mg ownership of the disputed land; but the suit was dismissed, and it was also held by the Civil Court that the Manager could be selected by the public. It was held by theTehsildar that the property belonged to Manner Hard Heir. The petitioner argues that a major part of the land under the occupancy tenancy of Manner Hard Heir has been allotted by the Border Allotment Committee to one Col. Na fees-ud- Din An sari and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 586?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 586 (SUPREME COURT, 1991-02-02): the public. It was held by theTehsildar that the property belonged to Manner Hard Heir. The petitioner argues that a major part of the land under the occupancy tenancy of Manner Hard Heir has been allotted by the Border Allotment Committee to one Col. Na fees-ud- Din An sari and Ex.P. 10 has been produced in support of this contention. It is argued that the allotment of other land of Manner Hard Heir to the said Colonel is proof that the Landis not Evacuee Trust Property. The other land is not sub judice before me at present, and it is for the Evacuee Trust Committee authorities to take necessary action in respect of its allotment. The documents produced by each side clearly establish that Manner Hard Heir is the occupancy tenant of the disputed land and there 1s therefore no doubt left that this land is attached to a religious institution as a Manner is nothing but a religious institution. In view of this, this petition is rejected and the declaration asked for is refused." Dissatisfied with this order, the respondents filed an appeal undersection 4(4) of the Act praying for setting aside of the above order passed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner and for restoration of the order of the Garden Allotment Committee dated 27-6-1955. This appeal was accepted by a learned Single Judge of the High Court who observed, inter alia, as follows:- All the documents which have been placed on record by the contesting parties go to show that the property is otherwise owned by the State and,as mentioned above, till 1936 it was in the name of different Mahantsand Gurus as Dakhilkars, but later on vide Mutation No.1707 Dakhilkarirights therein were transferred in the name of Manner Hard Heir. I am afraid, the material on record, which has been relied upon by the learned Chief Settlement Commissioner in declaring the property to be evacuectrust property is not sufficient to declare it as such. According to Hindu Law mm order to constitute a public trust the author or authors of the same must be ascertained and the intention to create a trust must be indicated by words or acts with reasonable certainty. Moreover, the purpose of trust, the trust property and the beneficiaries must be indicated so as to enable the Court to administer trust, if required." In reaching his decision the learned Judge relied upon a judgment earlier delivered by him in a case wherein he had elaborately dealt with this subject namely S. Abdus Saleem and 153 others v. Chairman, Evacuee Property Trust Board and another PLD 1975 LAH. 960. On account of his view, as expressed Anthe aforesaid judgment and reiterated by him in the present case, the learned Judge was pleased to allow the appeal and to set aside the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23-1-1970. This appeal by leave of this Court, misdirected against the aforesaid judgment of the learned Single Judge of the High Court dated 4-6-1974. Learned counsel

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 586?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 586 (SUPREME COURT, 1991-02-02): the present case, the learned Judge was pleased to allow the appeal and to set aside the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23-1-1970. This appeal by leave of this Court, misdirected against the aforesaid judgment of the learned Single Judge of the High Court dated 4-6-1974. Learned counsel for the parties have been heard. We observe that the judgment relied upon by the learned Single Judge namely S. Abdul Saleem and 153 others v. Chairman, Evacuee Property Trust Board and another PLD 1975 LAH. 960 has been expressly set aside by this Court in Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore and another v. Syed Abdus Salam and others 1990 S C M R 143. In fact, this Court has had occasion to deal with the question arise in this case, m some other judgments as well. Thus, Anthe case of District Evacuee Trust Committee v. Ashraf Khan and 3 others 1989S C M R 1636 where the question was whether in the absence of any deed of trust indicating the real purpose of trust, mere production of the extracts from the Record of Rights or City Surveys which describe a property as "Dharamshala","Piano" or by other similar expression, any such property can be declared to reattached to a religious, charitable or educational trust for the purpose of section 4of Act (XXVIII of 1958), it was held that "the entries in the official record taken as a whole leave no measure of doubt that the property was conveyed by endowment for the charitable purpose of Dharamshala and there is no medication any other evidence produced to show that the property was privately owned by any person". Therefore, applying the rule of preponderance of evidence the issue was decided in favor of the appellant that the property was attached to religious and charitable trust. Similarly, this Court in District Evacuee Trust Committee v. Muhammad Umar and others (Civil Appeal No. K-31 of 1973) 1990 S C M R 25 vide judgment delivered on 25-4- 1989 observed:- "TT is difficult to subscribe to the view taken by the High Court that in the absence of the trust deed a property could not be declared to be attached to a religious or charitable trust. It 1s to be noticed that a document creating a trust under the Hindu Laws does not require registration. In this case, all the trustees were Hindus who left Pakistan at about the time of Independence. The trust deed must have been in their possession. That BMG so, to demand that the trust deed must be produced before a property can be declared as attached to a religious or charitable trust ism the circumstances a tall order. On the other hand, there is no reason why the presumption of correctness which attaches to official records from it remains unrebutted, should not be given effect in deciding the nature of the property.” Thus, the view of this Court on this question is that if sufficient primacies evidence is adduced for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 586?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 586 (SUPREME COURT, 1991-02-02): other hand, there is no reason why the presumption of correctness which attaches to official records from it remains unrebutted, should not be given effect in deciding the nature of the property.” Thus, the view of this Court on this question is that if sufficient primacies evidence is adduced for show mg that the property in question was attached to a religious or charitable institution and this evidence is not displaced by another reliable evidence, the burden of showing actual creation of trust on the party asserting that the property is attached to a religious or charitable trust is nonessential and the matter can be decided on the rule of preponderance of evidence. A In the present case, the entries in the Revenue Record from 1936 onwards consistently show that the property belonged to Manner Hart Heir. The conduct, user and treatment of the property also indicate that the property was attached to the said Manner and no cogent evidence pointing to the contrary has been shown to us. In these circumstances, the order of the Chief dated 23-1-1970 declaring that the property was an evacuee trust property, and therefore, could not be allotted to a displaced person, was correct. The upshot is that the judgment of the High Court dated 4-6-1974 mus the set aside and the order of the Additional Commissioner (Revenue) exercising the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 23-1-1970 restored. This appeal is allowed. Since a complicated question of law arose for adjudication, the parties shall be left to bear their own costs. Ap peal allowed.

Question: What is case 1991 PLD 43 about?
Answer: Case 1991 PLD 43 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1991-04-30. The case involved SAIF ALI (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN REHABILITATION) ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S. 12 PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 11 AND 18-B AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VII OF 1974) -S. 44. The case was heard by ABDUL MAJEED MALLICK, CJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1991 PLD 43?
Answer: In case 1991 PLD 43, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN REHABILITATION) ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S. 12 PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 11 AND 18-B AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VII OF 1974) -S. 44. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1991-04-30.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1991 PLD 43?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1991 PLD 43 were: ABDUL LATIF DUTT FOR PETITIONER. CH. SHAH WALI FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. 2, AND 4.. The judges presiding were: ABDUL MAJEED MALLICK, CJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1991 PLD 43?
Answer: The parties in case 1991 PLD 43 were: SAIF ALI (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1991 PLD 43.
Answer: The dispute pertains to evacuee land, measuring 23 Canals 19 Marla's, under survey numbers 3260, 3261, 3252, 3250, 3251, 3258, 3259, 3266, 3255, 3253 and 3254, situate in village Chari, Thesis Chamber. The land as claimed by respondents Nos. 2, 3 and 4, was allotted in their name m 1953, and they occupied the same, by Virtue of their allotment, in Khan 1953. Said Al, petitioner also applied for allotment of the land in dispute. His application was granted and, on cancellation of the previous allotment, the A.R.C. Mirror allotted the land to him on June 24, 1959. He applied for ejectment of the respondents and delivery of possession on June 3, 1969, before A.R.C. (Possession) Chamber. The A.R.C. passed order of ejectment on August 30, 1969. The order was challenged by the respondents before D.R.C. Mirror. In presence of the question of previous allotment of the respondents, the D.R.C. accepted the appeal on July 11, 1972, and remanded the case to the A.R.C. to squire into the merits of allotment of the parties and to pass suitable order under law. The A.R.C. submitted his report to the D.R.C. In his report, the A.R.C. stated that in presence of the previous allotment of the respondents, subsequent allotment of the petitioner was not attainable. The D.R.C. again remanded the case to A.R.C. on April 9,1974, for passing a suitable order in the case. This order was challenged before the Rehabilitation Commissioner. The Rehabilitation Commissioner dismissed the revision petition by affirming the order of the D.R.C. On third round, the A.R.C. Mirror passed an order on July 28, 1982, wherein it was main tamed that the previous allotment was valid, as such no ejectment order could be passed by virtue of the subsequent allotment which was made without jurisdiction. This order was upheld by the D.R.C. vide his order passed on May 10, 1986. A revision petition addressed against the order of D.R.C. was dismissed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner on January 30, 1988. The petitioner feeling dissatisfied with the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner, preferred a revision petition before the learned Custodian. The learned Custodian, on going through the conquered history of the case, reversed all the orders of the subordinate Rehabilitation authorities by upholding the allotment of the petitioner. This order was passed on May 28, 1989. The respondents, feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid finding of the learned Custodian, invoked his powers in review. In exercise of review powers, the learned Custodian recalled his order of 28th May, 1989 and restored the orders of the Rehabilitation authorities by upholding the allotment of the respondents. The final order, in review was passed on 15th November, 1989. The petitioner has challenged the virus of the aforesaid order for want of jurisdiction. WW. 2. Mr. Abdul Latin Duty, the learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the order of the learned Custodian was without jurisdiction as the Custodian was not vested with review powers. It was emphasized that the land in dispute was not previously allotted to the respondents as the file of allotment of the respondents was not traceable. Moreover, the respondents failed to challenge the allotment of the petitioner in appeal or revision in due course of time, as such, on attaining finality, the allotment of the petitioner could not be reversed by the Rehabilitation authorities or the learned Custodian. Chaudhary Shah Was, the learned counsel for the respondents controverted the aforesaid objections and argued that the learned Custodian was not competent to entertain revision petition against the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner as the same was passed in ejectment proceedings. Moreover, the order of the Custodian made on 28th May, 1989, being void, was rightly recalled by the Custodian. The learned counsel referred to an unreported case, "Fair Muhammad v. Hazier", decided by this Court on February 7, 1981, in support of his contention. 3. During hearing of the petition, it was deemed expedient to summon the Record-keeper along with the Allotment Register per taming to evacuee property MN Thesis Chamber, to ascertain the validity of the allotment of the parties, in dispute. Isar Ahmad, Atari Helga Chari, appeared in the Court on 15th January, 1991 and deposed that he was in possession of the original register of allotments.* The allotment of the respondents was entered in the register. They were shown to have entered into possession of the evacuee land by virtue of their allotment, in Sharif 1953. However, he stated that he was not in possession of the file pertaining to the allotment of the respondents. In answer to a question in cross-examination, the witness stated that the register contained no entry of allotment of the petitioner. 4. The Record of Rights appended with the petition reflects that the respondents entered into possession of the land in dispute in Chart 1953 in their capacity as allottees. Their possession was continuous. They have also constructed their houses in the land. The allotment permit issued in the name of the petitioner also shows the entry of previous allotment of the respondents, as the allotment of the petitioner was made by cancelling the previous allotment. The previous allotment was cancelled on 6th April, 1959 and the subsequent allotment was made in the name of the petitioner. The allotment permit was issued on 24th June, 1959. The respondents were also in possession of the allotment WW. permit. It contains the entry of ration card number as 834, the number of members of family of the allottee as four and also the names and relationship of the family members. The total area of the allotted land was given as 30 canals. The date of delivery of possession was described as Sharif 1953. The allotment of the respondents has been held valid by the Rehabilitation authorities. The orders of the Rehabilitation authorities have not been challenged in the present petition. 5. Under the Rehabilitation Act, the Government is empowered to entertain revision petition against an order of Rehabilitation Commissioner in respect of an allotment, confirmation of allotment and cancellation of allotment. Under subsection (2) of section 12, the Government was empowered to delegate its revisional jurisdiction to any other authority. In exercise of these powers, the Government delegated its revisional jurisdiction to the Custodian. Thus, the learned Custodian was empowered to entertain revision petitions against orders of Rehabilitation Commissioner relating to allotments, confirmation of allotments and cancellation of allotments. 6. It is undenied that the proceedings in question started as ejectment proceedings before the Tonsilar with powers of Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner. The Tonsilar, exercising the powers of A.R.C. (Possession) passed an order on 30th August, 1969 in favor of the petitioner and against the respondents, to deliver possession of the land. The learned Custodian vide his order of 28th May, 1989, restored the aforesaid order of the Tonsilar/A.R.C. (Possession) by setting aside the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner of,30th January, 1988. Keeping in view the aforesaid provisions of section 12 of the Rehabilitation, Act, the learned Custodian was obviously not vested with jurisdiction to uphold the order of ejectment of the respondents passed by the Tonsilar/A.R.C. (Possession). The order was obviously without jurisdiction. 7. The other aspect of the proposition is that the learned Custodian accepted the revision petition of the petitioner on the premises that the allotment of the petitioner made in 1959 was not challenged in appeal or revision until 1969 when he himself initiated the ejectment proceedings before the A.R.C. (Possession). The learned Custodian overlooked the implication of his hypothesis, as by applying the same principle and formula to the previous allotment of the respondents, there was no answer favorable to the order of the learned Custodian. This was so, as the previous allotment was also not challenged in appeal or revision before the higher authorities. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the allotment of the respondents was the first and the earliest allotment. It was not challenged in due course of law before a competent authority, as such it attained finality. Such allotment could be cancelled, in addition to the aforesaid legal device, by abandonment by the allottees or n exercise of powers conferred under section 18(B) of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act. The allotment of the respondents was neither cancelled in exercise of powers under the provisions of section 11 of the Rehabilitation Act nor under the provisions of section 18(B) of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act. 8. The order of the learned Custodian of 28th May, 1989 was obviously without jurisdiction, as such void. Such an order carried no protection of law, as such it carried no force in the manner of its existence as a legal order. An identical order passed by D.R.C. in Ghulam Harder’s case, PLD 1962 Lahore 326, was ruled out of consideration for want of jurisdiction, in the following manner:- "It appears to me that this contention of learned counsel for the appellant has no more force than those already disposed of If the order of Malik Karma Dad Khan was without jurisdiction, the circumstance that it was not attacked as such in any previous proceedings taken against the order, cannot confer on it a binding force. In the eye of law, an order passed without jurisdiction, does not exist at all and can be ignored by anyone who chooses to treat it as a waste paper, which it is, and, therefore, the omission of the petitioners in the writ petition accepted by means of the order under appeal to attack the order of Malik Karma Dad Khan on the ground that it was without jurisdiction, can be of no avail to the appellant.” 9. On coming to the conclusion that the order of the learned Custodian of 28th May, 1989 was an illegal and unlawful order, it was least permissible to allow such an illegality to perpetuate. Thus, it was not desirable of this Court to exercise writ jurisdiction to give fresh life to a void order. 10. In an identical situation, ah order passed by the learned Custodian in Fair Muhammad’s case on 28th January, 1979 was recalled in exercise of review powers vide order of 16th March, 1980. The subsequent order passed by the Custodian was challenged in a writ petition before this Court. The learned Judges constituting the Division Bench dismissed the petition on 7th February, 1981, as in their opinion, writ jurisdiction of the High Court could not be evoked for restoration of an illegal order which was passed even in absence of. the opposite-party in violation of the rule of ‘Audi alteram partem’. It was observed that the previous order of the Custodian being without jurisdiction, was a nullity in the eye of law; therefore, to recall an illegal order by a subsequent order was not an illegality as it was just to set the things towards the right direction. The aforesaid decision of this Court supports the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents to repel the contention of the petitioner. 11. It is noticed that the Rehabilitation authorities, at all levels, upheld the allotment of the respondents as a valid allotment. The reaffirmation of validity of allotment of the respondents does not fall within the ambit of the provisions of section 11 of the Rehabilitation Act unless, of course, the original order of allotment passed in 1953 was assailed,in due course of law, by the petitioner and in that perspective, the allotment of the respondents was re-opened and confirmed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. In absence of such a situation, it was not permissible to construe the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner as an order of allotment, confirmation or cancellation of allotment as contemplated under the provisions of the Rehabilitation Act. Therefore, in all respects the order of the Custodian of 28th May, 1989, was unsustainable. 12. As the allotment of the respondents was not questioned in due course of time, it attained finality. Subsequently it Was not open to question in ejectment proceedings. Thus, the allotment being valid, was fairly sustainable. The impugned order of the Custodian was passed to recall an illegal order. Therefore, such an order cannot be reversed in exercise of writ jurisdiction to provide perpetuity to a void and illegal order. There is no force in the WNT petition. It is, therefore, dismissed. No order as to costs. A.A./453/H.C.A. Petition dismissed. WWW

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 43?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 43 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1991-04-30): The dispute pertains to evacuee land, measuring 23 Canals 19 Marla's, under survey numbers 3260, 3261, 3252, 3250, 3251, 3258, 3259, 3266, 3255, 3253 and 3254, situate in village Chari, Thesis Chamber. The land as claimed by respondents Nos. 2, 3 and 4, was allotted in their name m 1953, and they occupied the same, by Virtue of their allotment, in Khan 1953. Said Al, petitioner also applied for allotment of the land in dispute. His application was granted and, on cancellation of the previous allotment, the A.R.C. Mirror allotted the land to him on June 24, 1959. He applied for ejectment of the respondents and delivery of possession on June 3, 1969, before A.R.C. (Possession) Chamber. The A.R.C. passed order of ejectment on August 30, 1969. The order was challenged by the respondents before D.R.C. Mirror. In presence of the question of previous allotment of the respondents, the D.R.C. accepted the appeal on July 11, 1972, and remanded the case to the A.R.C. to squire into the merits of allotment of the parties and to pass suitable order under law. The A.R.C. submitted his report to the D.R.C. In his report, the A.R.C. stated that in presence of the previous allotment of the respondents, subsequent allotment of the petitioner was not attainable. The D.R.C. again remanded the case to A.R.C. on April 9,1974, for passing a suitable order in the case. This order was challenged before the Rehabilitation Commissioner. The Rehabilitation Commissioner dismissed the revision petition by affirming the order of the D.R.C. On third round, the A.R.C. Mirror passed an order on July 28, 1982, wherein it was main tamed that the previous allotment was valid, as such no ejectment order could be passed by virtue of the subsequent allotment which was made without jurisdiction. This order was upheld by the D.R.C. vide his order passed on May 10, 1986. A revision petition addressed against the order of D.R.C. was dismissed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner on January 30, 1988. The petitioner feeling dissatisfied with the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner, preferred a revision petition before the learned Custodian. The learned Custodian, on going through the conquered history of the case, reversed all the orders of the subordinate Rehabilitation authorities by upholding the allotment of the petitioner. This order was passed on May 28, 1989. The respondents, feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid finding of the learned Custodian, invoked his powers in review. In exercise of review powers, the learned Custodian recalled his order of 28th May, 1989 and restored the orders of the Rehabilitation authorities by upholding the allotment of the respondents. The final order, in review was passed on 15th November, 1989. The petitioner has challenged the virus of the aforesaid order for want of jurisdiction. WW. 2. Mr. Abdul Latin Duty, the learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the order of the learned Custodian was without jurisdiction as the Custodian was not vested with review powers. It was emphasized that the land in dispute was not previously

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 43?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 43 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1991-04-30): the aforesaid order for want of jurisdiction. WW. 2. Mr. Abdul Latin Duty, the learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the order of the learned Custodian was without jurisdiction as the Custodian was not vested with review powers. It was emphasized that the land in dispute was not previously allotted to the respondents as the file of allotment of the respondents was not traceable. Moreover, the respondents failed to challenge the allotment of the petitioner in appeal or revision in due course of time, as such, on attaining finality, the allotment of the petitioner could not be reversed by the Rehabilitation authorities or the learned Custodian. Chaudhary Shah Was, the learned counsel for the respondents controverted the aforesaid objections and argued that the learned Custodian was not competent to entertain revision petition against the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner as the same was passed in ejectment proceedings. Moreover, the order of the Custodian made on 28th May, 1989, being void, was rightly recalled by the Custodian. The learned counsel referred to an unreported case, "Fair Muhammad v. Hazier", decided by this Court on February 7, 1981, in support of his contention. 3. During hearing of the petition, it was deemed expedient to summon the Record-keeper along with the Allotment Register per taming to evacuee property MN Thesis Chamber, to ascertain the validity of the allotment of the parties, in dispute. Isar Ahmad, Atari Helga Chari, appeared in the Court on 15th January, 1991 and deposed that he was in possession of the original register of allotments.* The allotment of the respondents was entered in the register. They were shown to have entered into possession of the evacuee land by virtue of their allotment, in Sharif 1953. However, he stated that he was not in possession of the file pertaining to the allotment of the respondents. In answer to a question in cross-examination, the witness stated that the register contained no entry of allotment of the petitioner. 4. The Record of Rights appended with the petition reflects that the respondents entered into possession of the land in dispute in Chart 1953 in their capacity as allottees. Their possession was continuous. They have also constructed their houses in the land. The allotment permit issued in the name of the petitioner also shows the entry of previous allotment of the respondents, as the allotment of the petitioner was made by cancelling the previous allotment. The previous allotment was cancelled on 6th April, 1959 and the subsequent allotment was made in the name of the petitioner. The allotment permit was issued on 24th June, 1959. The respondents were also in possession of the allotment WW. permit. It contains the entry of ration card number as 834, the number of members of family of the allottee as four and also the names and relationship of the family members. The total area of the allotted land was given as 30 canals. The date of delivery of possession was described as Sharif 1953. The allotment of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 43?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 43 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1991-04-30): as 834, the number of members of family of the allottee as four and also the names and relationship of the family members. The total area of the allotted land was given as 30 canals. The date of delivery of possession was described as Sharif 1953. The allotment of the respondents has been held valid by the Rehabilitation authorities. The orders of the Rehabilitation authorities have not been challenged in the present petition. 5. Under the Rehabilitation Act, the Government is empowered to entertain revision petition against an order of Rehabilitation Commissioner in respect of an allotment, confirmation of allotment and cancellation of allotment. Under subsection (2) of section 12, the Government was empowered to delegate its revisional jurisdiction to any other authority. In exercise of these powers, the Government delegated its revisional jurisdiction to the Custodian. Thus, the learned Custodian was empowered to entertain revision petitions against orders of Rehabilitation Commissioner relating to allotments, confirmation of allotments and cancellation of allotments. 6. It is undenied that the proceedings in question started as ejectment proceedings before the Tonsilar with powers of Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner. The Tonsilar, exercising the powers of A.R.C. (Possession) passed an order on 30th August, 1969 in favor of the petitioner and against the respondents, to deliver possession of the land. The learned Custodian vide his order of 28th May, 1989, restored the aforesaid order of the Tonsilar/A.R.C. (Possession) by setting aside the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner of,30th January, 1988. Keeping in view the aforesaid provisions of section 12 of the Rehabilitation, Act, the learned Custodian was obviously not vested with jurisdiction to uphold the order of ejectment of the respondents passed by the Tonsilar/A.R.C. (Possession). The order was obviously without jurisdiction. 7. The other aspect of the proposition is that the learned Custodian accepted the revision petition of the petitioner on the premises that the allotment of the petitioner made in 1959 was not challenged in appeal or revision until 1969 when he himself initiated the ejectment proceedings before the A.R.C. (Possession). The learned Custodian overlooked the implication of his hypothesis, as by applying the same principle and formula to the previous allotment of the respondents, there was no answer favorable to the order of the learned Custodian. This was so, as the previous allotment was also not challenged in appeal or revision before the higher authorities. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the allotment of the respondents was the first and the earliest allotment. It was not challenged in due course of law before a competent authority, as such it attained finality. Such allotment could be cancelled, in addition to the aforesaid legal device, by abandonment by the allottees or n exercise of powers conferred under section 18(B) of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act. The allotment of the respondents was neither cancelled in exercise of powers under the provisions of section 11 of the Rehabilitation Act nor under the provisions of section 18(B) of the Administration of Evacuee Property

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 43?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 43 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1991-04-30): exercise of powers conferred under section 18(B) of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act. The allotment of the respondents was neither cancelled in exercise of powers under the provisions of section 11 of the Rehabilitation Act nor under the provisions of section 18(B) of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act. 8. The order of the learned Custodian of 28th May, 1989 was obviously without jurisdiction, as such void. Such an order carried no protection of law, as such it carried no force in the manner of its existence as a legal order. An identical order passed by D.R.C. in Ghulam Harder’s case, PLD 1962 Lahore 326, was ruled out of consideration for want of jurisdiction, in the following manner:- "It appears to me that this contention of learned counsel for the appellant has no more force than those already disposed of If the order of Malik Karma Dad Khan was without jurisdiction, the circumstance that it was not attacked as such in any previous proceedings taken against the order, cannot confer on it a binding force. In the eye of law, an order passed without jurisdiction, does not exist at all and can be ignored by anyone who chooses to treat it as a waste paper, which it is, and, therefore, the omission of the petitioners in the writ petition accepted by means of the order under appeal to attack the order of Malik Karma Dad Khan on the ground that it was without jurisdiction, can be of no avail to the appellant.” 9. On coming to the conclusion that the order of the learned Custodian of 28th May, 1989 was an illegal and unlawful order, it was least permissible to allow such an illegality to perpetuate. Thus, it was not desirable of this Court to exercise writ jurisdiction to give fresh life to a void order. 10. In an identical situation, ah order passed by the learned Custodian in Fair Muhammad’s case on 28th January, 1979 was recalled in exercise of review powers vide order of 16th March, 1980. The subsequent order passed by the Custodian was challenged in a writ petition before this Court. The learned Judges constituting the Division Bench dismissed the petition on 7th February, 1981, as in their opinion, writ jurisdiction of the High Court could not be evoked for restoration of an illegal order which was passed even in absence of. the opposite-party in violation of the rule of ‘Audi alteram partem’. It was observed that the previous order of the Custodian being without jurisdiction, was a nullity in the eye of law; therefore, to recall an illegal order by a subsequent order was not an illegality as it was just to set the things towards the right direction. The aforesaid decision of this Court supports the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents to repel the contention of the petitioner. 11. It is noticed that the Rehabilitation authorities, at all levels, upheld the allotment of the respondents as a valid

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1991 PLD 43?
Answer: From case 1991 PLD 43 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1991-04-30): set the things towards the right direction. The aforesaid decision of this Court supports the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents to repel the contention of the petitioner. 11. It is noticed that the Rehabilitation authorities, at all levels, upheld the allotment of the respondents as a valid allotment. The reaffirmation of validity of allotment of the respondents does not fall within the ambit of the provisions of section 11 of the Rehabilitation Act unless, of course, the original order of allotment passed in 1953 was assailed,in due course of law, by the petitioner and in that perspective, the allotment of the respondents was re-opened and confirmed by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. In absence of such a situation, it was not permissible to construe the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner as an order of allotment, confirmation or cancellation of allotment as contemplated under the provisions of the Rehabilitation Act. Therefore, in all respects the order of the Custodian of 28th May, 1989, was unsustainable. 12. As the allotment of the respondents was not questioned in due course of time, it attained finality. Subsequently it Was not open to question in ejectment proceedings. Thus, the allotment being valid, was fairly sustainable. The impugned order of the Custodian was passed to recall an illegal order. Therefore, such an order cannot be reversed in exercise of writ jurisdiction to provide perpetuity to a void and illegal order. There is no force in the WNT petition. It is, therefore, dismissed. No order as to costs. A.A./453/H.C.A. Petition dismissed. WWW

Question: What is case 1965 PLD 535 about?
Answer: Case 1965 PLD 535 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1965-03-29. The case involved WHADERA ALLAH DIWAYA KHAN N (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include RECORD OF RIGHTS PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. (3), (5), 5, AND 8. The case was heard by J. ORTCHESON, YAQUB ALI AND S. A. MAHMOOD.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: In case 1965 PLD 535, the court applied the following statutes: RECORD OF RIGHTS PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. (3), (5), 5, AND 8. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1965-03-29.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1965 PLD 535 were: DOST MUHAMMAD AWAN FOR PETITIONER. ISHAQ MUHAMMAD KHAN, S. C. (LEGAL) FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 2.NEMO FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 32.. The judges presiding were: J. ORTCHESON, YAQUB ALI AND S. A. MAHMOOD.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: The parties in case 1965 PLD 535 were: WHADERA ALLAH DIWAYA KHAN N (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1965 PLD 535.
Answer: Judgment S. A. Mahmood, J.-This writ petition arises out of an application made by Waders Allah Diana Khan petitioner to the Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore, on the 30th or 3lst of January 1950, under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949) for a declaration that land measuring 820 canals, entered in that No. khatuniNo. 11, according to Jacaranda for the year 1943-44, situate in Maura Khairpur, Thesis Jaipur of Bahawalpur District, given to evacuee respondents for building houses thereon for residential purposes long before Partition, on the condition that when the evacuees leave, the lands and the superstructures thereon would become the property of the petitioner, had become his property on their departure from the village. He further alleged that he became owner of the lands in dispute under the terms embodied in the Najib-ul-arz whereby the land reverted to the landlord on abandonment by the persons who had constructed houses on his land with his permission. The Deputy Custodian, by his order dated 30th September 1959, came to the conclusion that though it was established that the land on which the houses were built belonged to the petitioner, and presumed it to be correct that according to the terms and conditions of Najib-ul-arz the superstructures became the property of the landlord, the evacuee respondents did not leave the village in this case of their own sweet will, but were forced to leave for India in order to save their lives at the time of Partition, and that as this was a Situation not envisaged by the Najib-ul-arz, it was not justified to give the entire valuable property to the petitioner free. He felt that as according to the agreements the petitioner had a prior right over the buildings, he should pay the prevalent market-price of the superstructures in question, and ordered that when this had been done, he would acquire full proprietary rights in them. He left the market-price of the superstructure to be determined by the Rehabilitation Department or the Settlement Authorities. It may be mentioned that though the agreements related to a few canals of land, the declaration was given by the Deputy Custodian about 820 canals of land. This order was reviewed by the learned Custodian under section 43 (1) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) after notice to the petitioner and after harem him. The learned Custodian vacated the order of the Deputy Custodian holding that the Najib-ul-arz did not embody in it the right claimed in favor of the landlord, who owned proprietary rights in the land, but that all that it mentioned was that the bashing, other than those who had executed agreements or writings in favor of the landlords, shall be entitled to reconstruct the houses and to rent them out or to sell them. The admission of the petitioner that the houses were constructed by the non-Muslims, definitely proved that they had a right of permanent residence in those houses, which was saved, in spite of the abandonment, by section 8 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957). The learned counsel for the petitioner relied before the learned Custodian on six agreements which were executed in favor of the petitioner by some of the respondents in respect of six houses. In respect of these, the learned Custodian ordered that the petitioner may, if so advised, separately press his claim on the basis of the agreements, and the Settlement Department was directed to examine the claim of the petitioner, if it was preferred. It was observed that if any of the evacuee-respondents was under a stipulation or lability of any kind undertaken by him in any agreement in favor of the ground landlord, it shall have to be upheld, if duly proved, as against the persons who had now succeeded to those rights, 1e. the persons to whom those houses had been allotted or transferred by the Settlement or Rehabilitation Department. Dissatisfied with this order of the learned Custodian, dated the 19th of February 1962 the petitioner has moved this Court under Article 98 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and has prayed that the order of the learned Custodian declaring the property to be evacuee, be held to be FNO legal effect, BMG without lawful authority. 2. Before the admitting Bench, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the decision in Mark Am Muhammad Khan v. The Custodian, West Pakistan (1) but the learned Judges felt that whether an evacuee who left the country “under the force of circumstances” could be said to leave “voluntarily’, required re-consideration, since TT appeared, prima facie, that the very word “force” constituted a negation of voluntary action. Consequently, this Full Bench has been constituted. 3. Before dealing with the questions which fall for determination by us, it is necessary to first examine the agreements which have been executed by the respondents in favor of the ground landlord and to mention that from amongst the respondents, Ram Na rain Days, Lachman Days, Tiara Lai, Pars Mai, Kowal son of Mango Mai, UDA Ram and ADU Ram have not executed any agreement. Out of the renaming respondents, the agreements entered into by Dhaka Days son of DHA Days on 26th August 1946 in respect of 800 sq. ft. and on 4th November 1941 MN respect of 238 sq. ft. and 900 sq. ft. by Thailand Ram respondent on 4th April 1946 in respect of 384 sq. ft. by Asa Ram alias Jump Ram on 5th October 1944 in respect of 600 sq. ft. by Ram Na rain Days and Roshan Days on 6th March 1946 in respect of 9,600 sq. ft. by Ram Na rain on 9th May 1946 MN respect of 2,000 sq. ft. and on 26th August 1946 in respect of 1,200 sq. ft. by MST. Jiang Mai on 24th January 1928 in respect of 332 sq. ft. are all agreements of sale of the lands, evidence payment of a part (mostly one-fourth) of the consideration, leaving the remainder in the hands of the vendees, which sum had to be paid by them before the land and the houses constructed thereon could be sold, mortgaged or leased out by these persons. Whether the balance of the consideration had been paid off or. not has not been determined by the Custodian, but if it has not been paid by the above vendees of the sites, the petitioner can claim a declaration from the Custodian to that effect and have the balance, but he can have no right to the reversion of the sites on their evacuation or leaving the country. 4. Dhaka Days respondent executed an agreement on 8th April 1933 in respect of land measuring 10 hath X10 hath for a house to be constructed on it within the stipulated period, to be resided m. He had the right to alienate, mortgage and lease out the house with the permission of the ground landlord, MN which case the consideration for the sale, mortgage or the lease had to be shared equally between Adhere Allah Diana and him. Similar are the Terra of the agreements executed by Shankar Days and Area £ Mal dated 27th Roman-ul Mubarak, 1329, by Shankar Days son of Hand, Taken Mai and Maisey Mai on 29th Roman-ul-Mubarnik, 1329, by Tara Ram executed on 6th Roman- UL Mubarak 1329, by Hanuman Mai and Kowal Ram on 27th Roman-ul-Mubarik 1329, by Kowal Ram and Adhara Ram executed on 22nd Roman-ul-Mubarik, 1329, by MST. Sari Mai on 3rd April 1934, by Ram Hand and Lachman Days on 7th January 1917, by Birth Mai and Picard Ram on 29th Roman-ul-Mubarik, 1329, and by Chapman Lai on 17th July 1907. In these agreements it is stipulated that the landlord of the sites is entitled to half of the share of the consideration of sale, mortgage or lease entered mint to with his permission and the executant of the agreements the renaming half. It is also stated in some of the agreements that the land and its ownership will remain vested in the Waders owner and of the house in the execution, Le. the person who constructs the house. In most of the agreements the owner of the site has been given the right to resume possession of the site in case of breach of the terms of the agreement. There is no express stipulation in any agreement except the one by Thailand Ram, that the site will revert to the owner if the grantee of the site abandons the house. Even in the case of the agreement by Thailand Ram, the recital as to the right of resumption of the site is a clear interpolation m a different ink. These persons had rights, evidenced by agreements in writing which are substantial in nature. As stated in Najib-ul-arz of 1920-21, these agreements govern their rights. It was not the petitioner’s case before the learned Custodian that they have committed any breach of their agreements to confer on the landlord any right of resumption of the sites. 5. In the agreement executed by Kowal Ram on 5th March 1917, no conditions are stated. It is merely recited that the house has been constructed with the permission of the landlord. In the agreement by Transit Rai, dated 8th April 1922, there is no right in him to alienate the land, but he had a right to sell the superstructure, of which the value could be fixed up to Rs. 200. 6. In the case of those respondents mentioned above, from whom the petitioner and his father had not obtained any agreement in writing, the petitioner’s claim is based on the entry in the Najib-ul-arz of the Village Khairpur for the year 1908. The relevant entry is to the effect that the residents of the village have no might to construct a house without the permission of the landlords, and if any resident abandons his residence, he cannot remove the superstructure without the permission of the landlord but if any resident buys his land and constructs a building thereon, he has the right to sell it and to remove the superstructure. This entry does not, by itself make the landlord owner of the superstructure in case the non-proprietor, who has built the house, abandons it. The entry underwent a radical change in the year 1920-21 at the time of the fourth Settlement. The entry recorded in the Najib-ul-arz in 1920-21 is to the following effect “Except m the case of those residents from whom the landlords have obtained agreements in writing, the remaining residents are entitled to construct, sell and lease out the houses constructed by them. In the case of those owners of houses who have executed agreements in favor of landlords, the sale and alienation of houses will be effected in accordance with the terms and conditions in the documents and agreements.” 7. Entries in the Najib-ul-arz are a village statement of customs as distinguished from the District statement of customs, which is called the rival-+ AAM. A custom is expression of the will of a very large majority of the people who agree to be and are governed by it. A presumption of correctness attaches to entries of custom in the Najib-ul-arz. It will be presumed that an entry in it embodies a custom which existed when it was recorded in the Najib-ul-arz. Just as the unanimous, or almost unanimous, will of a community can establish custom, it can also change or abrogate it. Like other entries in the record-of-rights, entries in the Najib-ul-arz are open to periodical revision in the light of changes that may have taken place in the outlook and conduct of the residents of the village concerned in respect of customs obtaining amongst them. The entry of 1908 was not repeated in the Najib-ul-arz of 1920-21, which is the relevant entry. The later entry in the Najib-ul-arz is inconsistent with the earlier entry. To it also a presumption of correctness attaches. There is thus clear evidence of change in the custom since the earlier entry. The earlier entry can no longer be regarded as a record of custom existing in 1920-21, and it must be deemed to have ceased to operate. It has been B held in Chandra Than and another v. Mohammad and others (1) that where a new wait-ul-arz has been framed, the old one ceases to be operative. Consequently, the entry in the Najib-ul-arz of 1908 is of no avail to the petitioner. B 8. The petitioner’s counsel then relied on paragraphs 236, 237 and 238 of the Customary Law by Rattigan. Paragraph 236 states that in the absence of a well-established custom, a nonproprietary resident in a village cannot dispose of site on which his house is built, or a right of residence in the house, without the consent of the proprietors of the village. He is ordinarily entitled to sell the materials, and the purchaser must remove the same within a reasonable period. According to paragraph 237, a nonproprietary resident, who obtains a site for building purposes must build upon it within a reasonable time, or surrender it to the proprietors. According to paragraph 238-and this is the material paragraph relied on by the learned counsel-if a non-proprietor abandons his house, the site reverts to the proprietor, and he cannot claim it afterward on his return to the village. The petitioner claims that as the respondents have abandoned the houses, the sites, including the superstructures, have reverted to him as proprietor of the sites and the Custodian can claim no right or interest in them, because no rights of the evacuees were left even in the superstructures. The custom stated in paragraph 238 above is not applicable to the cases in hand, as it is not consistent with the entry in the Najib-ul-arz of the village pertaining to the year 1920-21, whereby, in the absence of an agreement, a proprietor has no right or interest in the site of a building put up by a non-proprietor, and the person who has constructed a house is its owner with rights of alienation, and where the landlord of the site has obtained an agreement, the terms and conditions of the agreement bind the parties and therefore the question of the application of the general custom as recorded in paragraph 238, does not arise. Thus, in the case of those respondents who did not execute any agreement MN favor of the landlord, the petitioner has no right, according to the wailful are, to claim the site or the superstructure. In the case of those who have purchased the sites, the petitioner has no right or interest left in the houses or the sites, except to the extent that the balance of the consideration remains unpaid to him. With regard to the second set of agreements by which sites were granted to the respondents, on which houses have been constructed by them, the landlord still has interest in the sites to the extent that he had to receive one-half of the consideration in the case of sale, mortgage or lease (which in some cases, could only be entered into with his permission) as landlord of the site, but the persons executing the agreements had also acquired rights in the superstructure put up by them, in lieu of which they were entitled to receive one-half of the consideration. There are some agreements clearly reciting that ownership of the building shall vest in the persons constructing the houses. They had undoubtedly acquired interest in the sites also. In most of the cases the rights of the parties are defined by the agreements, and the petitioner cannot claim that the executants of the agreements had no night or interest in the houses and the sites. Their right or interest in the houses and the sites constitutes evacuee property, which is defined in subsection (3) of section 2 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, (hereinafter referred to as the Act) which replaced Ordnance XX of 1956 as follows C “ ‘Evacuee property’ means any property in which an evacuee has any right or interest (whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or m any other capacity) and includes “Property” is further defined in subsection (5) as meaning property of any kind, and includes any right or interest in such property and debt, but does not include a mere right to sue. The respondents are admittedly evacuees as defined in subsection (2) of section 2 of the Act. By virtue of section 7 of the Act, their night or interest in evacuee property vests and shall be deemed always to have vested in the Custodian with effect from IST day of March 1947. Section 8 (1) of the Act further provides that : “Where the rights of an evacuee in any land or in any house or other building consist or consisted of occupancy or tenancy rights, or rights as lessee or grantee, nothing contained in any law for the time being in force or in any contract or in any instrument having the force of law or in any decree or order of any Court or any other authority shall extinguish or be deemed to have exon gushed any such rights on the occupant, tenant, lessee or grantee becoming an evacuee or at any time thereafter so as to prevent such rights from vesting in the Custodian or being dealt with as evacuee property, and neither the Custodian nor the evacuee shall be label to be ejected or be deemed to have become so liable on any ground whatsoever for any default of the evacuee committed after he became an evacuee or within a period of one year immediately before the date of his becoming an evacuee, the Custodian.” 9. The learned counsel for the petitioner contends, firstly, that the evacuee respondents had no such right or interest in the property as can be described as “evacuee property’, and that, secondly, section 8 of the Act has no application to the case as the evacuee respondents did not enjoy any occupancy or tenancy right or rights as lessee or grantee. He relies on Malik Ami Muhammad Khan v. The Custodian, West Pakistan in which Shabbir Ahmad, J. held (Mr. Iraq Muhammad Khan, learned counsel for the department conceding-but he claimed that he had been misunderstood) that the rights to which the dispute related, namely, the nights of residence of evacuee owners of buildings put up by them on sites granted by the petitioner in the case, were not evacuee property by reason of the fact that they fell under the provisions of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949) and the later Ordinances and Acts which replaced it. The learned Judge further held that “the right of residence” did not survive after the non-proprietor non-Muslims had left, for the right of residence, which was peculiar to the customary law of Punjab, terminated the moment a person, who had the right, left the property of his own accord, and that the night was heritable, though not transferable, by the person, on whom TT had been conferred, unless the proprietary body agreed. It may be noted that throughout the learned Judge described it as a right and the real reason for denying that it was a right was that it terminated or did not survive after the non-proprietor non-Muslims left the properties of their own accord. With the utmost respect, we are unable to agree that the right of the evacuees was not evacuee property. Manner Nadir, C. J. as he then was, in his judgment, while referring to section 8 of the Act, has found that the effect of section 8 was that for the purposes of determining rights in or over property, the fact that a person has migrated from Pakistan must be ignored, and those rights be determined as if he was still present where he was. While he agreed in principle with the test that the fact that non-Muslim residents of the land in question had gone away must be ignored, and on the assumption that they are still residing where they were, he concluded that it should be held that their right to continue to reside there is alive and available to the Custodian. With this view we are in agreement with all respect. But he was of the opinion that it was incapable of application to the kind of “right” with which they were concerned, for the “right” was nothing more than a permission given by a proprietor to certain families in a village community to reside on his land, coupled with an undertaking that he will not turn them out or use that land for any other purposes so long as those families continue to reside there. The appearance of “right” flowed from the undertaking not to evict, but that undertaking was of a personal character between the proprietor and the particular family. The proprietor had not parted with any right of his in or over the land. The only right he had parted with was his night to withdraw or revoke the permission he had given to the particular family. As soon as that family was not there to claim or enforce that personal obligation against the proprietor, that obligation must lapse. It seemed to the learned C. J. that the correct way of looking at that kind of transaction was that the families which were allowed to reside on the land, “at no stage acquired the right to reside on that land”, but were given an immunity available only to those families from being evicted by the landlord. To hold otherwise would be productive of results that it seemed unreasonable to suppose were intended by the Legislature. Finally, the learned C. J. concluded that the supposed “right to reside in the two cases was not a right at all’ and the said section 8 had no application to it. The Times underlined! above show that according to the learned C. J. himself the landlord had parted with a night and placed himself under an obligation, and, therefore, his earlier conclusion that he had not parted with any right in or over his land is difficult to accept. It could not be said that the families, who were granted the permission, “at no stage acquired the night to reside on the land, and it was no right at all’. Whether the obligation lapsed or not is beside the post in this context, but to call it a right, and it has all the necessary concomitants of aright and deny that it is a right is a contradiction in terms. 10. “Evacuee property” means any property in which an evacuee has any right or interest whether personally or as a trustee or as a beneficiary or in any other capacity. A right is defined in Salmon’s book on Jurisprudence 1957 Edition as an interest recognized and protected by a rule of right. It is any interest, respect for which is a duty, and the disregard of which TS a wrong. The interests which receive recognition and protection D from the rules of right are called rights. Every man who has a right to anything has an interest in it also, but he may have an interest without having his right. Whether his interest amounts to a right depends on whether there exists with respect to it a duty imposed upon any other person. In other words, his right is an interest the violation of which is a wrong. It will be noticed that the definition clause includes not only the word “right’” but also “interest”. All that is necessary is that there should be a right or interest, that is, there should be property in which an evacuee has any right or interest. 11. The learned Judges, in the case cited above, have termed the right as a “right of residence” in order, evidently, to avoid the conclusion that it was a right in property. Even where a non- e proprietor has been granted a site to build a house on it for the purposes of his and his family’s residence on the condition that he would remove the superstructure if he abandons the village, has he not buy building a house on the site granted to him acquired a right or interest MN it, besides a clear merest in the build mg ? Has he not acquired an interest in the site with a right to hold and possess it to the exclusion of every one else including the owner and as long as he or his family wishes to stay or reside m the house ? Is his right not protected by the law ? Can it be ignored that the right is conferred not only on one person but on the family, and that it is a heritable right to be enjoyed for generations so long as they choose to avail of it and the grantor of the site, Le. the landlord has no right to terminate the grant? Can he get the site back even if he wanted it in exercise of the right of ownership without a surrender by the grantee? Has he not, therefore, parted with substantial rights in the land, which was his property? How is TT possible, to deny that the owner has parted with and conferred rights on the grantee in the site ? He has unmistakably placed himself and his heirs and successors under an obligation. This situation can only arise if he has parted with some of his rights. The grantee has thus acquired valuable rights in property. 12. There are also two clear distinguishing features between the case of the owner of the sites in Malik Amir Muhammad Khan v. The Custodian, West Pakistan and the present case. In that case the non-proprietor grantees had no right to alienate the buildings standing on the site and there is no indication that the land was granted in lieu of some consideration or services to be rendered. In the present case, as stated already, the nonproprietors, who have been granted sites, had the right to transfer their right sim the super structure, in some cases on their own, while in others with the permission of the landlord. Secondly, the sites have been granted to the respondents in lieu of services to be rendered and certain periodical payments to be made by them. This satisfies the requirements of section 105 of the Transfer of Property Act, namely, a transfer of a right to enjoy immovable property made for a certain time express or implied, or in perpetuity, in consideration of a price paid or promised or of money, a share of crops, service or any other thing of value, to be rendered periodically or on specified occasions to. the transferor by the transferee, who accepts the transfer on such terms. It is plain, therefore, that some of the respondents have obtained leases in perpetuity of the sites granted to them. 13. In the view of Shabbir Ahmad, J. the non-proprietor’s right of residence teammates the moment a non-proprietor non-Muslim leaves the property of his own accord, and the right does not survive under custom if the non-proprietors abandon their houses. The word “abandon” according to New English Dictionary, Volume I, means “to give up absolutely, to surrender, to relinquish all claim to property, to renounce, to leave off, to forsake, to desert.” It has the connotation of leaving with anointed ton not to return to it. In most cases, the evacuees, on leaving, did not intend to abandon the houses, but their departure was forced by circumstances, and a vast majority of them intended to come back, but have found it not possible to return on account of circumstances beyond their control. It cannot, therefore, be said that they intended to abandon their houses the moment they left, though, it may be said by now that the houses have been abandoned. But by reason of the evacuee laws, their right and interest in the evacuee property has vested m the Custodian, and such property is held on his behalf The extinguishment of their rights, the moment they left, cannot therefore be inferred. 14. Abandonment implies voluntary surrender or renunciation of the property. Shabbir Ahmad, J. in the case of Malik Amir Muhammad Khan has held that the non-Muslim non- proprietors left voluntarily, although they were forced by circumstances to leave, being afraid of harm coming to them in the communal riots that had broken out near about the birth of Pakistan. His reasons are as follows “The term ‘voluntarily’ means of one’s own accord, and I am clear in my mind that the fact that departure was under the force of circumstances cannot make it voluntary. If for example, a person who had a right of residence in a house left the village because he felt that by gong to some other place he would get living wages, which he was not getting, it could not be reasonably contended by anyone that the departure was not voluntary. Similarly, if such a person were to leave because he felt that his safety or that of his near and dear ones lay in departure, it would be difficult to assert that the case was not one of voluntary departure. Equally similarly, if a person feels that the village in which he is residing is unsafe by reason of the fact that it is populated by marauders and dacoits who have but little compunction in attacking and looting neighboring villages, it is obvious that the departure motivated by these considerations could not be said to be involuntary. If} however, the proprietors or someone else turned out the person who resided in the village by means of causing or threatening harm, that departure could not be said to be voluntary. There is no evidence, direct or circumstantial, to establish that any one of the non-Muslims whose rights the Custodian wants to take possession of, had left the village concerned because an injury had been caused to him or a threat of injury had been held out to him, and though I am not saying that such threats were not held out nor that injuries had not been caused at the time of Partition to some persons, I am clear in my mind that some non-Muslims left because they felt that their safety or betterment lay in going to the newly-set-up Common of India.”’ While in the first instance mentioned by the learned Judge it may be conceded that the departure was voluntary, and the second instance may be on the borderline, it 1s, with all respect to him, difficult to agree that the third instance is also a case of voluntary departure. In the circumstances, the person has been forced by circumstances to leave for reasons of safety of himself and his dear ones, and though he may have gone on his own, he has been forced to leave, which cannot be said to be voluntary abandonment. In the first instance the leaving was initially tended to be temporary in view of the turbulent conditions with a desire to return on peaceful conditions being restored, and secondly, TT was forced by the circumstances. There was no voluntary abandonment. As observed by the admitting Bench, leaving under the force of circumstances indicates lack of volition, because force constitutes a negation of voluntary action. If the learned Judge has himself observed that if the proprietor or some-one else were to turn out a person by means of causing or threatening harm, his departure would not be voluntary, where is the difference where he is turned out by grave apprehension of harm or even of threatened harm ? The conditions created in both the parts of the sub-Continent became so disturbed that there was great apprehension of harm, and in the circumstances most persons were forced to leave, of which fact we can take judicial notice. It is not necessary that there should be evidenced that there was threat of harm which led the non-Muslims to leave the country. It is enough that they have left in the then prevailing conditions, which were unfortunately highly disturbed, as there were riots of communal nature on either side of the border. No one leaves his hearth and home, his place of birth, his business and valuable property unless he is so compelled. We do not think that the non-Muslims or Muslims left their hearths and homes with the idea of betterment of their future prospects. We are, therefore, unable to agree, with all respect to the learned Judges, that the non-Muslim nonproprietors, and in this case the respondents, abandoned their houses voluntarily. In our view they were forced by circumstances to leave, as were the Muslims from India, and did not voluntarily,’ abandon their hearths, homes, business and houses. 15. There remains to consider whether the conclusion of the learned Custodian is not correct that the rights of the respondents were saved by section 8 of the Act. The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the rights of the respondents not being occupancy rights or tenancy rights, as defined in the Punjab Tenancy Act, or the rights of grantee under the Colonization of Government Lands (Punjab) Act, 1912, are not covered by section 8 of the Act. In his view the terms “occupancy rights”, “tenancy rights” and “rights as lessee or grantee” are used in the same sense in which they are used MN the two enactments referred to above. We are unable to agree with this contention, keeping in view the intent and purpose for which section 8 was enacted. It appears to us that these words have been used mm the broader sense of beg rights of occupancy, rights of tenancy or nights as grantee. This conclusion is fortified by the succeeding words used in the same section, Le. “rights of the occupant, tenant, lessee or grantee”. These words were intended to cover the rights which the evacuees had in land or houses and which were intended to be saved from extinguishment or forfeiture for reason of their departure from Pakistan. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that these words could not cover temporary leases for a year, but it is not an apt example, as they held no subsiding rights. The learned counsel for the petitioner was also at pains in arguing that the respondents were no more than licensees, and urged that as licensees-they could not be G H treated as grantees. It is difficult to deny that even as licensees! they would be grantees in the wider sense of the term, but in the'-' present case, the respondents’ rights had been guaranteed to them by the agreements, which they executed, and the land could only be resumed in the case of breach of conditions of the agreements. But it is not the case of the petitioner that they have committed any breach of these conditions. There can, therefore, be no revocation of the license, even if it is treated as such, on the ground of breach of the license. Constructions of permanent character having been set up on the sites by the evacuee J respondents at their own expense, even a license could not be revoked in view of the principles embodied in section 60 of the Easements Act of 1882. 16. Shabbir Ahmad, J. was of the view that if the grant of a site to a non-proprietor for building a house was a grant, the result would be that the right of residence which a non-Muslim non-proprietor had lost, say about six months before the Partition of British India, would get revived, and that is a result which could not be achieved, for it had come to an end. Nor could the learned Judge accept the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan that because section 5 of the Act would override the provisions contained in any law for the time being in force or in any instrument, section 8 would be applicable, because section 5 did not mean that a person who became an evacuee shall be deemed to have left behind more rights than he would have had if he had not become an evacuee. With all respect to the learned Judge, it may be observed that section 5 expressly provides that the Act would override the provisions contamed in any other law, and the Courts must give effect to its provisions. Section 8 is intended to be retrospective, and if it clearly is retrospective, it has to be applied retrospectively. Its application cannot be avoided on the ground that it might affect certain rights, which would have come to an end otherwise. By operation of law the rights have not been extinguished and are still subsisting. The Custodian does not claim more rights than the evacuee had, and what is intended by section 8 is that the rights of the evacuees shall remain intact and shall not be extinguished. Their right and interest in the Superstructures and the sites are intended to remain intact in spite of their departure, and were not to be extinguished despite any agreement to that effect or by force of custom. Section 8 saves the rights of the evacuee respondents. K 17. We find no force in this writ petition, which is dismissed with costs. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): Judgment S. A. Mahmood, J.-This writ petition arises out of an application made by Waders Allah Diana Khan petitioner to the Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore, on the 30th or 3lst of January 1950, under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949) for a declaration that land measuring 820 canals, entered in that No. khatuniNo. 11, according to Jacaranda for the year 1943-44, situate in Maura Khairpur, Thesis Jaipur of Bahawalpur District, given to evacuee respondents for building houses thereon for residential purposes long before Partition, on the condition that when the evacuees leave, the lands and the superstructures thereon would become the property of the petitioner, had become his property on their departure from the village. He further alleged that he became owner of the lands in dispute under the terms embodied in the Najib-ul-arz whereby the land reverted to the landlord on abandonment by the persons who had constructed houses on his land with his permission. The Deputy Custodian, by his order dated 30th September 1959, came to the conclusion that though it was established that the land on which the houses were built belonged to the petitioner, and presumed it to be correct that according to the terms and conditions of Najib-ul-arz the superstructures became the property of the landlord, the evacuee respondents did not leave the village in this case of their own sweet will, but were forced to leave for India in order to save their lives at the time of Partition, and that as this was a Situation not envisaged by the Najib-ul-arz, it was not justified to give the entire valuable property to the petitioner free. He felt that as according to the agreements the petitioner had a prior right over the buildings, he should pay the prevalent market-price of the superstructures in question, and ordered that when this had been done, he would acquire full proprietary rights in them. He left the market-price of the superstructure to be determined by the Rehabilitation Department or the Settlement Authorities. It may be mentioned that though the agreements related to a few canals of land, the declaration was given by the Deputy Custodian about 820 canals of land. This order was reviewed by the learned Custodian under section 43 (1) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) after notice to the petitioner and after harem him. The learned Custodian vacated the order of the Deputy Custodian holding that the Najib-ul-arz did not embody in it the right claimed in favor of the landlord, who owned proprietary rights in the land, but that all that it mentioned was that the bashing, other than those who had executed agreements or writings in favor of the landlords, shall be entitled to reconstruct the houses and to rent them out or to sell them. The admission of the petitioner that the houses were constructed by the non-Muslims, definitely proved that they had a right of permanent residence in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): had executed agreements or writings in favor of the landlords, shall be entitled to reconstruct the houses and to rent them out or to sell them. The admission of the petitioner that the houses were constructed by the non-Muslims, definitely proved that they had a right of permanent residence in those houses, which was saved, in spite of the abandonment, by section 8 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957). The learned counsel for the petitioner relied before the learned Custodian on six agreements which were executed in favor of the petitioner by some of the respondents in respect of six houses. In respect of these, the learned Custodian ordered that the petitioner may, if so advised, separately press his claim on the basis of the agreements, and the Settlement Department was directed to examine the claim of the petitioner, if it was preferred. It was observed that if any of the evacuee-respondents was under a stipulation or lability of any kind undertaken by him in any agreement in favor of the ground landlord, it shall have to be upheld, if duly proved, as against the persons who had now succeeded to those rights, 1e. the persons to whom those houses had been allotted or transferred by the Settlement or Rehabilitation Department. Dissatisfied with this order of the learned Custodian, dated the 19th of February 1962 the petitioner has moved this Court under Article 98 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and has prayed that the order of the learned Custodian declaring the property to be evacuee, be held to be FNO legal effect, BMG without lawful authority. 2. Before the admitting Bench, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the decision in Mark Am Muhammad Khan v. The Custodian, West Pakistan (1) but the learned Judges felt that whether an evacuee who left the country “under the force of circumstances” could be said to leave “voluntarily’, required re-consideration, since TT appeared, prima facie, that the very word “force” constituted a negation of voluntary action. Consequently, this Full Bench has been constituted. 3. Before dealing with the questions which fall for determination by us, it is necessary to first examine the agreements which have been executed by the respondents in favor of the ground landlord and to mention that from amongst the respondents, Ram Na rain Days, Lachman Days, Tiara Lai, Pars Mai, Kowal son of Mango Mai, UDA Ram and ADU Ram have not executed any agreement. Out of the renaming respondents, the agreements entered into by Dhaka Days son of DHA Days on 26th August 1946 in respect of 800 sq. ft. and on 4th November 1941 MN respect of 238 sq. ft. and 900 sq. ft. by Thailand Ram respondent on 4th April 1946 in respect of 384 sq. ft. by Asa Ram alias Jump Ram on 5th October 1944 in respect of 600 sq. ft. by Ram Na rain Days and Roshan Days on 6th March 1946 in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): 238 sq. ft. and 900 sq. ft. by Thailand Ram respondent on 4th April 1946 in respect of 384 sq. ft. by Asa Ram alias Jump Ram on 5th October 1944 in respect of 600 sq. ft. by Ram Na rain Days and Roshan Days on 6th March 1946 in respect of 9,600 sq. ft. by Ram Na rain on 9th May 1946 MN respect of 2,000 sq. ft. and on 26th August 1946 in respect of 1,200 sq. ft. by MST. Jiang Mai on 24th January 1928 in respect of 332 sq. ft. are all agreements of sale of the lands, evidence payment of a part (mostly one-fourth) of the consideration, leaving the remainder in the hands of the vendees, which sum had to be paid by them before the land and the houses constructed thereon could be sold, mortgaged or leased out by these persons. Whether the balance of the consideration had been paid off or. not has not been determined by the Custodian, but if it has not been paid by the above vendees of the sites, the petitioner can claim a declaration from the Custodian to that effect and have the balance, but he can have no right to the reversion of the sites on their evacuation or leaving the country. 4. Dhaka Days respondent executed an agreement on 8th April 1933 in respect of land measuring 10 hath X10 hath for a house to be constructed on it within the stipulated period, to be resided m. He had the right to alienate, mortgage and lease out the house with the permission of the ground landlord, MN which case the consideration for the sale, mortgage or the lease had to be shared equally between Adhere Allah Diana and him. Similar are the Terra of the agreements executed by Shankar Days and Area £ Mal dated 27th Roman-ul Mubarak, 1329, by Shankar Days son of Hand, Taken Mai and Maisey Mai on 29th Roman-ul-Mubarnik, 1329, by Tara Ram executed on 6th Roman- UL Mubarak 1329, by Hanuman Mai and Kowal Ram on 27th Roman-ul-Mubarik 1329, by Kowal Ram and Adhara Ram executed on 22nd Roman-ul-Mubarik, 1329, by MST. Sari Mai on 3rd April 1934, by Ram Hand and Lachman Days on 7th January 1917, by Birth Mai and Picard Ram on 29th Roman-ul-Mubarik, 1329, and by Chapman Lai on 17th July 1907. In these agreements it is stipulated that the landlord of the sites is entitled to half of the share of the consideration of sale, mortgage or lease entered mint to with his permission and the executant of the agreements the renaming half. It is also stated in some of the agreements that the land and its ownership will remain vested in the Waders owner and of the house in the execution, Le. the person who constructs the house. In most of the agreements the owner of the site has been given the right to resume possession of the site in case of breach of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): its ownership will remain vested in the Waders owner and of the house in the execution, Le. the person who constructs the house. In most of the agreements the owner of the site has been given the right to resume possession of the site in case of breach of the terms of the agreement. There is no express stipulation in any agreement except the one by Thailand Ram, that the site will revert to the owner if the grantee of the site abandons the house. Even in the case of the agreement by Thailand Ram, the recital as to the right of resumption of the site is a clear interpolation m a different ink. These persons had rights, evidenced by agreements in writing which are substantial in nature. As stated in Najib-ul-arz of 1920-21, these agreements govern their rights. It was not the petitioner’s case before the learned Custodian that they have committed any breach of their agreements to confer on the landlord any right of resumption of the sites. 5. In the agreement executed by Kowal Ram on 5th March 1917, no conditions are stated. It is merely recited that the house has been constructed with the permission of the landlord. In the agreement by Transit Rai, dated 8th April 1922, there is no right in him to alienate the land, but he had a right to sell the superstructure, of which the value could be fixed up to Rs. 200. 6. In the case of those respondents mentioned above, from whom the petitioner and his father had not obtained any agreement in writing, the petitioner’s claim is based on the entry in the Najib-ul-arz of the Village Khairpur for the year 1908. The relevant entry is to the effect that the residents of the village have no might to construct a house without the permission of the landlords, and if any resident abandons his residence, he cannot remove the superstructure without the permission of the landlord but if any resident buys his land and constructs a building thereon, he has the right to sell it and to remove the superstructure. This entry does not, by itself make the landlord owner of the superstructure in case the non-proprietor, who has built the house, abandons it. The entry underwent a radical change in the year 1920-21 at the time of the fourth Settlement. The entry recorded in the Najib-ul-arz in 1920-21 is to the following effect “Except m the case of those residents from whom the landlords have obtained agreements in writing, the remaining residents are entitled to construct, sell and lease out the houses constructed by them. In the case of those owners of houses who have executed agreements in favor of landlords, the sale and alienation of houses will be effected in accordance with the terms and conditions in the documents and agreements.” 7. Entries in the Najib-ul-arz are a village statement of customs as distinguished from the District statement of customs, which is called the rival-+ AAM.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): in favor of landlords, the sale and alienation of houses will be effected in accordance with the terms and conditions in the documents and agreements.” 7. Entries in the Najib-ul-arz are a village statement of customs as distinguished from the District statement of customs, which is called the rival-+ AAM. A custom is expression of the will of a very large majority of the people who agree to be and are governed by it. A presumption of correctness attaches to entries of custom in the Najib-ul-arz. It will be presumed that an entry in it embodies a custom which existed when it was recorded in the Najib-ul-arz. Just as the unanimous, or almost unanimous, will of a community can establish custom, it can also change or abrogate it. Like other entries in the record-of-rights, entries in the Najib-ul-arz are open to periodical revision in the light of changes that may have taken place in the outlook and conduct of the residents of the village concerned in respect of customs obtaining amongst them. The entry of 1908 was not repeated in the Najib-ul-arz of 1920-21, which is the relevant entry. The later entry in the Najib-ul-arz is inconsistent with the earlier entry. To it also a presumption of correctness attaches. There is thus clear evidence of change in the custom since the earlier entry. The earlier entry can no longer be regarded as a record of custom existing in 1920-21, and it must be deemed to have ceased to operate. It has been B held in Chandra Than and another v. Mohammad and others (1) that where a new wait-ul-arz has been framed, the old one ceases to be operative. Consequently, the entry in the Najib-ul-arz of 1908 is of no avail to the petitioner. B 8. The petitioner’s counsel then relied on paragraphs 236, 237 and 238 of the Customary Law by Rattigan. Paragraph 236 states that in the absence of a well-established custom, a nonproprietary resident in a village cannot dispose of site on which his house is built, or a right of residence in the house, without the consent of the proprietors of the village. He is ordinarily entitled to sell the materials, and the purchaser must remove the same within a reasonable period. According to paragraph 237, a nonproprietary resident, who obtains a site for building purposes must build upon it within a reasonable time, or surrender it to the proprietors. According to paragraph 238-and this is the material paragraph relied on by the learned counsel-if a non-proprietor abandons his house, the site reverts to the proprietor, and he cannot claim it afterward on his return to the village. The petitioner claims that as the respondents have abandoned the houses, the sites, including the superstructures, have reverted to him as proprietor of the sites and the Custodian can claim no right or interest in them, because no rights of the evacuees were left even in the superstructures. The custom stated in paragraph 238 above is not applicable

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): abandoned the houses, the sites, including the superstructures, have reverted to him as proprietor of the sites and the Custodian can claim no right or interest in them, because no rights of the evacuees were left even in the superstructures. The custom stated in paragraph 238 above is not applicable to the cases in hand, as it is not consistent with the entry in the Najib-ul-arz of the village pertaining to the year 1920-21, whereby, in the absence of an agreement, a proprietor has no right or interest in the site of a building put up by a non-proprietor, and the person who has constructed a house is its owner with rights of alienation, and where the landlord of the site has obtained an agreement, the terms and conditions of the agreement bind the parties and therefore the question of the application of the general custom as recorded in paragraph 238, does not arise. Thus, in the case of those respondents who did not execute any agreement MN favor of the landlord, the petitioner has no right, according to the wailful are, to claim the site or the superstructure. In the case of those who have purchased the sites, the petitioner has no right or interest left in the houses or the sites, except to the extent that the balance of the consideration remains unpaid to him. With regard to the second set of agreements by which sites were granted to the respondents, on which houses have been constructed by them, the landlord still has interest in the sites to the extent that he had to receive one-half of the consideration in the case of sale, mortgage or lease (which in some cases, could only be entered into with his permission) as landlord of the site, but the persons executing the agreements had also acquired rights in the superstructure put up by them, in lieu of which they were entitled to receive one-half of the consideration. There are some agreements clearly reciting that ownership of the building shall vest in the persons constructing the houses. They had undoubtedly acquired interest in the sites also. In most of the cases the rights of the parties are defined by the agreements, and the petitioner cannot claim that the executants of the agreements had no night or interest in the houses and the sites. Their right or interest in the houses and the sites constitutes evacuee property, which is defined in subsection (3) of section 2 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, (hereinafter referred to as the Act) which replaced Ordnance XX of 1956 as follows C “ ‘Evacuee property’ means any property in which an evacuee has any right or interest (whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or m any other capacity) and includes “Property” is further defined in subsection (5) as meaning property of any kind, and includes any right or interest in such property and debt, but does not include a mere right to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): or interest (whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or m any other capacity) and includes “Property” is further defined in subsection (5) as meaning property of any kind, and includes any right or interest in such property and debt, but does not include a mere right to sue. The respondents are admittedly evacuees as defined in subsection (2) of section 2 of the Act. By virtue of section 7 of the Act, their night or interest in evacuee property vests and shall be deemed always to have vested in the Custodian with effect from IST day of March 1947. Section 8 (1) of the Act further provides that : “Where the rights of an evacuee in any land or in any house or other building consist or consisted of occupancy or tenancy rights, or rights as lessee or grantee, nothing contained in any law for the time being in force or in any contract or in any instrument having the force of law or in any decree or order of any Court or any other authority shall extinguish or be deemed to have exon gushed any such rights on the occupant, tenant, lessee or grantee becoming an evacuee or at any time thereafter so as to prevent such rights from vesting in the Custodian or being dealt with as evacuee property, and neither the Custodian nor the evacuee shall be label to be ejected or be deemed to have become so liable on any ground whatsoever for any default of the evacuee committed after he became an evacuee or within a period of one year immediately before the date of his becoming an evacuee, the Custodian.” 9. The learned counsel for the petitioner contends, firstly, that the evacuee respondents had no such right or interest in the property as can be described as “evacuee property’, and that, secondly, section 8 of the Act has no application to the case as the evacuee respondents did not enjoy any occupancy or tenancy right or rights as lessee or grantee. He relies on Malik Ami Muhammad Khan v. The Custodian, West Pakistan in which Shabbir Ahmad, J. held (Mr. Iraq Muhammad Khan, learned counsel for the department conceding-but he claimed that he had been misunderstood) that the rights to which the dispute related, namely, the nights of residence of evacuee owners of buildings put up by them on sites granted by the petitioner in the case, were not evacuee property by reason of the fact that they fell under the provisions of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949) and the later Ordinances and Acts which replaced it. The learned Judge further held that “the right of residence” did not survive after the non-proprietor non-Muslims had left, for the right of residence, which was peculiar to the customary law of Punjab, terminated the moment a person, who had the right, left the property of his own accord, and that the night was heritable, though not transferable, by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): residence” did not survive after the non-proprietor non-Muslims had left, for the right of residence, which was peculiar to the customary law of Punjab, terminated the moment a person, who had the right, left the property of his own accord, and that the night was heritable, though not transferable, by the person, on whom TT had been conferred, unless the proprietary body agreed. It may be noted that throughout the learned Judge described it as a right and the real reason for denying that it was a right was that it terminated or did not survive after the non-proprietor non-Muslims left the properties of their own accord. With the utmost respect, we are unable to agree that the right of the evacuees was not evacuee property. Manner Nadir, C. J. as he then was, in his judgment, while referring to section 8 of the Act, has found that the effect of section 8 was that for the purposes of determining rights in or over property, the fact that a person has migrated from Pakistan must be ignored, and those rights be determined as if he was still present where he was. While he agreed in principle with the test that the fact that non-Muslim residents of the land in question had gone away must be ignored, and on the assumption that they are still residing where they were, he concluded that it should be held that their right to continue to reside there is alive and available to the Custodian. With this view we are in agreement with all respect. But he was of the opinion that it was incapable of application to the kind of “right” with which they were concerned, for the “right” was nothing more than a permission given by a proprietor to certain families in a village community to reside on his land, coupled with an undertaking that he will not turn them out or use that land for any other purposes so long as those families continue to reside there. The appearance of “right” flowed from the undertaking not to evict, but that undertaking was of a personal character between the proprietor and the particular family. The proprietor had not parted with any right of his in or over the land. The only right he had parted with was his night to withdraw or revoke the permission he had given to the particular family. As soon as that family was not there to claim or enforce that personal obligation against the proprietor, that obligation must lapse. It seemed to the learned C. J. that the correct way of looking at that kind of transaction was that the families which were allowed to reside on the land, “at no stage acquired the right to reside on that land”, but were given an immunity available only to those families from being evicted by the landlord. To hold otherwise would be productive of results that it seemed unreasonable to suppose were intended by the Legislature. Finally, the learned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): land, “at no stage acquired the right to reside on that land”, but were given an immunity available only to those families from being evicted by the landlord. To hold otherwise would be productive of results that it seemed unreasonable to suppose were intended by the Legislature. Finally, the learned C. J. concluded that the supposed “right to reside in the two cases was not a right at all’ and the said section 8 had no application to it. The Times underlined! above show that according to the learned C. J. himself the landlord had parted with a night and placed himself under an obligation, and, therefore, his earlier conclusion that he had not parted with any right in or over his land is difficult to accept. It could not be said that the families, who were granted the permission, “at no stage acquired the night to reside on the land, and it was no right at all’. Whether the obligation lapsed or not is beside the post in this context, but to call it a right, and it has all the necessary concomitants of aright and deny that it is a right is a contradiction in terms. 10. “Evacuee property” means any property in which an evacuee has any right or interest whether personally or as a trustee or as a beneficiary or in any other capacity. A right is defined in Salmon’s book on Jurisprudence 1957 Edition as an interest recognized and protected by a rule of right. It is any interest, respect for which is a duty, and the disregard of which TS a wrong. The interests which receive recognition and protection D from the rules of right are called rights. Every man who has a right to anything has an interest in it also, but he may have an interest without having his right. Whether his interest amounts to a right depends on whether there exists with respect to it a duty imposed upon any other person. In other words, his right is an interest the violation of which is a wrong. It will be noticed that the definition clause includes not only the word “right’” but also “interest”. All that is necessary is that there should be a right or interest, that is, there should be property in which an evacuee has any right or interest. 11. The learned Judges, in the case cited above, have termed the right as a “right of residence” in order, evidently, to avoid the conclusion that it was a right in property. Even where a non- e proprietor has been granted a site to build a house on it for the purposes of his and his family’s residence on the condition that he would remove the superstructure if he abandons the village, has he not buy building a house on the site granted to him acquired a right or interest MN it, besides a clear merest in the build mg ? Has he not acquired an interest in the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): the condition that he would remove the superstructure if he abandons the village, has he not buy building a house on the site granted to him acquired a right or interest MN it, besides a clear merest in the build mg ? Has he not acquired an interest in the site with a right to hold and possess it to the exclusion of every one else including the owner and as long as he or his family wishes to stay or reside m the house ? Is his right not protected by the law ? Can it be ignored that the right is conferred not only on one person but on the family, and that it is a heritable right to be enjoyed for generations so long as they choose to avail of it and the grantor of the site, Le. the landlord has no right to terminate the grant? Can he get the site back even if he wanted it in exercise of the right of ownership without a surrender by the grantee? Has he not, therefore, parted with substantial rights in the land, which was his property? How is TT possible, to deny that the owner has parted with and conferred rights on the grantee in the site ? He has unmistakably placed himself and his heirs and successors under an obligation. This situation can only arise if he has parted with some of his rights. The grantee has thus acquired valuable rights in property. 12. There are also two clear distinguishing features between the case of the owner of the sites in Malik Amir Muhammad Khan v. The Custodian, West Pakistan and the present case. In that case the non-proprietor grantees had no right to alienate the buildings standing on the site and there is no indication that the land was granted in lieu of some consideration or services to be rendered. In the present case, as stated already, the nonproprietors, who have been granted sites, had the right to transfer their right sim the super structure, in some cases on their own, while in others with the permission of the landlord. Secondly, the sites have been granted to the respondents in lieu of services to be rendered and certain periodical payments to be made by them. This satisfies the requirements of section 105 of the Transfer of Property Act, namely, a transfer of a right to enjoy immovable property made for a certain time express or implied, or in perpetuity, in consideration of a price paid or promised or of money, a share of crops, service or any other thing of value, to be rendered periodically or on specified occasions to. the transferor by the transferee, who accepts the transfer on such terms. It is plain, therefore, that some of the respondents have obtained leases in perpetuity of the sites granted to them. 13. In the view of Shabbir Ahmad, J. the non-proprietor’s right of residence teammates the moment a non-proprietor non-Muslim leaves the property of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): who accepts the transfer on such terms. It is plain, therefore, that some of the respondents have obtained leases in perpetuity of the sites granted to them. 13. In the view of Shabbir Ahmad, J. the non-proprietor’s right of residence teammates the moment a non-proprietor non-Muslim leaves the property of his own accord, and the right does not survive under custom if the non-proprietors abandon their houses. The word “abandon” according to New English Dictionary, Volume I, means “to give up absolutely, to surrender, to relinquish all claim to property, to renounce, to leave off, to forsake, to desert.” It has the connotation of leaving with anointed ton not to return to it. In most cases, the evacuees, on leaving, did not intend to abandon the houses, but their departure was forced by circumstances, and a vast majority of them intended to come back, but have found it not possible to return on account of circumstances beyond their control. It cannot, therefore, be said that they intended to abandon their houses the moment they left, though, it may be said by now that the houses have been abandoned. But by reason of the evacuee laws, their right and interest in the evacuee property has vested m the Custodian, and such property is held on his behalf The extinguishment of their rights, the moment they left, cannot therefore be inferred. 14. Abandonment implies voluntary surrender or renunciation of the property. Shabbir Ahmad, J. in the case of Malik Amir Muhammad Khan has held that the non-Muslim non- proprietors left voluntarily, although they were forced by circumstances to leave, being afraid of harm coming to them in the communal riots that had broken out near about the birth of Pakistan. His reasons are as follows “The term ‘voluntarily’ means of one’s own accord, and I am clear in my mind that the fact that departure was under the force of circumstances cannot make it voluntary. If for example, a person who had a right of residence in a house left the village because he felt that by gong to some other place he would get living wages, which he was not getting, it could not be reasonably contended by anyone that the departure was not voluntary. Similarly, if such a person were to leave because he felt that his safety or that of his near and dear ones lay in departure, it would be difficult to assert that the case was not one of voluntary departure. Equally similarly, if a person feels that the village in which he is residing is unsafe by reason of the fact that it is populated by marauders and dacoits who have but little compunction in attacking and looting neighboring villages, it is obvious that the departure motivated by these considerations could not be said to be involuntary. If} however, the proprietors or someone else turned out the person who resided in the village by means of causing or threatening harm, that departure could not be said

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): and looting neighboring villages, it is obvious that the departure motivated by these considerations could not be said to be involuntary. If} however, the proprietors or someone else turned out the person who resided in the village by means of causing or threatening harm, that departure could not be said to be voluntary. There is no evidence, direct or circumstantial, to establish that any one of the non-Muslims whose rights the Custodian wants to take possession of, had left the village concerned because an injury had been caused to him or a threat of injury had been held out to him, and though I am not saying that such threats were not held out nor that injuries had not been caused at the time of Partition to some persons, I am clear in my mind that some non-Muslims left because they felt that their safety or betterment lay in going to the newly-set-up Common of India.”’ While in the first instance mentioned by the learned Judge it may be conceded that the departure was voluntary, and the second instance may be on the borderline, it 1s, with all respect to him, difficult to agree that the third instance is also a case of voluntary departure. In the circumstances, the person has been forced by circumstances to leave for reasons of safety of himself and his dear ones, and though he may have gone on his own, he has been forced to leave, which cannot be said to be voluntary abandonment. In the first instance the leaving was initially tended to be temporary in view of the turbulent conditions with a desire to return on peaceful conditions being restored, and secondly, TT was forced by the circumstances. There was no voluntary abandonment. As observed by the admitting Bench, leaving under the force of circumstances indicates lack of volition, because force constitutes a negation of voluntary action. If the learned Judge has himself observed that if the proprietor or some-one else were to turn out a person by means of causing or threatening harm, his departure would not be voluntary, where is the difference where he is turned out by grave apprehension of harm or even of threatened harm ? The conditions created in both the parts of the sub-Continent became so disturbed that there was great apprehension of harm, and in the circumstances most persons were forced to leave, of which fact we can take judicial notice. It is not necessary that there should be evidenced that there was threat of harm which led the non-Muslims to leave the country. It is enough that they have left in the then prevailing conditions, which were unfortunately highly disturbed, as there were riots of communal nature on either side of the border. No one leaves his hearth and home, his place of birth, his business and valuable property unless he is so compelled. We do not think that the non-Muslims or Muslims left their hearths and homes with the idea of betterment of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): of communal nature on either side of the border. No one leaves his hearth and home, his place of birth, his business and valuable property unless he is so compelled. We do not think that the non-Muslims or Muslims left their hearths and homes with the idea of betterment of their future prospects. We are, therefore, unable to agree, with all respect to the learned Judges, that the non-Muslim nonproprietors, and in this case the respondents, abandoned their houses voluntarily. In our view they were forced by circumstances to leave, as were the Muslims from India, and did not voluntarily,’ abandon their hearths, homes, business and houses. 15. There remains to consider whether the conclusion of the learned Custodian is not correct that the rights of the respondents were saved by section 8 of the Act. The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the rights of the respondents not being occupancy rights or tenancy rights, as defined in the Punjab Tenancy Act, or the rights of grantee under the Colonization of Government Lands (Punjab) Act, 1912, are not covered by section 8 of the Act. In his view the terms “occupancy rights”, “tenancy rights” and “rights as lessee or grantee” are used in the same sense in which they are used MN the two enactments referred to above. We are unable to agree with this contention, keeping in view the intent and purpose for which section 8 was enacted. It appears to us that these words have been used mm the broader sense of beg rights of occupancy, rights of tenancy or nights as grantee. This conclusion is fortified by the succeeding words used in the same section, Le. “rights of the occupant, tenant, lessee or grantee”. These words were intended to cover the rights which the evacuees had in land or houses and which were intended to be saved from extinguishment or forfeiture for reason of their departure from Pakistan. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that these words could not cover temporary leases for a year, but it is not an apt example, as they held no subsiding rights. The learned counsel for the petitioner was also at pains in arguing that the respondents were no more than licensees, and urged that as licensees-they could not be G H treated as grantees. It is difficult to deny that even as licensees! they would be grantees in the wider sense of the term, but in the'-' present case, the respondents’ rights had been guaranteed to them by the agreements, which they executed, and the land could only be resumed in the case of breach of conditions of the agreements. But it is not the case of the petitioner that they have committed any breach of these conditions. There can, therefore, be no revocation of the license, even if it is treated as such, on the ground of breach of the license. Constructions of permanent character having been set up on the sites by the evacuee J

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 535?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 535 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1965-03-29): the petitioner that they have committed any breach of these conditions. There can, therefore, be no revocation of the license, even if it is treated as such, on the ground of breach of the license. Constructions of permanent character having been set up on the sites by the evacuee J respondents at their own expense, even a license could not be revoked in view of the principles embodied in section 60 of the Easements Act of 1882. 16. Shabbir Ahmad, J. was of the view that if the grant of a site to a non-proprietor for building a house was a grant, the result would be that the right of residence which a non-Muslim non-proprietor had lost, say about six months before the Partition of British India, would get revived, and that is a result which could not be achieved, for it had come to an end. Nor could the learned Judge accept the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan that because section 5 of the Act would override the provisions contained in any law for the time being in force or in any instrument, section 8 would be applicable, because section 5 did not mean that a person who became an evacuee shall be deemed to have left behind more rights than he would have had if he had not become an evacuee. With all respect to the learned Judge, it may be observed that section 5 expressly provides that the Act would override the provisions contamed in any other law, and the Courts must give effect to its provisions. Section 8 is intended to be retrospective, and if it clearly is retrospective, it has to be applied retrospectively. Its application cannot be avoided on the ground that it might affect certain rights, which would have come to an end otherwise. By operation of law the rights have not been extinguished and are still subsisting. The Custodian does not claim more rights than the evacuee had, and what is intended by section 8 is that the rights of the evacuees shall remain intact and shall not be extinguished. Their right and interest in the Superstructures and the sites are intended to remain intact in spite of their departure, and were not to be extinguished despite any agreement to that effect or by force of custom. Section 8 saves the rights of the evacuee respondents. K 17. We find no force in this writ petition, which is dismissed with costs. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1965 PLD 453 about?
Answer: Case 1965 PLD 453 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1965-04-30. The case involved KHUSHIRAM ATMARAM JAISINGHANI AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY WEST PAKISTAN AND KARACHI AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1956 - ARTICLE 160 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT [XII OF 1957) - SS. 43(6) AND 43-A https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1965/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1965_453.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 00:32 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1965/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1965_453.html. The case was heard by ',S. A. RAHMAN, B. Z. KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: In case 1965 PLD 453, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1956 - ARTICLE 160 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT [XII OF 1957) - SS. 43(6) AND 43-A https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1965/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1965_453.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 00:32 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1965/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1965_453.html. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1965-04-30.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1965 PLD 453 were: DINGOMALN. RAMCHANDNANI SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT —(PERCY—B—RAM CHANDNANI—ADVOCATE— SUPREM E-COURT— WITH HIM) — INSTRUCTED BYS. M. HANIF ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANTS. NURULARFIN ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY YOUSUF RAFI ATTORNEY FOR RESPONDENT NO. 4.. The judges presiding were: ',S. A. RAHMAN, B. Z. KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: The parties in case 1965 PLD 453 were: KHUSHIRAM ATMARAM JAISINGHANI AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY WEST PAKISTAN AND KARACHI AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1965 PLD 453.
Answer: Judgment B. Z. Haikus, J.-This is an appeal by special leave under the Constitution of 1956 against an order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property refusing to review certain orders to which reference will presently be made. The appellants before us are K Reshiram, Asmara Madhavan Asmara, Goals Asmara all sons, and Device, widow of Asmara Hashmatrai All the four appellants along with Asmara Hashmatrai constituted a joint Hindu family which according to the appellants owned: (1) agricultural land about 1,200 acres in villages Cajolery, Airbus and Ahmadabad of Jacobabad district; (11) one rice mill in village Ahmadabad, Jacobabad district; (I'm) one residential house in Ahmadabad, Jacobabad district; (iv) one bungalow on plot No. 69, N. I. Lines, Cantonment Garden Road, Karachi; and (v) three open plots of land m Garden East and one in Clifton quarters, Karachi. Asmara Hashmatrai was the manager of this joint Hindu family who went away to India in 1948. After the introduction of evacuee property law in Sind the Rehabilitation Department commenced taking possession of the above-mentioned property and allotted part of it to refugees. The appellants made several representations to the Custodian as well as to the Government and ultimately the Custodian by his letter dated the 23rd April 1951, directed the appellants to make an application under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. The appellants then made an application under section 18 with respect to the rice mill, the agricultural land and the three open plots of land in Karachi before the Custodian of Evacuee Property. The Custodian by his order dated the 25th May 1951, held the application to be time-barred in respect of the rice mill at Ahmadabad, the agricultural land in Del Cajolery and three open plots in Karachi, as this property had been allotted in 1951 and the cause of action for applying under section 18 had arisen at that time. He held the application to be within time, however, with respect to the agricultural land in dens Airbus and Ahmadabad. On the merits the agricultural lands were found to be joint Hindu family property and the share of the appellants which was held to be 3/4th was declared ' to be non-evacuee property. The share of Asmara which was I/4th was found to be evacuee property. On the 19th June 1951, the appellants filed an application for review against the said order on the ground that their application under section 18 was not barred even in respect of the rice mill at Ahmadabad, the agricultural land in Del Cajolery and the three open plots in Karachi. They also contended in this application that the share of Asmara Hashmatrai in joint family property was in Hindu law not 4th, but /Sth. Mr. Fayyazali the successor of the Custodian who had disposed of application under section 18 main tamed the order of his predecessor with respect to limitation, but he accepted the contention of the appellants that the share of Asmara Hashmatrai in the joint family property was /Sth and not I/4th. A second application was made by the appellants under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance on the 15th November 1953, with respect to the bungalow bearing Survey No. 69 in. I. Lines, Garden Road, Karachi, claiming it to be joint family property. This application was disposed of by the Deputy Custodian who held that the bungalow was the self acquired property of Asmara. The appellants filed an appeal against this order and Mr. Diaz-ud-Din, Additional Custodian, accepting the appeal held that the bungalow in dispute was joint family property. He declared it to be non-evacuee property to the extent of 4/5th share of the appellants. Against this order the Central Government made a reference under section 43-A of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance to the Evacuee Property Tribunal. The Tribunal by an order dated the 19th April 1960, found the order of Mr. Diaz- adding to be wholly unjustified and declared the bungalow to be self acquired property of Asmara. While by a separate application the appellants were claim mg title to the bungalow mentioned above they were at the same time taking further proceedings against the order which had been passed on their first application under section 18. The first review application which was disposed of by Mr. Fayyazali has already been referred to. The appellants filed another application for review which was dismissed by the then Custodian Mr. Z. H. Lair by an order dated 4-7-1953. The appellants filed a third review application in 1957 which was dismissed by Mr. Muhammad BUX A. Demon, the then Custodian, on 9-3-1957. The appellants then approached the Ministry of Refugees and Rehabilitation and the case of the appellants is that the Ministry directed the Custodian to take proceedings so moth for review of his previous orders. The Custodian issued a notice on the. Nth May 1958, to the four appellants, the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi and three allottees to appear on the 21st May 1958, for a consideration of a question whether the previous orders of the Custodian on the application of the appellants under section 18 should not be reviewed. These proceedings were disposed of by the Custodian on the 23rd September 1959. At that time proceedings were pending before the Evacuee Property Tribunal against the order of the Additional Custodian relating to the bungalow in Plot No. 69, N. I. Lines, Karachi. The Custodian assumed that the proceedings before the Evacuee Property Tribunal related to the property in dispute in the proceeding before him and on t ground alone he ordered the proceedings to be “filed.” At this the appellants filed a writ petition in this Court against the order of the Custodian, because under the Constitution of 1956, a writ petition could be filed even in the Supreme Court. Later, however, a prayer was made, which was allowed, that the writ petition be converted into a petition for special leave to appeal. Leave to appeal was subsequently granted madly on the ground that the Custodian had on a mistaken ground refused A to exercise jurisdiction. That the order of the Custodian film the proceedings for review was based on a misapprehension is obvious. The proceedings before the Evacuee Property Tribunal related only to the bungalow and the review petition before the Custodian was not concerned with the bungalow at all The application under section 18 the decision in which was sought to be reviewed related to the agricultural land, the rice mill and the open plots, the bungalow in Karachi not being the subject-matter of the application. Yet the Custodian directed the proceedings to be filed on the ground that the case before him had been referred to the Evacuee Property Tribunal. The Custodian said: “As the matter is now before the Tribunal it is unnecessary for me to decide whether any of the previous orders require modification”. If there was no more to be said this appeal would,have succeeded for the Custodian had refused to exercise jurisdiction on a mistaken ground. In the meantime, however, there has been legislation which has deprived the Custodian of the power of deciding the proceedings for review. The Custodian had a power of review by virtue of section 43 (6) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. Section 43 (6) runs: “43 The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him m this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at any time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order passed by his predecessor- in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require: Provided that no final order passed on or before the seventeenth day of November 1956, declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property shall be reviewed.” By Ordinance LXIII of 1962 which came into force on the 7th June 1962, section 43 (6) was' substituted by the following section: “(6) Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by any Custodian under this Act, or errors arising their from any accidental slip or omission, may at any time be corrected by the Custodian concerned or his successor-in- Office,” It will be observed that there remained after this amendment only a power of correcting clerical or arithmetical mistakes or accidental slips or omissions. The saving clause contained in this Ordinance may also be reproduced here for it is on the basis of the saving clause that the jurisdiction of the Custodian will have to be decided. It TS in the following words: ' “Savings, etc.-It is hereby declared that the amendment of section 43 of the said Act shall not affect review applications pending immediately before the commencement of this Ordinance, on which proceedings have, before such commencement, started, or which relate to such mistakes or errors as are referred to in subsection (6) of that section as substituted by this Ordinance, and applications on which no proceedings have started or which do not relate to such matters shall forthwith abate.”’' c Two contentions have been put forward on behalf of the appellants in support of the proposition that even after the coming into force of Ordinance XLIII of 1962 there still remained jurisdiction in the Custodian to review his orders. The first is that the question as to whether a pending proceeding is saved should be decided with reference to section 6 of the General Clauses Act. The second is that even in accordance with the saving clause the Custodian retained jurisdiction in the >resent case because there was an application before him in which notice had been issued. For convenience of reference action 6 of the General Clauses Act is reproduced below: “6. Where this Act, or any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, repeals any enactment hitherto made or hereafter to be made, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not- (a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes effect; or (b) affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or (c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or ability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed ; or (d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offense committed against any enactment so repealed; or (e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such night, privilege, obligation, lability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the repealing Act or Regulation had not been passed.” J Reliance is placed on clause (e) of this section, and it is urged hat any proceeding which could have been taken if the Act remained in force can be taken if it is repealed. It will be observed however that clause (e) refers to “such night, privilege, etc. as aforesaid” and this has reference to clause (c) in, accordance with which any “right, privilege, obligation or lability’ which has already accrued or been incurred, remains unaffected. For the application of clause therefore there has first to be a right and then a legal proceeding in respect of such’ right. This does not appear to be applicable to a case where the only possible right which can be said to have accrued is the night to prefer a particular legal proceeding. From its wording ' clause (e) would apply to legal proceedings in respect of substantive rights which have already occurred under a repealed enactment and would not cover a case where only a procedural right is granted. It is not necessary however to pursue this matter further as section 6 applies in accordance with its wording only where a different intention does not appear and in the present case there is a saving clause in the repealing enactment which should govern the question as to what proceeding will remain unaffected. According to the saving clause which has been reproduced above review applications pending immediately before the commencement of this Ordinance on which proceedings had started before the commencement of the Ordinance remained unaffected. As only applications for review have been mentioned in the saving clause it is proper to infer that so moth reviews were not intended to be saved. From the fact that the Legislature provided a saving clause it is apparent that the question as to what should be saved was considered by the Legislature. If the intention was to save so moth proceedings also there is no reason why those proceedings should not have been mentioned. Expression units exclusion apterous, is not all rule of universal application for the Legislature may mention I a matter on account of excessive caution, but if it is clearer than the mention of one out of several matters is not on account of excessive caution it is legitimate to regard the provision as exhaustive and exclusive of what is not mentioned in it. In the present case the Legislature appears to have made a distinction for which a good reason existed. It has continued pending proceedings in the case of an application because to submit an application was the right of a party and the right having been exercised the proceedings should not on account of the repeal of the power of review become unfructuous. On the other hand there was no right of any person involved in a so moth review, the only person aggrieved by the loss of further jurisdiction being the Custodian himself’ The further contention of the appellants on this post is that the proceedings before the Custodian should be regarded as proceedings on an application for review. It is not the case of the appellants that any application had been submitted to the Custodian for review. The contention is that as the appellants had approached the Ministry for Refugees and F Rehabilitation and the Ministry had given a direction to the Custodian to review the matter the position is the same as if there was an application to the Custodian for review. We ARI unable to accede to this contention. The letter of the Government! in compliance with which the Custodian started proceedings for review is not on the file. But assuming, as is alleged by the appellants, that the Ministry had given a direction for review the situation would not be the same as it would be when there is an application for review. The order issuing notice makes it clear that the Custodian was taking proceedings so moth. The order issuing notice is in the following words: - “You are called upon to appear before the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, on 21-5-1958 at 10 a.m to show cause why the order mentioned in the subject-matter should not be set aside or reviewed so moth. In case of non-appearance, the matter will be heard and decided ex parte." It will be observed that there is an express reference to so moth review. In the heading of the notice also there is a reference to a so moth review. In fact the appellants in their concise statement have themselves said that the notice had been issued in a so moth review. It is to be remembered that according to section 43 (6) an application for review could be submitted only within the “prescribed period” which was thirty days though it could be extended for sufficient cause, but for so moth review there was no limitation. The ordinary period of limitation for review had expired long ago. The Custodian issued notice for review not because there was any application before him and he found sufficient cause for condoning delay, but because he decided to exercise his jurisdiction for so moth review which he could exercise at any time. In view therefore of the fact that the jurisdiction of the. Custodian to review his order has terminated we are unable to set aside the order and to send back the case to him. This appeal is dismissed, but there is no order as to costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 453 (SUPREME COURT, 1965-04-30): Judgment B. Z. Haikus, J.-This is an appeal by special leave under the Constitution of 1956 against an order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property refusing to review certain orders to which reference will presently be made. The appellants before us are K Reshiram, Asmara Madhavan Asmara, Goals Asmara all sons, and Device, widow of Asmara Hashmatrai All the four appellants along with Asmara Hashmatrai constituted a joint Hindu family which according to the appellants owned: (1) agricultural land about 1,200 acres in villages Cajolery, Airbus and Ahmadabad of Jacobabad district; (11) one rice mill in village Ahmadabad, Jacobabad district; (I'm) one residential house in Ahmadabad, Jacobabad district; (iv) one bungalow on plot No. 69, N. I. Lines, Cantonment Garden Road, Karachi; and (v) three open plots of land m Garden East and one in Clifton quarters, Karachi. Asmara Hashmatrai was the manager of this joint Hindu family who went away to India in 1948. After the introduction of evacuee property law in Sind the Rehabilitation Department commenced taking possession of the above-mentioned property and allotted part of it to refugees. The appellants made several representations to the Custodian as well as to the Government and ultimately the Custodian by his letter dated the 23rd April 1951, directed the appellants to make an application under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. The appellants then made an application under section 18 with respect to the rice mill, the agricultural land and the three open plots of land in Karachi before the Custodian of Evacuee Property. The Custodian by his order dated the 25th May 1951, held the application to be time-barred in respect of the rice mill at Ahmadabad, the agricultural land in Del Cajolery and three open plots in Karachi, as this property had been allotted in 1951 and the cause of action for applying under section 18 had arisen at that time. He held the application to be within time, however, with respect to the agricultural land in dens Airbus and Ahmadabad. On the merits the agricultural lands were found to be joint Hindu family property and the share of the appellants which was held to be 3/4th was declared ' to be non-evacuee property. The share of Asmara which was I/4th was found to be evacuee property. On the 19th June 1951, the appellants filed an application for review against the said order on the ground that their application under section 18 was not barred even in respect of the rice mill at Ahmadabad, the agricultural land in Del Cajolery and the three open plots in Karachi. They also contended in this application that the share of Asmara Hashmatrai in joint family property was in Hindu law not 4th, but /Sth. Mr. Fayyazali the successor of the Custodian who had disposed of application under section 18 main tamed the order of his predecessor with respect to limitation, but he accepted the contention of the appellants that the share of Asmara Hashmatrai in the joint

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 453 (SUPREME COURT, 1965-04-30): in Hindu law not 4th, but /Sth. Mr. Fayyazali the successor of the Custodian who had disposed of application under section 18 main tamed the order of his predecessor with respect to limitation, but he accepted the contention of the appellants that the share of Asmara Hashmatrai in the joint family property was /Sth and not I/4th. A second application was made by the appellants under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance on the 15th November 1953, with respect to the bungalow bearing Survey No. 69 in. I. Lines, Garden Road, Karachi, claiming it to be joint family property. This application was disposed of by the Deputy Custodian who held that the bungalow was the self acquired property of Asmara. The appellants filed an appeal against this order and Mr. Diaz-ud-Din, Additional Custodian, accepting the appeal held that the bungalow in dispute was joint family property. He declared it to be non-evacuee property to the extent of 4/5th share of the appellants. Against this order the Central Government made a reference under section 43-A of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance to the Evacuee Property Tribunal. The Tribunal by an order dated the 19th April 1960, found the order of Mr. Diaz- adding to be wholly unjustified and declared the bungalow to be self acquired property of Asmara. While by a separate application the appellants were claim mg title to the bungalow mentioned above they were at the same time taking further proceedings against the order which had been passed on their first application under section 18. The first review application which was disposed of by Mr. Fayyazali has already been referred to. The appellants filed another application for review which was dismissed by the then Custodian Mr. Z. H. Lair by an order dated 4-7-1953. The appellants filed a third review application in 1957 which was dismissed by Mr. Muhammad BUX A. Demon, the then Custodian, on 9-3-1957. The appellants then approached the Ministry of Refugees and Rehabilitation and the case of the appellants is that the Ministry directed the Custodian to take proceedings so moth for review of his previous orders. The Custodian issued a notice on the. Nth May 1958, to the four appellants, the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi and three allottees to appear on the 21st May 1958, for a consideration of a question whether the previous orders of the Custodian on the application of the appellants under section 18 should not be reviewed. These proceedings were disposed of by the Custodian on the 23rd September 1959. At that time proceedings were pending before the Evacuee Property Tribunal against the order of the Additional Custodian relating to the bungalow in Plot No. 69, N. I. Lines, Karachi. The Custodian assumed that the proceedings before the Evacuee Property Tribunal related to the property in dispute in the proceeding before him and on t ground alone he ordered the proceedings to be “filed.” At this the appellants filed a writ petition in this Court

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 453 (SUPREME COURT, 1965-04-30): 69, N. I. Lines, Karachi. The Custodian assumed that the proceedings before the Evacuee Property Tribunal related to the property in dispute in the proceeding before him and on t ground alone he ordered the proceedings to be “filed.” At this the appellants filed a writ petition in this Court against the order of the Custodian, because under the Constitution of 1956, a writ petition could be filed even in the Supreme Court. Later, however, a prayer was made, which was allowed, that the writ petition be converted into a petition for special leave to appeal. Leave to appeal was subsequently granted madly on the ground that the Custodian had on a mistaken ground refused A to exercise jurisdiction. That the order of the Custodian film the proceedings for review was based on a misapprehension is obvious. The proceedings before the Evacuee Property Tribunal related only to the bungalow and the review petition before the Custodian was not concerned with the bungalow at all The application under section 18 the decision in which was sought to be reviewed related to the agricultural land, the rice mill and the open plots, the bungalow in Karachi not being the subject-matter of the application. Yet the Custodian directed the proceedings to be filed on the ground that the case before him had been referred to the Evacuee Property Tribunal. The Custodian said: “As the matter is now before the Tribunal it is unnecessary for me to decide whether any of the previous orders require modification”. If there was no more to be said this appeal would,have succeeded for the Custodian had refused to exercise jurisdiction on a mistaken ground. In the meantime, however, there has been legislation which has deprived the Custodian of the power of deciding the proceedings for review. The Custodian had a power of review by virtue of section 43 (6) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. Section 43 (6) runs: “43 The Custodian or Additional Custodian may on application made to him m this behalf within the prescribed period or of his own motion at any time and after giving notice to the parties concerned and the Rehabilitation Authority, review his own order or an order passed by his predecessor- in-office on any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case may require: Provided that no final order passed on or before the seventeenth day of November 1956, declaring any person to be not evacuee or any property to be not evacuee property shall be reviewed.” By Ordinance LXIII of 1962 which came into force on the 7th June 1962, section 43 (6) was' substituted by the following section: “(6) Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by any Custodian under this Act, or errors arising their from any accidental slip or omission, may at any time be corrected by the Custodian concerned or his successor-in- Office,” It will be observed that there remained after this amendment only a power of correcting clerical or arithmetical

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 453 (SUPREME COURT, 1965-04-30): order passed by any Custodian under this Act, or errors arising their from any accidental slip or omission, may at any time be corrected by the Custodian concerned or his successor-in- Office,” It will be observed that there remained after this amendment only a power of correcting clerical or arithmetical mistakes or accidental slips or omissions. The saving clause contained in this Ordinance may also be reproduced here for it is on the basis of the saving clause that the jurisdiction of the Custodian will have to be decided. It TS in the following words: ' “Savings, etc.-It is hereby declared that the amendment of section 43 of the said Act shall not affect review applications pending immediately before the commencement of this Ordinance, on which proceedings have, before such commencement, started, or which relate to such mistakes or errors as are referred to in subsection (6) of that section as substituted by this Ordinance, and applications on which no proceedings have started or which do not relate to such matters shall forthwith abate.”’' c Two contentions have been put forward on behalf of the appellants in support of the proposition that even after the coming into force of Ordinance XLIII of 1962 there still remained jurisdiction in the Custodian to review his orders. The first is that the question as to whether a pending proceeding is saved should be decided with reference to section 6 of the General Clauses Act. The second is that even in accordance with the saving clause the Custodian retained jurisdiction in the >resent case because there was an application before him in which notice had been issued. For convenience of reference action 6 of the General Clauses Act is reproduced below: “6. Where this Act, or any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, repeals any enactment hitherto made or hereafter to be made, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not- (a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes effect; or (b) affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or (c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or ability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed ; or (d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offense committed against any enactment so repealed; or (e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such night, privilege, obligation, lability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the repealing Act or Regulation had not been passed.” J Reliance is placed on clause (e) of this section, and it is urged hat any proceeding which could have been taken if the Act remained in force can be taken if it is repealed. It will be observed however that clause (e)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 453 (SUPREME COURT, 1965-04-30): Act or Regulation had not been passed.” J Reliance is placed on clause (e) of this section, and it is urged hat any proceeding which could have been taken if the Act remained in force can be taken if it is repealed. It will be observed however that clause (e) refers to “such night, privilege, etc. as aforesaid” and this has reference to clause (c) in, accordance with which any “right, privilege, obligation or lability’ which has already accrued or been incurred, remains unaffected. For the application of clause therefore there has first to be a right and then a legal proceeding in respect of such’ right. This does not appear to be applicable to a case where the only possible right which can be said to have accrued is the night to prefer a particular legal proceeding. From its wording ' clause (e) would apply to legal proceedings in respect of substantive rights which have already occurred under a repealed enactment and would not cover a case where only a procedural right is granted. It is not necessary however to pursue this matter further as section 6 applies in accordance with its wording only where a different intention does not appear and in the present case there is a saving clause in the repealing enactment which should govern the question as to what proceeding will remain unaffected. According to the saving clause which has been reproduced above review applications pending immediately before the commencement of this Ordinance on which proceedings had started before the commencement of the Ordinance remained unaffected. As only applications for review have been mentioned in the saving clause it is proper to infer that so moth reviews were not intended to be saved. From the fact that the Legislature provided a saving clause it is apparent that the question as to what should be saved was considered by the Legislature. If the intention was to save so moth proceedings also there is no reason why those proceedings should not have been mentioned. Expression units exclusion apterous, is not all rule of universal application for the Legislature may mention I a matter on account of excessive caution, but if it is clearer than the mention of one out of several matters is not on account of excessive caution it is legitimate to regard the provision as exhaustive and exclusive of what is not mentioned in it. In the present case the Legislature appears to have made a distinction for which a good reason existed. It has continued pending proceedings in the case of an application because to submit an application was the right of a party and the right having been exercised the proceedings should not on account of the repeal of the power of review become unfructuous. On the other hand there was no right of any person involved in a so moth review, the only person aggrieved by the loss of further jurisdiction being the Custodian himself’ The further contention of the appellants on

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 453?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 453 (SUPREME COURT, 1965-04-30): on account of the repeal of the power of review become unfructuous. On the other hand there was no right of any person involved in a so moth review, the only person aggrieved by the loss of further jurisdiction being the Custodian himself’ The further contention of the appellants on this post is that the proceedings before the Custodian should be regarded as proceedings on an application for review. It is not the case of the appellants that any application had been submitted to the Custodian for review. The contention is that as the appellants had approached the Ministry for Refugees and F Rehabilitation and the Ministry had given a direction to the Custodian to review the matter the position is the same as if there was an application to the Custodian for review. We ARI unable to accede to this contention. The letter of the Government! in compliance with which the Custodian started proceedings for review is not on the file. But assuming, as is alleged by the appellants, that the Ministry had given a direction for review the situation would not be the same as it would be when there is an application for review. The order issuing notice makes it clear that the Custodian was taking proceedings so moth. The order issuing notice is in the following words: - “You are called upon to appear before the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, on 21-5-1958 at 10 a.m to show cause why the order mentioned in the subject-matter should not be set aside or reviewed so moth. In case of non-appearance, the matter will be heard and decided ex parte." It will be observed that there is an express reference to so moth review. In the heading of the notice also there is a reference to a so moth review. In fact the appellants in their concise statement have themselves said that the notice had been issued in a so moth review. It is to be remembered that according to section 43 (6) an application for review could be submitted only within the “prescribed period” which was thirty days though it could be extended for sufficient cause, but for so moth review there was no limitation. The ordinary period of limitation for review had expired long ago. The Custodian issued notice for review not because there was any application before him and he found sufficient cause for condoning delay, but because he decided to exercise his jurisdiction for so moth review which he could exercise at any time. In view therefore of the fact that the jurisdiction of the. Custodian to review his order has terminated we are unable to set aside the order and to send back the case to him. This appeal is dismissed, but there is no order as to costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 1965 PLD 356 about?
Answer: Case 1965 PLD 356 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1963-11-19. The case involved DEVACHAND MULJIMAL (APPELLANT) VERSUS (1) THE DEPUTY SETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATIONCOM MISSIONER, KARACHI,(2) THE ADDITIONAL SETTLEMENT ANDREHABILITATION COMMISSIONER, KARACHI, (3) THE SETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATIONCOM MISSIONER, KARACHI,(4) THE CHIEF SETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATIONCOMMISSIONER, WEST PAKISTAN,(5) MST. SALEEMA FAROOQUE,(6) THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WESTPAKISTAN, AND(7) THE CHAIRMAN, AUQAF BOARD, LAHORE (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - SS. 3, (2), 16-A AND 25. The case was heard by A. R. CORNELIUS, C. J. B. Z KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: In case 1965 PLD 356, the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - SS. 3, (2), 16-A AND 25. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1963-11-19.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1965 PLD 356 were: NATHULAL BHAMBHANI ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY MUHAMMAD BUX MESAWA ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANT. SHEIKH ABDUL QADIR ADDITIONAL AD VOCATE-GENERAL (GHULAM HUSSAIN ABBASI ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH HIM) INSTRUCTED BY SHAJIQ AHMAD ATTORNEY FOR REPONDENTS NOS. TO 4. https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1965/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1965_356.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 00:32 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1965/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1965_356.html. The judges presiding were: A. R. CORNELIUS, C. J. B. Z KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: The parties in case 1965 PLD 356 were: DEVACHAND MULJIMAL (APPELLANT) VERSUS (1) THE DEPUTY SETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATIONCOM MISSIONER, KARACHI,(2) THE ADDITIONAL SETTLEMENT ANDREHABILITATION COMMISSIONER, KARACHI, (3) THE SETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATIONCOM MISSIONER, KARACHI,(4) THE CHIEF SETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATIONCOMMISSIONER, WEST PAKISTAN,(5) MST. SALEEMA FAROOQUE,(6) THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WESTPAKISTAN, AND(7) THE CHAIRMAN, AUQAF BOARD, LAHORE (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1965 PLD 356.
Answer: Judgment Seymour Rahman, J.-This is an appeal, by special leave, from an order of the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi, passed on the 14th of April 1961, disallowing a revision against an order of the Additional Settlement Commissioner (Judicial) refusing to review and cancel a previous order of provisional transfer of the property in dispute BMG Survey No.O. T. -77, situate at Bombay Bazaar, Karachi, in favor of the respondent No. MST. Salem Baroque. The appellant before us, claiming to be a person looking after the said property since the Partition of the country, had applied to the Deputy Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi, for the review and cancellation of the orders passed by his predecessor on the 29th of December 1959 and the 9th of January 1960, respectively, transferring the said property to MST. Salem Baroque, alleging that the property in dispute belonged to a religious and charitable trust for the benefit of the Bhatia community of Karachi. Originally, only a portion of this property was transferred to the said respondent against her C. H. application form on the 28th of November 1959, but the case was subsequently re-opened in order to ascertain whether the property in question was attached to any charitable, religious or educational trust and the transferee was called upon to adduce documentary evidence for that purpose. It appears that in her original C. H. application form she had, in answer to question No. 11 in the said form, stated that she did not know if the property was a trust property. But when the case was re-opened she submitted a certificate from the City Deputy Collector which contamed an entry under the heading “owner’s name” to the following effect- “Estate of Chetumal Johanan per trustees.” Thereafter, the names of four trustees were given and in the column for the “nature of origin of title” it was firstly mentioned that the trustees of the Estate of Chetumal Johanan had acquired the disputed property “by purchase’. Then alongside the Nam,e of the last trustee it was recorded “by succession’. The City Deputy Collector, however, in his report to the Deputy Custodian concluded as follows:- “It is presumed to be private trust. It must be confirmed from the Sessions Judge who main tams the records of trusts and WAFS.” A reference was, accordingly, made to the Sessions Judge and the Additional District and Sessions Judge, Karachi, on the 26th of December 1959, reported as follows “No such trust property is entered in the trust register maintained in this Court. The City Deputy Collector’s property register extract shows the property as devolving by succession which implies that it is not a trust of the above description.” Upon the basis of these documents the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on the 29th of December 1959, held that the property in question was not a trust property excluded from the Compensation Pool and confirmed his earlier orders transferring a portion of the property to the said respondent. Subsequently on the 9th of January 1960, the earlier orders were again reviewed, and the entire property was transferred to her. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner also informed the appellant that the property had been so transferred to the respondent and that he should pay rents to her. The transferee then served a notice dated the 26th of May 1960, upon the appellant calling upon him to attorn to her and to pay rents to her. The appellant thereupon moved the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on the 16th of July 1960, to review the transfer order and to cancel the same. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner refused to do so on the ground that no second review lay under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act XXVIII of 1958. In support of this application for review the appellant had, ITT appears, filed before the Deputy Settlement Commissioner further evidence to show that the property had been acquired by the trustees appointed under the will of one Chetumal Johanan which had been duly probated in 1919 and must, therefore, be treated as an accretion to the trust created under the said will. The appellant also relied on the extracts from the register maintained in the office of the City Deputy Collector to show that the property was a property held by the trustees of the estate of Chetumal Johanan but since he did not file either the original or a copy of the will the Additional Settlement Commissioner took the view that there was no evidence to show that the trust, if any, was for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection (2) of section 4 and section 16-A of the abovementioned Act of 1958. The Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner also refused to interfere in revision, because, he felt himself bound to accept the record of the City Deputy Collector and the District Judge as correct in determine the true character of the trust property. Hence the evidence before him was held to be insufficient to prove, beyond all reasonable doubt, the true nature and character of the trust in question. He was also of the opinion that section 16-A of the Act of 1958 dealt only with evacuee property “belonging to educational, charitable and religious character”. From this order a second revision was moved before the Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner. The latter, in the first instance, granted a stay order on the 14th of June 1961, but three days later he, without giving the appellant any hearing, vacated the stay order. The appellant then came to the High Court by way of a writ petition but a learned Single Judge of the High Court of West Pakistan, Karachi Bench, dismissed the application in line on two short grounds, firstly, that the sole post arising for consideration in the case was one of fact and secondly, that an earlier writ petition being Writ Petition No. 244 of 1961 with regard to the same property having already been dismissed by another learned Judge of the same High Court, no second writ petition could be entertained. The earlier writ petition, it may be mentioned here, was dismissed on the 30th of May 1961, because, it was felt that the petitioner their had another remedy open to him, namely, by way of a second application for revision before the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and, therefore, until that remedy had been exhausted his writ petition could not be enter tamed. It was after the rejection of the first WNT petition that the present appellant again moved the Chief Settlement Commissioner and obtained the stay order on the 14th of June 1961, but this order was also vacated, as already stated, three days later without assigning any reason or giving any hearing to the appellant. The appellant originally moved this Court for special leave ' to appeal from the order of the learned Single Judge of the High Court but at the hearing of the petition for special leave he was given permission to file an amended petition for leave to appeal against the last decision of the Settlement Authorities and ultimately leave was given to him to appeal against the order passed by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner on the 14th of April 1961. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has urged that so far as the Settlement Authorities were concerned, they were bound to accept, and act upon the basis of the records of the Custodian Authorities in dealing with evacuee properties. Under the Scheme of Act XXVIII of 1958 it was only after a Notification had been issued acquiring evacuee properties under section 3 of the said Act that the properties went into the Compensation Pool under section thereof: But subsection (2) of the said section 4 excluded evacuee property “attached to any charitable, religious or educational trust from the said Compensation Pool. These properties had to be dealt with separately under section 16-A of the said Act by a separate Scheme which contemplated the appointment of new trustees on fresh terms and conditions, if necessary, or the transference of such a property to a suitable institution or to a Government or local authority for any charitable, religious or educational purpose. In the present case, it is contended that on the findings of the Additional Settlement Commissioner (Judicial) himself the property in dispute was mentioned in the register of the Custodian as well as in the register of the City Deputy Collector to be a trust property. Prima facie, therefore, it should have been treated as a trust property which had to be dealt with in a separate and distinct category and in a manner different from that in which the other evacuee properties were to be dealt with. Under the earlier Act, namely, the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, also the only differential treatment that was given to any evacuee property was in respect of evacuee property vested in the Custodian or in the possession of the Custodian which was a “property in trust for a public purpose of a religious or charitable nature”. In respect of such properties only subsection (2) of section 7 of the aforesaid Act provided that the Central Government was to apport, by general or special order, new trustees in place of the evacuee trustees and the property was to remain vested in the Custodian or in his possession until such time as such new trustees were apported. In the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, it seems, only properties falling in the above category came to be excluded by subsection (2) of section thereof from going into the Compensation Pool and in respect of properties of this kind it was provided that they would be dealt with differently by framing appropriate Schemes for their management under section 16-A of the latter Act. It would thus appear that under both these Acts the authorities were concerned with separately classifying only properties given, in trust for a public purpose of a religious or charitable nature. The presumption, therefore, that should have been drawn from the fact of the properties BMG entered in the register of the Custodian as a trust property was that it was a trust of the kind mentioned in subsection (2) of section 7 of the Act of 1957 which should have been dealt with in accordance with the provisions of subsection (2) of section of the Act of 1958 by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Authorities. The view that a property could only be excluded from the Compensation Pool if it was actually being utilized for a charitable, religious or educational purpose, does not appear to be correct, for, the Act of 1958 merely requires that the property should be attached to such a trust. Thus a property, though not used specifically for such a purpose, might still come within the category excluded from going into the Compensation Pool, if its income 1s to be utilized for any of the specified purposes. The learned Additional Advocate-General has, however, argued that even trust properties became evacuee properties under the definition of that term given in section 2 of the Act of 1957 and, as such, vested in the Custodian. But under subsection (2) of section 7 they were to be only dealt with in a somewhat different manner. Therefore, under section 3 of the Act of 1958 such trust properties were also label to acquisition, and it was only after they had been so acquired that they were to be kept out of the Compensation Pool if they were, in fact, attached to any charitable, religious or educational trust and then dealt with in accordance with the provisions of section 16-A. In the present case, it is said, there was no evidence to show that the Central Government had, after the property was entered in the register of trust by the Custodian authorities, taken any other action with regard thereto under subsection (2) of section 7 of the Act of 1957. The Settlement Authorities, therefore, after the acquisition of the property were not altogether unjustified in treating it as having come into the Compensation Pool. It is possible that because no action was taken with regard to the said property under subsection (2) of section 7 of the Act of 1957, that the Settlement Authorities were misled into bona fide believing that the property formed part of the Compensation Pool and was accordingly transferable like any other evacuee property. The learned Additional Advocate-General, therefore, claims that the issuance of the provisional transfer order m respect of the said property cannot be said to have been made without jurisdiction, but concedes that if a question should now arise whether the property had been rightly treated as forming part of the Compensation Pool the Settlement Authorities would not be the authorities competent to decide this question. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant and the Sugar Board have, on the other hand, argued that even the provisional transfer order was made without jurisdiction. It appears to us that under the Scheme of the Act of 1958 the Settlement Authorities acquired jurisdiction to transfer or dispose of evacuee property only if it came into the Compensation Pool. But there is no power in the Settlement Authorities to decide as to which property should or should not come into the said Pool, or to adjudicate on the question as to whether a particular property has been rightly treated as included in the said Pool In so far, therefore, as the Settlement Authorities purported, in the present case, to decide whether the property in dispute was held in trust for any of the purposes specified in subsection (2) of section of the Act of 1958, they acted clearly in excess of their jurisdiction. Learned counsel appearing for the respondent and the Settlement Authorities have, of course, contended that it would even now be within the jurisdiction of the Custodian to decide this question under section 41 of the Act of 1957 and nobody else would have the jurisdiction to adjudicate in respect of any such matter. Section 41 excludes the jurisdiction of the Civil or Revenue Courts only with regard to a matter which the Custodian is empowered to decide under the said Act. Under the said Act the Custodian has the power to decide whether the property is an evacuee property or not. There is, in the present case, however, no dispute that the property is evacuee property. So there is nothing left for the Custodian to decide. Even otherwise as soon as a property is acquired by Notification under section 3 of the Act of 1958 it ceases to be evacuee and the Custodian has, thereafter, no further jurisdiction with regard to TT. D So far as action under subsection (2) of section 7 of the Act of 1957 is concerned TT is the Central Government which has to take that particular action with regard to properties held in trust for a public purpose of religious or charitable nature. The Custodian has only the power to deal with such properties and the come thereof, as far as possible, for fulfilling the purpose of the trust until the Government has appointed new trustees in place of the evacuee trustees. It thus appears to us that even under the Act of 1957 the Custodian Authorities would not have been empowered to decide the question as to whether an evacuee property is held for a trust of this particular nature or to adjudicate upon the validity of the trust, if the same came to be questioned. These matters can, in our view, now be decided only by a competent civil Court, for, neither section 41 of the Act of 1957 nor section 25 of the Act of 1958 has the effect of taking away this jurisdiction of the civil Courts. We have come to the conclusion, therefore, that in the present case by reason of the property having been acquired by Notification issued under section 3 of the Act of 1958 the Custodian Authorities ceased to have any jurisdiction in respect of the said property. Furthermore, even otherwise the Custodian authorities would not have, in our opinion, had any jurisdiction to decide this particular question under the Act of 1957. Again, under the Act of 1958 the Settlement Authorities do not also appear to have acquired any jurisdiction to decide this question. The appellant, must therefore, of necessity, have recourse to the civil Courts to have the character of this trust adjudicated upon after the taking of evidence, particularly, since the transferee' respondent is also challenging the validity of the trust itself on the ground that a trust for Dharma simpliciter is void under F the Hindu law. At the same time, however, we are not prepared to go to the extent of holding that the action of the Settlement Authorities in issuing the provisional transfer order in respect of the said property was without jurisdiction. If the Settlement Authorities had no jurisdiction to decide whether this was property attached to a trust for an educational, religious or charitable purpose, then their findings to the contrary were also without jurisdiction. They should have acted upon the basis of the records of the Custodian. Since those records, in the present case, did not give any clear indication as to the true nature of the trust for which this property was acquired, it cannot be said that the Settlement Authorities acted improperly in treating it as an ordinary trust property not attached to any trust for any religious, educational or charitable purpose. This appeal is, accordingly, allowed in part and the findings of the Settlement Authorities, in so far as they purport to declare this property not to be attached to a trust of a charitable, educational or religious purpose, are set aside, but their action in issuing the provisional transfer order is maintained. No further action will, however, be taken by the Settlement Authorities until this question is decided by a competent civil Court. The appellant must take steps within a month to have this question brought before a civil Court for decision. In the meantime, no final transfer order will be issued in respect of this property and the present status quo will be maintained. Since success is divided, the parties will bear their own costs in this appeal. /. Order accordingly.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 356 (SUPREME COURT, 1963-11-19): Judgment Seymour Rahman, J.-This is an appeal, by special leave, from an order of the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi, passed on the 14th of April 1961, disallowing a revision against an order of the Additional Settlement Commissioner (Judicial) refusing to review and cancel a previous order of provisional transfer of the property in dispute BMG Survey No.O. T. -77, situate at Bombay Bazaar, Karachi, in favor of the respondent No. MST. Salem Baroque. The appellant before us, claiming to be a person looking after the said property since the Partition of the country, had applied to the Deputy Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi, for the review and cancellation of the orders passed by his predecessor on the 29th of December 1959 and the 9th of January 1960, respectively, transferring the said property to MST. Salem Baroque, alleging that the property in dispute belonged to a religious and charitable trust for the benefit of the Bhatia community of Karachi. Originally, only a portion of this property was transferred to the said respondent against her C. H. application form on the 28th of November 1959, but the case was subsequently re-opened in order to ascertain whether the property in question was attached to any charitable, religious or educational trust and the transferee was called upon to adduce documentary evidence for that purpose. It appears that in her original C. H. application form she had, in answer to question No. 11 in the said form, stated that she did not know if the property was a trust property. But when the case was re-opened she submitted a certificate from the City Deputy Collector which contamed an entry under the heading “owner’s name” to the following effect- “Estate of Chetumal Johanan per trustees.” Thereafter, the names of four trustees were given and in the column for the “nature of origin of title” it was firstly mentioned that the trustees of the Estate of Chetumal Johanan had acquired the disputed property “by purchase’. Then alongside the Nam,e of the last trustee it was recorded “by succession’. The City Deputy Collector, however, in his report to the Deputy Custodian concluded as follows:- “It is presumed to be private trust. It must be confirmed from the Sessions Judge who main tams the records of trusts and WAFS.” A reference was, accordingly, made to the Sessions Judge and the Additional District and Sessions Judge, Karachi, on the 26th of December 1959, reported as follows “No such trust property is entered in the trust register maintained in this Court. The City Deputy Collector’s property register extract shows the property as devolving by succession which implies that it is not a trust of the above description.” Upon the basis of these documents the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on the 29th of December 1959, held that the property in question was not a trust property excluded from the Compensation Pool and confirmed his earlier orders transferring a portion of the property to the said respondent. Subsequently on the 9th of January

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 356 (SUPREME COURT, 1963-11-19): of these documents the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on the 29th of December 1959, held that the property in question was not a trust property excluded from the Compensation Pool and confirmed his earlier orders transferring a portion of the property to the said respondent. Subsequently on the 9th of January 1960, the earlier orders were again reviewed, and the entire property was transferred to her. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner also informed the appellant that the property had been so transferred to the respondent and that he should pay rents to her. The transferee then served a notice dated the 26th of May 1960, upon the appellant calling upon him to attorn to her and to pay rents to her. The appellant thereupon moved the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on the 16th of July 1960, to review the transfer order and to cancel the same. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner refused to do so on the ground that no second review lay under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act XXVIII of 1958. In support of this application for review the appellant had, ITT appears, filed before the Deputy Settlement Commissioner further evidence to show that the property had been acquired by the trustees appointed under the will of one Chetumal Johanan which had been duly probated in 1919 and must, therefore, be treated as an accretion to the trust created under the said will. The appellant also relied on the extracts from the register maintained in the office of the City Deputy Collector to show that the property was a property held by the trustees of the estate of Chetumal Johanan but since he did not file either the original or a copy of the will the Additional Settlement Commissioner took the view that there was no evidence to show that the trust, if any, was for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection (2) of section 4 and section 16-A of the abovementioned Act of 1958. The Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner also refused to interfere in revision, because, he felt himself bound to accept the record of the City Deputy Collector and the District Judge as correct in determine the true character of the trust property. Hence the evidence before him was held to be insufficient to prove, beyond all reasonable doubt, the true nature and character of the trust in question. He was also of the opinion that section 16-A of the Act of 1958 dealt only with evacuee property “belonging to educational, charitable and religious character”. From this order a second revision was moved before the Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner. The latter, in the first instance, granted a stay order on the 14th of June 1961, but three days later he, without giving the appellant any hearing, vacated the stay order. The appellant then came to the High Court by way of a writ petition but a learned Single Judge of the High Court of West Pakistan, Karachi Bench, dismissed the application in line on two short grounds,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 356 (SUPREME COURT, 1963-11-19): days later he, without giving the appellant any hearing, vacated the stay order. The appellant then came to the High Court by way of a writ petition but a learned Single Judge of the High Court of West Pakistan, Karachi Bench, dismissed the application in line on two short grounds, firstly, that the sole post arising for consideration in the case was one of fact and secondly, that an earlier writ petition being Writ Petition No. 244 of 1961 with regard to the same property having already been dismissed by another learned Judge of the same High Court, no second writ petition could be entertained. The earlier writ petition, it may be mentioned here, was dismissed on the 30th of May 1961, because, it was felt that the petitioner their had another remedy open to him, namely, by way of a second application for revision before the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and, therefore, until that remedy had been exhausted his writ petition could not be enter tamed. It was after the rejection of the first WNT petition that the present appellant again moved the Chief Settlement Commissioner and obtained the stay order on the 14th of June 1961, but this order was also vacated, as already stated, three days later without assigning any reason or giving any hearing to the appellant. The appellant originally moved this Court for special leave ' to appeal from the order of the learned Single Judge of the High Court but at the hearing of the petition for special leave he was given permission to file an amended petition for leave to appeal against the last decision of the Settlement Authorities and ultimately leave was given to him to appeal against the order passed by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner on the 14th of April 1961. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has urged that so far as the Settlement Authorities were concerned, they were bound to accept, and act upon the basis of the records of the Custodian Authorities in dealing with evacuee properties. Under the Scheme of Act XXVIII of 1958 it was only after a Notification had been issued acquiring evacuee properties under section 3 of the said Act that the properties went into the Compensation Pool under section thereof: But subsection (2) of the said section 4 excluded evacuee property “attached to any charitable, religious or educational trust from the said Compensation Pool. These properties had to be dealt with separately under section 16-A of the said Act by a separate Scheme which contemplated the appointment of new trustees on fresh terms and conditions, if necessary, or the transference of such a property to a suitable institution or to a Government or local authority for any charitable, religious or educational purpose. In the present case, it is contended that on the findings of the Additional Settlement Commissioner (Judicial) himself the property in dispute was mentioned in the register of the Custodian as well as in the register of the City

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 356 (SUPREME COURT, 1963-11-19): Government or local authority for any charitable, religious or educational purpose. In the present case, it is contended that on the findings of the Additional Settlement Commissioner (Judicial) himself the property in dispute was mentioned in the register of the Custodian as well as in the register of the City Deputy Collector to be a trust property. Prima facie, therefore, it should have been treated as a trust property which had to be dealt with in a separate and distinct category and in a manner different from that in which the other evacuee properties were to be dealt with. Under the earlier Act, namely, the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, also the only differential treatment that was given to any evacuee property was in respect of evacuee property vested in the Custodian or in the possession of the Custodian which was a “property in trust for a public purpose of a religious or charitable nature”. In respect of such properties only subsection (2) of section 7 of the aforesaid Act provided that the Central Government was to apport, by general or special order, new trustees in place of the evacuee trustees and the property was to remain vested in the Custodian or in his possession until such time as such new trustees were apported. In the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, it seems, only properties falling in the above category came to be excluded by subsection (2) of section thereof from going into the Compensation Pool and in respect of properties of this kind it was provided that they would be dealt with differently by framing appropriate Schemes for their management under section 16-A of the latter Act. It would thus appear that under both these Acts the authorities were concerned with separately classifying only properties given, in trust for a public purpose of a religious or charitable nature. The presumption, therefore, that should have been drawn from the fact of the properties BMG entered in the register of the Custodian as a trust property was that it was a trust of the kind mentioned in subsection (2) of section 7 of the Act of 1957 which should have been dealt with in accordance with the provisions of subsection (2) of section of the Act of 1958 by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Authorities. The view that a property could only be excluded from the Compensation Pool if it was actually being utilized for a charitable, religious or educational purpose, does not appear to be correct, for, the Act of 1958 merely requires that the property should be attached to such a trust. Thus a property, though not used specifically for such a purpose, might still come within the category excluded from going into the Compensation Pool, if its income 1s to be utilized for any of the specified purposes. The learned Additional Advocate-General has, however, argued that even trust properties became evacuee properties under the definition of that term given in section 2 of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 356 (SUPREME COURT, 1963-11-19): still come within the category excluded from going into the Compensation Pool, if its income 1s to be utilized for any of the specified purposes. The learned Additional Advocate-General has, however, argued that even trust properties became evacuee properties under the definition of that term given in section 2 of the Act of 1957 and, as such, vested in the Custodian. But under subsection (2) of section 7 they were to be only dealt with in a somewhat different manner. Therefore, under section 3 of the Act of 1958 such trust properties were also label to acquisition, and it was only after they had been so acquired that they were to be kept out of the Compensation Pool if they were, in fact, attached to any charitable, religious or educational trust and then dealt with in accordance with the provisions of section 16-A. In the present case, it is said, there was no evidence to show that the Central Government had, after the property was entered in the register of trust by the Custodian authorities, taken any other action with regard thereto under subsection (2) of section 7 of the Act of 1957. The Settlement Authorities, therefore, after the acquisition of the property were not altogether unjustified in treating it as having come into the Compensation Pool. It is possible that because no action was taken with regard to the said property under subsection (2) of section 7 of the Act of 1957, that the Settlement Authorities were misled into bona fide believing that the property formed part of the Compensation Pool and was accordingly transferable like any other evacuee property. The learned Additional Advocate-General, therefore, claims that the issuance of the provisional transfer order m respect of the said property cannot be said to have been made without jurisdiction, but concedes that if a question should now arise whether the property had been rightly treated as forming part of the Compensation Pool the Settlement Authorities would not be the authorities competent to decide this question. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant and the Sugar Board have, on the other hand, argued that even the provisional transfer order was made without jurisdiction. It appears to us that under the Scheme of the Act of 1958 the Settlement Authorities acquired jurisdiction to transfer or dispose of evacuee property only if it came into the Compensation Pool. But there is no power in the Settlement Authorities to decide as to which property should or should not come into the said Pool, or to adjudicate on the question as to whether a particular property has been rightly treated as included in the said Pool In so far, therefore, as the Settlement Authorities purported, in the present case, to decide whether the property in dispute was held in trust for any of the purposes specified in subsection (2) of section of the Act of 1958, they acted clearly in excess of their jurisdiction. Learned counsel appearing for the respondent and the Settlement Authorities have,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 356 (SUPREME COURT, 1963-11-19): in the present case, to decide whether the property in dispute was held in trust for any of the purposes specified in subsection (2) of section of the Act of 1958, they acted clearly in excess of their jurisdiction. Learned counsel appearing for the respondent and the Settlement Authorities have, of course, contended that it would even now be within the jurisdiction of the Custodian to decide this question under section 41 of the Act of 1957 and nobody else would have the jurisdiction to adjudicate in respect of any such matter. Section 41 excludes the jurisdiction of the Civil or Revenue Courts only with regard to a matter which the Custodian is empowered to decide under the said Act. Under the said Act the Custodian has the power to decide whether the property is an evacuee property or not. There is, in the present case, however, no dispute that the property is evacuee property. So there is nothing left for the Custodian to decide. Even otherwise as soon as a property is acquired by Notification under section 3 of the Act of 1958 it ceases to be evacuee and the Custodian has, thereafter, no further jurisdiction with regard to TT. D So far as action under subsection (2) of section 7 of the Act of 1957 is concerned TT is the Central Government which has to take that particular action with regard to properties held in trust for a public purpose of religious or charitable nature. The Custodian has only the power to deal with such properties and the come thereof, as far as possible, for fulfilling the purpose of the trust until the Government has appointed new trustees in place of the evacuee trustees. It thus appears to us that even under the Act of 1957 the Custodian Authorities would not have been empowered to decide the question as to whether an evacuee property is held for a trust of this particular nature or to adjudicate upon the validity of the trust, if the same came to be questioned. These matters can, in our view, now be decided only by a competent civil Court, for, neither section 41 of the Act of 1957 nor section 25 of the Act of 1958 has the effect of taking away this jurisdiction of the civil Courts. We have come to the conclusion, therefore, that in the present case by reason of the property having been acquired by Notification issued under section 3 of the Act of 1958 the Custodian Authorities ceased to have any jurisdiction in respect of the said property. Furthermore, even otherwise the Custodian authorities would not have, in our opinion, had any jurisdiction to decide this particular question under the Act of 1957. Again, under the Act of 1958 the Settlement Authorities do not also appear to have acquired any jurisdiction to decide this question. The appellant, must therefore, of necessity, have recourse to the civil Courts to have the character of this trust adjudicated upon after the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1965 PLD 356?
Answer: From case 1965 PLD 356 (SUPREME COURT, 1963-11-19): under the Act of 1957. Again, under the Act of 1958 the Settlement Authorities do not also appear to have acquired any jurisdiction to decide this question. The appellant, must therefore, of necessity, have recourse to the civil Courts to have the character of this trust adjudicated upon after the taking of evidence, particularly, since the transferee' respondent is also challenging the validity of the trust itself on the ground that a trust for Dharma simpliciter is void under F the Hindu law. At the same time, however, we are not prepared to go to the extent of holding that the action of the Settlement Authorities in issuing the provisional transfer order in respect of the said property was without jurisdiction. If the Settlement Authorities had no jurisdiction to decide whether this was property attached to a trust for an educational, religious or charitable purpose, then their findings to the contrary were also without jurisdiction. They should have acted upon the basis of the records of the Custodian. Since those records, in the present case, did not give any clear indication as to the true nature of the trust for which this property was acquired, it cannot be said that the Settlement Authorities acted improperly in treating it as an ordinary trust property not attached to any trust for any religious, educational or charitable purpose. This appeal is, accordingly, allowed in part and the findings of the Settlement Authorities, in so far as they purport to declare this property not to be attached to a trust of a charitable, educational or religious purpose, are set aside, but their action in issuing the provisional transfer order is maintained. No further action will, however, be taken by the Settlement Authorities until this question is decided by a competent civil Court. The appellant must take steps within a month to have this question brought before a civil Court for decision. In the meantime, no final transfer order will be issued in respect of this property and the present status quo will be maintained. Since success is divided, the parties will bear their own costs in this appeal. /. Order accordingly.

Question: What is case 1998 CLC 302 about?
Answer: Case 1998 CLC 302 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1997-03-31. The case involved MUHAMMAD HUSSAIN AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND 12 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (II OF 1961 - S. 18-A(1) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. The case was heard by SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C. J. AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1998 CLC 302?
Answer: In case 1998 CLC 302, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (II OF 1961 - S. 18-A(1) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1997-03-31.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1998 CLC 302?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1998 CLC 302 were: ABDUL MAJID MALLICK, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANTS. CH. SHAH WALI, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C. J. AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1998 CLC 302?
Answer: The parties in case 1998 CLC 302 were: MUHAMMAD HUSSAIN AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND 12 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1998 CLC 302.
Answer: MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.-This appeal has been directed against an order passed by the High Court on February 26, 1996, whereby a writ petition filed by the appellants herein was dismissed. 2. The subject of dispute is a land measuring 41 Canals, 17 Marla's, comprises Survey Nos. 10, 11 and 16, situate in village Samantha, Thesis Radial, District Mirror. The disputed land is claimed by the appellants to be in their continuous possession since the time of the ancestors from Dogma Regime. According to the appellants this land was initially allotted to one Adam Shah s/o Muhammad Dm but during the subsistence of the said allotment it was subsequently allotted to one Muhammad Naval, the predecessor-in- interest of respondents 3 to 13 on August 28, 1959. The said allotment was alleged to have been made in favor of allottee in collaboration with the Rehabilitation Authorities. The order of allotment was challenged by the appellants before the D.R.C. but their appeal was dismissed on July 7, 1964. This order of D.R.C. was assailed in revision before the Rehabilitation Commissioner, but it was claimed to be dismissed for want of prosecution in absence of the appellants and the outcome of the same was not conveyed to them. However on October 31, 1991, respondents 3 to 13 secured the provisional proprietary rights transfer order from the Custodian. The appellants challenged the aforesaid order through a review petition before the Custodian of Azad Jammu and Kashmir which was dismissed on October 4, 1994. The aforesaid order of Custodian along with orders of allotment, D.R.C. and the Rehabilitation Commissioner and proprietary rights transfer in favor of appellants were challenged by the appellants by filing a writ petition in the High Court but the same was dismissed vide the order impugned which is the subject of present controversy. 3. It was vehemently contended by Mr. Abdul Maid Wallick, the learned counsel for the appellants, that the impugned order was violative of law and as such label to be set aside. According to the learned counsel the Custodian failed to apply his independent mind to the allotment in question in compliance with the provisions of law as the appellants were admittedly old tenants in the land in dispute as such the failure on the part of the learned Custodian to examine the allotment in the light of sections 18-A(1) and 18-B of the Amended Administration of the Evacuee Property Act was tantamount to failure of exercise of jurisdiction. According to the learned counsel it was wrong to suggest that the points raised before the learned Custodian and the High Court were purely questions of fact needing detailed inquiry, as such not within the purview of High Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction. The learned counsel -posted out that the learned Judge in the High Court failed to examine the copies of record of rights appended with the writ petition showing that the appellants were the old tenants in the land as they continuously occupied the same since the Dogma Regime through their ancestors. It also escaped the attention of the learned Judge in the High Court that the status of appellants as old tenants was admitted by respondents in their written statement. Thus, according to the learned counsel the Custodian and the learned Judge in the High Court misdirected themselves in not attending to the point of determining the status of appellants as old tenants and its effect on the allotment in question. 4. In reply, it was contended by Ch. Shah Walk, the learned counsel representing the respondents that finding of facts finally concluded by the Rehabilitation Authorities on the basis of material placed before them were open to no exception by challenging the same through a constitutional petition The learned counsel submitted that the proprietary rights transfer order was passed in favor of respondents on the basis of valid allotment as such the review petition before the Custodian did not merit any consideration. According to the learned counsel the matter was finally determined by the Rehabilitation Authorities on all forums who were vested with the jurisdiction to determine the same and the High Court had no jurisdiction to interfere in the findings arrived at by the competent authorities. The learned counsel maintained that the appellants never applied for the allotment of the land till the same was August m favor of allottee and all the proceedings initiated for its cancellation ended, upholding the allotment of the allottee as genuine. According to the learned counsel for respondents the claim of appellants as being old tenants was also disallowed by the Rehabilitation Authorities. 5. After harem the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, it may be stated that the land in dispute was admittedly allotted in favor of Muhammad Naval, the predecessor-MN-interest of respondents 3 to 13 on August 28, 1959. This order was challenged by way of appeal but the same was dismissed by D.R.C. on July 7, 1964. Revision petition filed before the Rehabilitation Commissioner against the order of D.R.C. was also dismissed on February 25, 1967. On the basis of entitlement certificate issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner the provisional proprietary rights transfer order was issued on October 31, 1991, which was challenged through a review petition before the Custodian, but it was disallowed vide order, dated October 4, 1994. It is pertinent to post out that at the time of challenging the allotment order it was categorically averred by the appellants that they were the old tenants and the land in question was in their continuous possession since Dogma Regime. In the alternative it was also averred that land be allotted to the appellants. The question of allotment in favor of respondents was concurrently resolved by the Rehabilitation Authorities on all the forums to be genuine, and it was also opined that the appellants in presence of allotment in favor of respondents were not entitled to the allotment of the land in dispute. Nevertheless the fact remains that none of the Rehabilitation Authorities determine the question of status of appellants in the land in question as old tenants. The D.R.C. formed the view that since the plea of appellants being old tenants was not raised before Tonsilar Custodian, so the same could not be raised before him. It 1s, however, an underlying fact that post was raised before D.R.C. Rehabilitation Commissioner, the Custodian and then before the High Court but all of them failed to advert to the above post. Instead all of them adverted only to the point that allotment in favor of respondents had attained finality as the same was conclusively determined by the Rehabilitation Authorities. We also concur with the aforesaid view that the allotment in favor of respondents indeed attained the finality as none of the Rehabilitation Authorities was persuaded to annul the same. But we may observe that the question with regard to the status of appellants as being old tenants in the land in question, as said earlier, was, though raised, specifically, but not resolved which has resulted into miscarriage of justice. The first proviso of section 18-A(1) 01 Administration of Evacuee Property Act as amended in Azad Jammu and Kashmir on January 14, 1987, under No.19–123/LD/LEG(A)/1987 reads as under:- "Provided that in the case where the Evacuee Property is held by any old tenant as defined in Government Order, then, notwithstanding the grant of proprietary rights to the allottees in respect of such Evacuee Property, the old tenant shall have the protection against the ejectment to the extent indicated in para. 1(e) of the Government Order No. and he shall be label to pay the rent to the allottee as provided therein." The above provision shows that an old tenant shall have the protection against the ejectment to the extent of land provided in the Government Order No. para. 1(e). For the sake of convenience para. 1(e) of Government Order is reproduced below: 'Old tenant! would mean such tenants as are recorded to have been tenants of evacuee property immediately before the War of Liberation started: Provided that the total land in possession of such tenants m whatever capacity does not exceed 24 Canals in all: Provided further, that the land shall be allotted to the refugees and the tenants shall be liable to pay the same rent to the allottees as they paid to. the evacuee landowners." w The above-referred'’ provision of law makes it abundantly clear that while granting proprietary rights to the allottees it was also enjoyed upon the Custodian to resolve the question of status of appellants in the land in question as old tenants and to protect their rights at the time of ejectment to the extent provided in the relevant law. But the learned Custodian has adverted to the point of status of the appellants as old tenants as under: I The question as to whether the appellants enjoy the status of old tenants and are entitled to enjoy the protection under Order were not resolved at all. 6. Even a question of fact which could have been determined on the basis of perusal of record without adverting to making a detailed enquiry is permissible under law to be resolved in exercise of writ jurisdiction. In the instant case the status of appellants being old tenants MN the land in question is admitted by the respondents in their written statement as they did not repudiate the said assertion rather it was alleged that the appellants failed to pay the share of the produce of the land to the evacuee owners. Besides* there was a bulk of evidence existing on the record which purports to show that the land in question was in continuous possession of the appellants SME Dogma Regime. In Jacaranda 1957-1958 B.K. the forefathers of the appellants are shown in the possession of the land in question on payment of fixed revenue. In Jacaranda 1992-1993 B.K. Muhammad Hussain, one of the appellants and Abdul Rehman and Muhammad Nawab the ancestors of appellants, are shown in possession of the land in question on the payment of share of produce. In Jacaranda 2000-2001 B.K. Muhammad Baths, the ancestor of appellants, is entered in the possession of the land on the payment of share of produce. In Jacarandas 1957-1958, 1981-1982 A.D. the appellants are entered in possession of the land on payment of fixed revenue in some portion of it and share of produce in the other portion of the land. Thus, there remains no manner of doubt that the land in question is shown in continuous possession of the appellants since the time of their ancestors from Dogma Regime up to the present time and the learned D.R.C. Rehabilitation Commissioner, Custodian and the High Court failed to determine the status of appellants as being old tenants which could have been very easily determined on perusal of the relevant record available. We, therefore, have no hesitation to hold that the appellants are old tenants in the land in question and their status as such remains undisputed by the respondents. 7. In the review petition before the Custodian it has been specifically alleged in the memo, of review petition by the appellants that they belong to three different families, but their total holding is only 44 Canals. However, the learned Custodian in his judgment in the review petition has mentioned that the counsel for the appellant argued before him that their holding measures 34 Canals. The question whether they belong to one family or three families and whether their other holding measures 44 Canals or 34 Canals have not been adverted to at all. During the course of arguments the learned counsel for the appellants contended that lit of 24 Canals under Government Order, per family has been changed through an amendment. While consider mg the question of benefit to the appellants as old tenants all these questions are relevant and need resolution. The learned Custodian has expressed the view that as there was nothing on the record to show that the appellants-tenants paid any rent to evacuee-Hindus, they are not entitled to the benefit envisaged under Order. The aforesaid observation of the Custodian is contradictory to his observation that question of benefit of Government Order may be raised and resolved at the time when the appellants are ejected. Even otherwise, the observation is also unsustainable because no such objection appears to have been taken by the respondents at any stage previously nor the same was resolved. Thus there being no finding whether the appellants are entitled to benefit under Order, the question of application of res judicata does not arise. 8. In light of what has been stated above, we partly accept the appeal, set aside the impugned orders of the Custodian and the High Court. The case is remanded to the Custodian with the direction to inquire into the matter whether the appellants are entitled to take the benefit of Order and if so to what extent. The Custodian while dealing with the matter may strike issues in the light of above observations and decide the question of protection to the appellants under Order according to law. Before parting with the case we may observe that under the first proviso of section 18-A(1) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, it is desirable that the question of protection to an old tenant, if raised before Custodian is decided at the time of issuing of Proprietary Rights Transfer Order. The appeal is accepted as indicated above. Appeal partly accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 CLC 302?
Answer: From case 1998 CLC 302 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-03-31): MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.-This appeal has been directed against an order passed by the High Court on February 26, 1996, whereby a writ petition filed by the appellants herein was dismissed. 2. The subject of dispute is a land measuring 41 Canals, 17 Marla's, comprises Survey Nos. 10, 11 and 16, situate in village Samantha, Thesis Radial, District Mirror. The disputed land is claimed by the appellants to be in their continuous possession since the time of the ancestors from Dogma Regime. According to the appellants this land was initially allotted to one Adam Shah s/o Muhammad Dm but during the subsistence of the said allotment it was subsequently allotted to one Muhammad Naval, the predecessor-in- interest of respondents 3 to 13 on August 28, 1959. The said allotment was alleged to have been made in favor of allottee in collaboration with the Rehabilitation Authorities. The order of allotment was challenged by the appellants before the D.R.C. but their appeal was dismissed on July 7, 1964. This order of D.R.C. was assailed in revision before the Rehabilitation Commissioner, but it was claimed to be dismissed for want of prosecution in absence of the appellants and the outcome of the same was not conveyed to them. However on October 31, 1991, respondents 3 to 13 secured the provisional proprietary rights transfer order from the Custodian. The appellants challenged the aforesaid order through a review petition before the Custodian of Azad Jammu and Kashmir which was dismissed on October 4, 1994. The aforesaid order of Custodian along with orders of allotment, D.R.C. and the Rehabilitation Commissioner and proprietary rights transfer in favor of appellants were challenged by the appellants by filing a writ petition in the High Court but the same was dismissed vide the order impugned which is the subject of present controversy. 3. It was vehemently contended by Mr. Abdul Maid Wallick, the learned counsel for the appellants, that the impugned order was violative of law and as such label to be set aside. According to the learned counsel the Custodian failed to apply his independent mind to the allotment in question in compliance with the provisions of law as the appellants were admittedly old tenants in the land in dispute as such the failure on the part of the learned Custodian to examine the allotment in the light of sections 18-A(1) and 18-B of the Amended Administration of the Evacuee Property Act was tantamount to failure of exercise of jurisdiction. According to the learned counsel it was wrong to suggest that the points raised before the learned Custodian and the High Court were purely questions of fact needing detailed inquiry, as such not within the purview of High Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction. The learned counsel -posted out that the learned Judge in the High Court failed to examine the copies of record of rights appended with the writ petition showing that the appellants were the old tenants in the land as they continuously occupied the same

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 CLC 302?
Answer: From case 1998 CLC 302 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-03-31): in exercise of its writ jurisdiction. The learned counsel -posted out that the learned Judge in the High Court failed to examine the copies of record of rights appended with the writ petition showing that the appellants were the old tenants in the land as they continuously occupied the same since the Dogma Regime through their ancestors. It also escaped the attention of the learned Judge in the High Court that the status of appellants as old tenants was admitted by respondents in their written statement. Thus, according to the learned counsel the Custodian and the learned Judge in the High Court misdirected themselves in not attending to the point of determining the status of appellants as old tenants and its effect on the allotment in question. 4. In reply, it was contended by Ch. Shah Walk, the learned counsel representing the respondents that finding of facts finally concluded by the Rehabilitation Authorities on the basis of material placed before them were open to no exception by challenging the same through a constitutional petition The learned counsel submitted that the proprietary rights transfer order was passed in favor of respondents on the basis of valid allotment as such the review petition before the Custodian did not merit any consideration. According to the learned counsel the matter was finally determined by the Rehabilitation Authorities on all forums who were vested with the jurisdiction to determine the same and the High Court had no jurisdiction to interfere in the findings arrived at by the competent authorities. The learned counsel maintained that the appellants never applied for the allotment of the land till the same was August m favor of allottee and all the proceedings initiated for its cancellation ended, upholding the allotment of the allottee as genuine. According to the learned counsel for respondents the claim of appellants as being old tenants was also disallowed by the Rehabilitation Authorities. 5. After harem the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, it may be stated that the land in dispute was admittedly allotted in favor of Muhammad Naval, the predecessor-MN-interest of respondents 3 to 13 on August 28, 1959. This order was challenged by way of appeal but the same was dismissed by D.R.C. on July 7, 1964. Revision petition filed before the Rehabilitation Commissioner against the order of D.R.C. was also dismissed on February 25, 1967. On the basis of entitlement certificate issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner the provisional proprietary rights transfer order was issued on October 31, 1991, which was challenged through a review petition before the Custodian, but it was disallowed vide order, dated October 4, 1994. It is pertinent to post out that at the time of challenging the allotment order it was categorically averred by the appellants that they were the old tenants and the land in question was in their continuous possession since Dogma Regime. In the alternative it was also averred that land be allotted to the appellants. The

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 CLC 302?
Answer: From case 1998 CLC 302 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-03-31): that at the time of challenging the allotment order it was categorically averred by the appellants that they were the old tenants and the land in question was in their continuous possession since Dogma Regime. In the alternative it was also averred that land be allotted to the appellants. The question of allotment in favor of respondents was concurrently resolved by the Rehabilitation Authorities on all the forums to be genuine, and it was also opined that the appellants in presence of allotment in favor of respondents were not entitled to the allotment of the land in dispute. Nevertheless the fact remains that none of the Rehabilitation Authorities determine the question of status of appellants in the land in question as old tenants. The D.R.C. formed the view that since the plea of appellants being old tenants was not raised before Tonsilar Custodian, so the same could not be raised before him. It 1s, however, an underlying fact that post was raised before D.R.C. Rehabilitation Commissioner, the Custodian and then before the High Court but all of them failed to advert to the above post. Instead all of them adverted only to the point that allotment in favor of respondents had attained finality as the same was conclusively determined by the Rehabilitation Authorities. We also concur with the aforesaid view that the allotment in favor of respondents indeed attained the finality as none of the Rehabilitation Authorities was persuaded to annul the same. But we may observe that the question with regard to the status of appellants as being old tenants in the land in question, as said earlier, was, though raised, specifically, but not resolved which has resulted into miscarriage of justice. The first proviso of section 18-A(1) 01 Administration of Evacuee Property Act as amended in Azad Jammu and Kashmir on January 14, 1987, under No.19–123/LD/LEG(A)/1987 reads as under:- "Provided that in the case where the Evacuee Property is held by any old tenant as defined in Government Order, then, notwithstanding the grant of proprietary rights to the allottees in respect of such Evacuee Property, the old tenant shall have the protection against the ejectment to the extent indicated in para. 1(e) of the Government Order No. and he shall be label to pay the rent to the allottee as provided therein." The above provision shows that an old tenant shall have the protection against the ejectment to the extent of land provided in the Government Order No. para. 1(e). For the sake of convenience para. 1(e) of Government Order is reproduced below: 'Old tenant! would mean such tenants as are recorded to have been tenants of evacuee property immediately before the War of Liberation started: Provided that the total land in possession of such tenants m whatever capacity does not exceed 24 Canals in all: Provided further, that the land shall be allotted to the refugees and the tenants shall be liable to pay the same rent to the allottees as they paid to. the evacuee landowners."

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 CLC 302?
Answer: From case 1998 CLC 302 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-03-31): the total land in possession of such tenants m whatever capacity does not exceed 24 Canals in all: Provided further, that the land shall be allotted to the refugees and the tenants shall be liable to pay the same rent to the allottees as they paid to. the evacuee landowners." w The above-referred'’ provision of law makes it abundantly clear that while granting proprietary rights to the allottees it was also enjoyed upon the Custodian to resolve the question of status of appellants in the land in question as old tenants and to protect their rights at the time of ejectment to the extent provided in the relevant law. But the learned Custodian has adverted to the point of status of the appellants as old tenants as under: I The question as to whether the appellants enjoy the status of old tenants and are entitled to enjoy the protection under Order were not resolved at all. 6. Even a question of fact which could have been determined on the basis of perusal of record without adverting to making a detailed enquiry is permissible under law to be resolved in exercise of writ jurisdiction. In the instant case the status of appellants being old tenants MN the land in question is admitted by the respondents in their written statement as they did not repudiate the said assertion rather it was alleged that the appellants failed to pay the share of the produce of the land to the evacuee owners. Besides* there was a bulk of evidence existing on the record which purports to show that the land in question was in continuous possession of the appellants SME Dogma Regime. In Jacaranda 1957-1958 B.K. the forefathers of the appellants are shown in the possession of the land in question on payment of fixed revenue. In Jacaranda 1992-1993 B.K. Muhammad Hussain, one of the appellants and Abdul Rehman and Muhammad Nawab the ancestors of appellants, are shown in possession of the land in question on the payment of share of produce. In Jacaranda 2000-2001 B.K. Muhammad Baths, the ancestor of appellants, is entered in the possession of the land on the payment of share of produce. In Jacarandas 1957-1958, 1981-1982 A.D. the appellants are entered in possession of the land on payment of fixed revenue in some portion of it and share of produce in the other portion of the land. Thus, there remains no manner of doubt that the land in question is shown in continuous possession of the appellants since the time of their ancestors from Dogma Regime up to the present time and the learned D.R.C. Rehabilitation Commissioner, Custodian and the High Court failed to determine the status of appellants as being old tenants which could have been very easily determined on perusal of the relevant record available. We, therefore, have no hesitation to hold that the appellants are old tenants in the land in question and their status as such remains undisputed by the respondents. 7. In the review

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 CLC 302?
Answer: From case 1998 CLC 302 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-03-31): as being old tenants which could have been very easily determined on perusal of the relevant record available. We, therefore, have no hesitation to hold that the appellants are old tenants in the land in question and their status as such remains undisputed by the respondents. 7. In the review petition before the Custodian it has been specifically alleged in the memo, of review petition by the appellants that they belong to three different families, but their total holding is only 44 Canals. However, the learned Custodian in his judgment in the review petition has mentioned that the counsel for the appellant argued before him that their holding measures 34 Canals. The question whether they belong to one family or three families and whether their other holding measures 44 Canals or 34 Canals have not been adverted to at all. During the course of arguments the learned counsel for the appellants contended that lit of 24 Canals under Government Order, per family has been changed through an amendment. While consider mg the question of benefit to the appellants as old tenants all these questions are relevant and need resolution. The learned Custodian has expressed the view that as there was nothing on the record to show that the appellants-tenants paid any rent to evacuee-Hindus, they are not entitled to the benefit envisaged under Order. The aforesaid observation of the Custodian is contradictory to his observation that question of benefit of Government Order may be raised and resolved at the time when the appellants are ejected. Even otherwise, the observation is also unsustainable because no such objection appears to have been taken by the respondents at any stage previously nor the same was resolved. Thus there being no finding whether the appellants are entitled to benefit under Order, the question of application of res judicata does not arise. 8. In light of what has been stated above, we partly accept the appeal, set aside the impugned orders of the Custodian and the High Court. The case is remanded to the Custodian with the direction to inquire into the matter whether the appellants are entitled to take the benefit of Order and if so to what extent. The Custodian while dealing with the matter may strike issues in the light of above observations and decide the question of protection to the appellants under Order according to law. Before parting with the case we may observe that under the first proviso of section 18-A(1) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, it is desirable that the question of protection to an old tenant, if raised before Custodian is decided at the time of issuing of Proprietary Rights Transfer Order. The appeal is accepted as indicated above. Appeal partly accepted.

Question: What is case 1998 MLD 1020 about?
Answer: Case 1998 MLD 1020 was decided by GILGIT CHIEF COURT on 1997-10-17. The case involved THE ST ATE (PETITIONER) VERSUS SHAHZAD WALI AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 497(5) PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS. 302/324/307/34 AND 392 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 17 WEST PAKISTAN ARMS ORDINANCE (XX OF 1965) - S. 13. The case was heard by JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ISHAQ KHAN, CHAIRMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1998 MLD 1020?
Answer: In case 1998 MLD 1020, the court applied the following statutes: CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 497(5) PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - SS. 302/324/307/34 AND 392 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 17 WEST PAKISTAN ARMS ORDINANCE (XX OF 1965) - S. 13. This case was heard in GILGIT CHIEF COURT and decided on 1997-10-17.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1998 MLD 1020?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1998 MLD 1020 were: HAFIZUR REHMAN, DISTRICT ATTORNEY FOR THE STATE.MMALIK HAQ NAWAZ FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ISHAQ KHAN, CHAIRMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1998 MLD 1020?
Answer: The parties in case 1998 MLD 1020 were: THE ST ATE (PETITIONER) VERSUS SHAHZAD WALI AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in GILGIT CHIEF COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1998 MLD 1020.
Answer: WW. 1. This single Order will dispose of the abovementioned two applications for cancellation of bail, as both of them arise out of one and the same F.LR. 2. According to the report lodged by Rashid Iqbal son of Mir Haman, resident of Kumar Band, This and District Abbottabad, the prosecution story runs thus:-- That the maker of the report on 15-10-1996 at 12-10 p.m. went to the Police Station Gil git and lodged a report before Station House Officer to the effect that he is a cleaner of Truck No.GITA- 2937 and while Abdul Attar resident of Abbottabad was the driver of the Truck in question; that on 14-10-1996 at Most situate within the limits of Huzza, one Saved resident of Benji engaged their truck from Most to Gil git for Rs.5,500 and his goods were loaded in the truck and at about 5 p.m. after loading the goods, they started for Gil git and at about 9 p.m. when they crossed the Check Post at Danish, a car of black color which had a revolving light on its roof, overtook the truck and proceeded ahead, while the Driver Abdul Attar stopped the truck at Petrol Pump Aliased, in order to fill the diesel in the truck and thereafter they proceeded towards Gil git; that at about 12.30 a.m. when they covered a distance of 13 k.m. ahead of Sikandarabad towards Gil git, the aforesaid car once again came from behind and crossed the truck and after covering a little distance, the car was stopped on the road in a slanting position and the revolving light on the roof of the car was on; that the driver and the cleaner took it to be a police car and therefore stopped the truck; that from the said car some unknown persons who were armed with automatic weapons started firm, as a result of which Abdul Attar driver received bullet juries on his head and chest, while the cleaner also sustained fire-arm injuries on his arm and other parts of the body, when the driver was hit, the truck became out of control, and it collided against the said very car, from which the unknown culprits had fired shots at them; that Abdul Attar breathed his lost in the truck, while the cleaner in injured condition ran back and after covering some distance, he climbed a mountain and spent the night in a cave and at dawn he came down to the road and found that both the truck and dead body of the driver were missing; that Rashid Iqbal in injured condition left for Gil git in a car, which was proceeding towards. Gil git, in order to make a report at the Police Station. On his arrival at Police Station Gil git, Rashid Iqbal reported the matter to Syed Burk Shah, S.H.O. who recorded his report and registered a case under section / /341, P.P.C. read with section 17 of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, vide F.I.R. No.254 of 1996. WW. Thereafter, the Investigating Agency came in motion. Burk Shah, S.H.O. handed over the investigation to Fatal Ahmad S.I.P. who left for the spot. Rashid Iqbal in injured condition was sent to District Headquarter Hospital Gil git for medical examination and treatment and his blood-stained clothes were also taken into possession by the police. '. Fatal Ahmad S.I.P. on his arrival at the scene of occurrence, recovered Identity Card of Abdul Attar driver (deceased) from his pocket along with Rs.6,224 and one blood-stained pocket-diary was also taken into possession in the presence of Larger and Attar- Rehman, marginal witnesses. The Investigating Officer collected 20 empty shells of 7.62 M.M. rifle, four pieces of mudguard of the damaged car, three pieces of mirror light and the pieces of -brake-light of the said car were also taken into possession from the scene of occurrence by the very Investigating Officer Fatal Ahmad,' in the presence of Baba Khan and Ghulam Mehdi, marginal witnesses. Burk Shah S.H.O. on his arrival at the scene of occurrence, took the chain of investigation in hand from Fatal Ahmad S.I.P. and prepared site plan. Post No.] in the site plan indicates the place where the accused had blocked the road by parking their car in a slanting position; Point No.2 shows the place, where the driver had stopped the truck, the distance between post No.l and Post No.2 is 3 paces; Post No.3 in the site plan, denotes a Hakka drain where the dead body of Abdul Attar driver was lying at a distance of 5 paces from post No.2; ’ Point No.4 in the site plan, shows the place wherefrom the scattered empty shells of 7.62 M.M. Rifle were collected by the Investigating Officer. The Investigating Officer affected the arrest of accused Shaheed Walk, You nus and Sherman on 16-10-1996 at different times. Shaheed Walk accused while in handcuffs led the police to his house situate at Homer, wherefrom at his instance and rotation 10 bundles of China cloth and toys which he had concealed in a store in the southern comer of his house and the same were taken into possession by the Investigating Officer in the presence of Karim Hussain and Syed Ismail Shah, marginal witnesses. WW. The said bundles, which were recovered at the instance and rotation of Shaheed Walk accused, were duly identified by the owner of the goods namely, Jan Adam. On 16-10-1996, You nus accused while in handcuffs led the police to the vacant house of one Nasir at Burial, a close relative of Shaheed Walk accused, where Shaheed Walk had parked his car which was allegedly used in the commission of offense, the said Car bearing No.PG.6982 in a damaged condition was taken into possession in the presence of Jan Adam and Karim Hussain, marginal witnesses. You nus accused informed the police that the keys of the car, were in possession of Shaheed Walk accused, who is the owner of the aforesaid car, thereafter accused Shaheed Walk was brought to the said vacant house of Nasir, situate at Burial, and accused Shaheed Walk opened the deck of the car with the keys, which were in his possession, wherefrom unlicenced S.M.G. bearing No.ED-6712-N Made in USSR along with magazine and one folding Kalashnikov No.56-65534 with magazine and two spare magazines along with 40 live rounds of 7.62 M.M. Rifle were recovered from the deck of the very car in the presence of the very marginal witnesses. During the search of the deck of the very car, one set of blood-stained rubber gloves, one revolving light etc. were also taken into possession. The blood stained clothes of accused Sherman were taken into possession by the Investigating Officer, in the presence of Abdul Bari and Abdullah, marginal witnesses. 3. The entire prosecution case hinges on the circumstantial evidence, in the shape of recovery of 10 bundles of China cloth from the house of Shaheed Walk accused, which he had concealed in a store room situate in the southern comer of his house, the recovery of unlicenced S.M.G. Folding Kalashnikov with magazines and two spare magazines along with 40 live rounds of 7.62 M.M. Rifle, one set of blood-stained rubber gloves, one revolving light etc. from the deck of the black car at the instance and rotation of You nus accused from the vacant house of NASA, resident of Burial, who is a close relative of Shaheed Walk accused, besides this, the recovery of 37 bundles from a shop at Dan yore at the instance and rotation of You nus accused, the shop in question was taken on rent by the three accused. WW. 4. It is also mentioned in the F.I.R. by Rashid Iqbal, lodger of the report that the truck became out of control, when the culprits fired shots at them and the truck collided against the black car. 5. Mr. Haviour Rehman, District Attorney representing the State and Malik Had Nawab, Counsel for the accused/respondents were heard at length and record of the case was perused with their able assistance. j- 6. The learned District Attorney put a lot of stress during the course of his arguments that the Sessions Judge has passed an illegal order by allowing bail to the accused/respondents. He argued that no doubt, section /307, P.P.C. are compoundable and the legal heirs of the deceased Abdul Attar driver have compromised the murder case by receiving three lac rupees from the accused party and the impugned order is valid up to that extent, but so far section 392, P.P.C. and section 17 Barnabas are concerned, these sections are not compoundable and fall under the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. He further stated that when a Dacoity takes place on a highway and during the transaction a murder takes place then the offense falls under section 17(4), Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, which reads as under:- M (4) Whoever, being an adult, is guilty of Barnabas in the course of which. he commits murder shall be punished with death imposed as Had. 7. The learned District Attorney also stated that in the case in hand, all the three accused are adults, and they have committed dacoity on the highway by kill mg Abdul Attar driver and injuring Rashid Iqbal cleaner of the truck by firing at them with their automatic weapons from the black car belonging, to Shaheed Walk accused and the Sessions Judge was not legally correct by incorporating in his impugned order that punishment for Barnabas is 14 years with whipping not exceeding thirty stripes and the impugned order is altogether liable to be set aside. 8. On the other hand, Malik Had Nawab, Advocate appearing on behalf of the. accused/respondents argued that section /307, P.P.C. are compoundable, and the matter has been patched up between the legal heirs of the deceased Abdul Star and accused party, who paid three lac rupees as "Diet" to the legal heirs of the deceased and referred to the statements of MST. Sabina Bibi widow of Abdul Attar deceased and Vardar Muhammad brother of the deceased as well as the statement of Rashid Iqbal, cleaner of the WW. truck who had sustained bullet injuries on different parts of his body during the dacoity on the highway. ' 9. When the learned Counsel for the accused/respondents was asked whether section 392, P.P.C. and section 17(4) of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 are compoundable or not. He frankly conceded and rightly to that when a dacoity is committed on the highway by an adult person and during the course of which, he commits murder shall be punished with death imposed as Had. 10. From the bare reading of section 17(4) of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, it is crystal clear that, whoever, being an adult, is guilty of Barnabas in the course of which he commits murder shall be punished with death as Had, the Sessions Judge Gil git has not applied his mind regarding this section of law. 11. Keep mg ITO consideration the circumstantial evidence, in the shape of recoveries as mentioned above, coupled with the exculpatory confessional X statement of accused Sherman recorded under section 164, CRP.C. by Muhammad Abbas, Assistant Commissioner/MIC Gil git on 29-10-1996, prima facie, the accused/respondents are linked with the offenses under section 392 P.P.C, and section 17(4) of the Barnabas Offfenc.es Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, which are not compoundable and the punishment for Barnabas is the forfeiture of life as Had, which falls within the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. the accused/respondents are not entitled to bail. The result is that I recall the impugned orders and the accused/respondents present in Court on bail, are taken into custody and remanded to judicial lock-up as under trial prisoners. 12. Before parting with the judgment, it is disquieting to note that Sessions Judge Gil git has passed the impugned order without applying his mind to section 392, P.P.C. read with section 17(4) of the Hara bah Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, which are not compoundable and fall under the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. but on the other hand, Mr. Ghana Sessions Judge Gil git kept his eyes shut to this aspect of the case that in a dacoity case on the highway, when murder takes place, the punishment imposed is death as Had, while going through the order, one can get the impression that Mr. Ghana was under great pressure, political or local which compelled him to accept the bail application by releasing all the three accused/respondents WW. on bail and this action on his part naturally tells upon his integrity. Moreover, it affects adversely the image of the judiciary in eyes of public. 13. Copies of this order be circulated among all the Sessions Judges and Judicial Magistrates for their future guidance. 14. The ma'am case under section / /341, P.P.C. and section 17 of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 read with section 13(B) No.20 of Arms Ordinance 1965 stands transferred from the Court of Mr. Mahmood Ghana, Sessions Judge Gil git to the Court of Mr. Muhammad Ali, Sessions Judge Diaper for disposal, with the direction that he should try the case at Gil git as and when he happens to be on tour to Gil git. Bail cancelled

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 MLD 1020?
Answer: From case 1998 MLD 1020 (GILGIT CHIEF COURT, 1997-10-17): WW. 1. This single Order will dispose of the abovementioned two applications for cancellation of bail, as both of them arise out of one and the same F.LR. 2. According to the report lodged by Rashid Iqbal son of Mir Haman, resident of Kumar Band, This and District Abbottabad, the prosecution story runs thus:-- That the maker of the report on 15-10-1996 at 12-10 p.m. went to the Police Station Gil git and lodged a report before Station House Officer to the effect that he is a cleaner of Truck No.GITA- 2937 and while Abdul Attar resident of Abbottabad was the driver of the Truck in question; that on 14-10-1996 at Most situate within the limits of Huzza, one Saved resident of Benji engaged their truck from Most to Gil git for Rs.5,500 and his goods were loaded in the truck and at about 5 p.m. after loading the goods, they started for Gil git and at about 9 p.m. when they crossed the Check Post at Danish, a car of black color which had a revolving light on its roof, overtook the truck and proceeded ahead, while the Driver Abdul Attar stopped the truck at Petrol Pump Aliased, in order to fill the diesel in the truck and thereafter they proceeded towards Gil git; that at about 12.30 a.m. when they covered a distance of 13 k.m. ahead of Sikandarabad towards Gil git, the aforesaid car once again came from behind and crossed the truck and after covering a little distance, the car was stopped on the road in a slanting position and the revolving light on the roof of the car was on; that the driver and the cleaner took it to be a police car and therefore stopped the truck; that from the said car some unknown persons who were armed with automatic weapons started firm, as a result of which Abdul Attar driver received bullet juries on his head and chest, while the cleaner also sustained fire-arm injuries on his arm and other parts of the body, when the driver was hit, the truck became out of control, and it collided against the said very car, from which the unknown culprits had fired shots at them; that Abdul Attar breathed his lost in the truck, while the cleaner in injured condition ran back and after covering some distance, he climbed a mountain and spent the night in a cave and at dawn he came down to the road and found that both the truck and dead body of the driver were missing; that Rashid Iqbal in injured condition left for Gil git in a car, which was proceeding towards. Gil git, in order to make a report at the Police Station. On his arrival at Police Station Gil git, Rashid Iqbal reported the matter to Syed Burk Shah, S.H.O. who recorded his report and registered a case under section / /341, P.P.C. read with section 17 of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 MLD 1020?
Answer: From case 1998 MLD 1020 (GILGIT CHIEF COURT, 1997-10-17): report at the Police Station. On his arrival at Police Station Gil git, Rashid Iqbal reported the matter to Syed Burk Shah, S.H.O. who recorded his report and registered a case under section / /341, P.P.C. read with section 17 of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, vide F.I.R. No.254 of 1996. WW. Thereafter, the Investigating Agency came in motion. Burk Shah, S.H.O. handed over the investigation to Fatal Ahmad S.I.P. who left for the spot. Rashid Iqbal in injured condition was sent to District Headquarter Hospital Gil git for medical examination and treatment and his blood-stained clothes were also taken into possession by the police. '. Fatal Ahmad S.I.P. on his arrival at the scene of occurrence, recovered Identity Card of Abdul Attar driver (deceased) from his pocket along with Rs.6,224 and one blood-stained pocket-diary was also taken into possession in the presence of Larger and Attar- Rehman, marginal witnesses. The Investigating Officer collected 20 empty shells of 7.62 M.M. rifle, four pieces of mudguard of the damaged car, three pieces of mirror light and the pieces of -brake-light of the said car were also taken into possession from the scene of occurrence by the very Investigating Officer Fatal Ahmad,' in the presence of Baba Khan and Ghulam Mehdi, marginal witnesses. Burk Shah S.H.O. on his arrival at the scene of occurrence, took the chain of investigation in hand from Fatal Ahmad S.I.P. and prepared site plan. Post No.] in the site plan indicates the place where the accused had blocked the road by parking their car in a slanting position; Point No.2 shows the place, where the driver had stopped the truck, the distance between post No.l and Post No.2 is 3 paces; Post No.3 in the site plan, denotes a Hakka drain where the dead body of Abdul Attar driver was lying at a distance of 5 paces from post No.2; ’ Point No.4 in the site plan, shows the place wherefrom the scattered empty shells of 7.62 M.M. Rifle were collected by the Investigating Officer. The Investigating Officer affected the arrest of accused Shaheed Walk, You nus and Sherman on 16-10-1996 at different times. Shaheed Walk accused while in handcuffs led the police to his house situate at Homer, wherefrom at his instance and rotation 10 bundles of China cloth and toys which he had concealed in a store in the southern comer of his house and the same were taken into possession by the Investigating Officer in the presence of Karim Hussain and Syed Ismail Shah, marginal witnesses. WW. The said bundles, which were recovered at the instance and rotation of Shaheed Walk accused, were duly identified by the owner of the goods namely, Jan Adam. On 16-10-1996, You nus accused while in handcuffs led the police to the vacant house of one Nasir at Burial, a close relative of Shaheed Walk accused, where Shaheed Walk had parked his car which was allegedly used in the commission of offense, the said

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 MLD 1020?
Answer: From case 1998 MLD 1020 (GILGIT CHIEF COURT, 1997-10-17): the goods namely, Jan Adam. On 16-10-1996, You nus accused while in handcuffs led the police to the vacant house of one Nasir at Burial, a close relative of Shaheed Walk accused, where Shaheed Walk had parked his car which was allegedly used in the commission of offense, the said Car bearing No.PG.6982 in a damaged condition was taken into possession in the presence of Jan Adam and Karim Hussain, marginal witnesses. You nus accused informed the police that the keys of the car, were in possession of Shaheed Walk accused, who is the owner of the aforesaid car, thereafter accused Shaheed Walk was brought to the said vacant house of Nasir, situate at Burial, and accused Shaheed Walk opened the deck of the car with the keys, which were in his possession, wherefrom unlicenced S.M.G. bearing No.ED-6712-N Made in USSR along with magazine and one folding Kalashnikov No.56-65534 with magazine and two spare magazines along with 40 live rounds of 7.62 M.M. Rifle were recovered from the deck of the very car in the presence of the very marginal witnesses. During the search of the deck of the very car, one set of blood-stained rubber gloves, one revolving light etc. were also taken into possession. The blood stained clothes of accused Sherman were taken into possession by the Investigating Officer, in the presence of Abdul Bari and Abdullah, marginal witnesses. 3. The entire prosecution case hinges on the circumstantial evidence, in the shape of recovery of 10 bundles of China cloth from the house of Shaheed Walk accused, which he had concealed in a store room situate in the southern comer of his house, the recovery of unlicenced S.M.G. Folding Kalashnikov with magazines and two spare magazines along with 40 live rounds of 7.62 M.M. Rifle, one set of blood-stained rubber gloves, one revolving light etc. from the deck of the black car at the instance and rotation of You nus accused from the vacant house of NASA, resident of Burial, who is a close relative of Shaheed Walk accused, besides this, the recovery of 37 bundles from a shop at Dan yore at the instance and rotation of You nus accused, the shop in question was taken on rent by the three accused. WW. 4. It is also mentioned in the F.I.R. by Rashid Iqbal, lodger of the report that the truck became out of control, when the culprits fired shots at them and the truck collided against the black car. 5. Mr. Haviour Rehman, District Attorney representing the State and Malik Had Nawab, Counsel for the accused/respondents were heard at length and record of the case was perused with their able assistance. j- 6. The learned District Attorney put a lot of stress during the course of his arguments that the Sessions Judge has passed an illegal order by allowing bail to the accused/respondents. He argued that no doubt, section /307, P.P.C. are compoundable and the legal heirs of the deceased Abdul Attar driver have compromised the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 MLD 1020?
Answer: From case 1998 MLD 1020 (GILGIT CHIEF COURT, 1997-10-17): Attorney put a lot of stress during the course of his arguments that the Sessions Judge has passed an illegal order by allowing bail to the accused/respondents. He argued that no doubt, section /307, P.P.C. are compoundable and the legal heirs of the deceased Abdul Attar driver have compromised the murder case by receiving three lac rupees from the accused party and the impugned order is valid up to that extent, but so far section 392, P.P.C. and section 17 Barnabas are concerned, these sections are not compoundable and fall under the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. He further stated that when a Dacoity takes place on a highway and during the transaction a murder takes place then the offense falls under section 17(4), Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, which reads as under:- M (4) Whoever, being an adult, is guilty of Barnabas in the course of which. he commits murder shall be punished with death imposed as Had. 7. The learned District Attorney also stated that in the case in hand, all the three accused are adults, and they have committed dacoity on the highway by kill mg Abdul Attar driver and injuring Rashid Iqbal cleaner of the truck by firing at them with their automatic weapons from the black car belonging, to Shaheed Walk accused and the Sessions Judge was not legally correct by incorporating in his impugned order that punishment for Barnabas is 14 years with whipping not exceeding thirty stripes and the impugned order is altogether liable to be set aside. 8. On the other hand, Malik Had Nawab, Advocate appearing on behalf of the. accused/respondents argued that section /307, P.P.C. are compoundable, and the matter has been patched up between the legal heirs of the deceased Abdul Star and accused party, who paid three lac rupees as "Diet" to the legal heirs of the deceased and referred to the statements of MST. Sabina Bibi widow of Abdul Attar deceased and Vardar Muhammad brother of the deceased as well as the statement of Rashid Iqbal, cleaner of the WW. truck who had sustained bullet injuries on different parts of his body during the dacoity on the highway. ' 9. When the learned Counsel for the accused/respondents was asked whether section 392, P.P.C. and section 17(4) of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 are compoundable or not. He frankly conceded and rightly to that when a dacoity is committed on the highway by an adult person and during the course of which, he commits murder shall be punished with death imposed as Had. 10. From the bare reading of section 17(4) of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, it is crystal clear that, whoever, being an adult, is guilty of Barnabas in the course of which he commits murder shall be punished with death as Had, the Sessions Judge Gil git has not applied his mind regarding this section of law. 11. Keep mg

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 MLD 1020?
Answer: From case 1998 MLD 1020 (GILGIT CHIEF COURT, 1997-10-17): of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, it is crystal clear that, whoever, being an adult, is guilty of Barnabas in the course of which he commits murder shall be punished with death as Had, the Sessions Judge Gil git has not applied his mind regarding this section of law. 11. Keep mg ITO consideration the circumstantial evidence, in the shape of recoveries as mentioned above, coupled with the exculpatory confessional X statement of accused Sherman recorded under section 164, CRP.C. by Muhammad Abbas, Assistant Commissioner/MIC Gil git on 29-10-1996, prima facie, the accused/respondents are linked with the offenses under section 392 P.P.C, and section 17(4) of the Barnabas Offfenc.es Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, which are not compoundable and the punishment for Barnabas is the forfeiture of life as Had, which falls within the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. the accused/respondents are not entitled to bail. The result is that I recall the impugned orders and the accused/respondents present in Court on bail, are taken into custody and remanded to judicial lock-up as under trial prisoners. 12. Before parting with the judgment, it is disquieting to note that Sessions Judge Gil git has passed the impugned order without applying his mind to section 392, P.P.C. read with section 17(4) of the Hara bah Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979, which are not compoundable and fall under the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. but on the other hand, Mr. Ghana Sessions Judge Gil git kept his eyes shut to this aspect of the case that in a dacoity case on the highway, when murder takes place, the punishment imposed is death as Had, while going through the order, one can get the impression that Mr. Ghana was under great pressure, political or local which compelled him to accept the bail application by releasing all the three accused/respondents WW. on bail and this action on his part naturally tells upon his integrity. Moreover, it affects adversely the image of the judiciary in eyes of public. 13. Copies of this order be circulated among all the Sessions Judges and Judicial Magistrates for their future guidance. 14. The ma'am case under section / /341, P.P.C. and section 17 of the Barnabas Offenses Against Property (Enforcement of Hudson) Ordinance, 1979 read with section 13(B) No.20 of Arms Ordinance 1965 stands transferred from the Court of Mr. Mahmood Ghana, Sessions Judge Gil git to the Court of Mr. Muhammad Ali, Sessions Judge Diaper for disposal, with the direction that he should try the case at Gil git as and when he happens to be on tour to Gil git. Bail cancelled

Question: What is case 1998 MLD 997 about?
Answer: Case 1998 MLD 997 was decided by GILGIT CHIEF COURT on 1997-11-08. The case involved THE STATE (PETITIONER) VERSUS BAHADUR AMAN AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 497(5) PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - S. 457 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 9/14. The case was heard by JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ISHAQ KHAN, CHAIRMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1998 MLD 997?
Answer: In case 1998 MLD 997, the court applied the following statutes: CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) - S. 497(5) PENAL CODE (XLV OF 1860) - S. 457 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY (ENFORCEMENT OF HUDOOD) ORDINANCE (VI OF 1979) - S. 9/14. This case was heard in GILGIT CHIEF COURT and decided on 1997-11-08.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1998 MLD 997?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1998 MLD 997 were: HAFIZUR REHMAN, DISTRICT ATTORNEY FOR THE STATE.MALIK HAQ NAWAZ FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ISHAQ KHAN, CHAIRMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1998 MLD 997?
Answer: The parties in case 1998 MLD 997 were: THE STATE (PETITIONER) VERSUS BAHADUR AMAN AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in GILGIT CHIEF COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1998 MLD 997.
Answer: k m To begin with, on 8-1-1997 Ghulam Hussein, Station House Officer was busy in the investigation of a case under section, Offense Against Property (Enforcement of WW. Hudson) Ordinance 1979 read with section 457 P.P.C. registered vide F.I.R. No. 11 of 1996, the. accused/respondents Broader Aman and Sultan Adam, residents of Tangier Koran gay, District Diaper, who were suspected, informed the S.H.O. that they have no hand in the burglary case for which they are beg interrogated, but they disclosed to the very Investigating Officer that they are trafficking m arms and contraband OMM, and they further apprised the Investigating Officer that they had brought some opium and one China made pistol for selling to Monza Under and were in search of a customer; that they could not find any customer there, and therefore they concealed the contraband OMM and the unlicenced pistol at village Under near Burbot Bridge on the bank of river and themselves proceeded towards Gin day in search of a customer, when they were arrested by the local police. 2. Armed with this formation, Ghulam Hussain S.H.O. in the company of A.S.I. Muhammad Diaz, Reheat Being H.C. Baba Khan and FIDA Muhammad Shah constables left for Monza Under along with the accused/respondents who were mm custody of the police and across the river, near Burbot Bridge from the bank of the river, at the instance and plantation of accused/respondent Broader Aman, in the presence of Numbardar Mag sad Ali Khan, Boo Jan, GUL Ghana, Fair Muhammad and Malik Muhammad, residents of village Under, from underneath, two big stones a bag of white color was recovered and on opening the same, the Investigating Officer found two plastic pieces. In one plastic, 30 bore pistol made in China, one spare magazine besides live rounds of 30 bore pistol and in other piece of plastic', contraband opium was found, and the opium was weighed in the nearby shop of one Mira Ali Khan in the presence of the aforesaid marginal witnesses. On weighing the contraband opium, the total quantity was found 3750 grams and the opium was sealed into a parcel. ] 3. On the basis of the recovery of contraband opium and the unlicenced 30 bore pistol along with live rounds of 30 bore pistol etc. the Investigating Officer registered a case against the accused/respondents Broader Aman and Sultan Adam. 4. The accused/respondents approached the Sessions Judge Guitar for bail, who in his tum after hearing the arguments, pro and contra, enlarged the accused/respondents on bail, subject to their furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.50,000 WW. with two sureties each, in the like amount to the satisfaction of S.D.M. Penial, vide his order dated 6-3-1997. 5. Feeling dissatisfied with the impugned order, passed by the Sessions Judge Guitar, the State moved the present application for cancellation of bail granted to the accused/respondents. 6. I have heard Mr. Haviour Rehman, District Attorney on behalf of the State and Malik Had Nawab, Advocate for the accused/respondents and also studied the file. 7. The accused/respondents while in custody m another case, admitted before the S.H.O. Ghulam Hussain that they are innocent so far the theft is concerned, and they farther informed the Investigating Officer that they are dealing in contraband opium and arms; that they had come to village Under in search of a customer in order to sell contraband OPM and one unlicenced pistol, but they could not get any customer, therefore, they started for village Gin day and have concealed the opium and the unlicenced 30 bore pistol across the river near Burbot Bridge on the bank of the river. The accused/respondents while in handcuffs led the police to the bridge in question and from near the bridge on the bank of the river, at the instance and rotation of Broader Aman, accused/respondent, recovered one China Made 30 bore pistol, one spare magazine along with live rounds of 30 bore pistol and 3750 grams of contraband opium duly wrapped in different plastic pieces, in the presence of the marginal witnesses. The offense of dealing in contraband OMM falls under the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. as the punishment provided for the same is imprisonment for life. 8. For the aforesaid reasons, the Sessions Judge Guitar was not justified to allow bail to the accused/respondents. I, therefore, recall the impugned order and cancel the bail granted to the accused/respondents. The accused/respondents present in Court are to be taken into custody and remanded to judicial lock-up as under trial prisoners. Bail cancelled. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 MLD 997?
Answer: From case 1998 MLD 997 (GILGIT CHIEF COURT, 1997-11-08): k m To begin with, on 8-1-1997 Ghulam Hussein, Station House Officer was busy in the investigation of a case under section, Offense Against Property (Enforcement of WW. Hudson) Ordinance 1979 read with section 457 P.P.C. registered vide F.I.R. No. 11 of 1996, the. accused/respondents Broader Aman and Sultan Adam, residents of Tangier Koran gay, District Diaper, who were suspected, informed the S.H.O. that they have no hand in the burglary case for which they are beg interrogated, but they disclosed to the very Investigating Officer that they are trafficking m arms and contraband OMM, and they further apprised the Investigating Officer that they had brought some opium and one China made pistol for selling to Monza Under and were in search of a customer; that they could not find any customer there, and therefore they concealed the contraband OMM and the unlicenced pistol at village Under near Burbot Bridge on the bank of river and themselves proceeded towards Gin day in search of a customer, when they were arrested by the local police. 2. Armed with this formation, Ghulam Hussain S.H.O. in the company of A.S.I. Muhammad Diaz, Reheat Being H.C. Baba Khan and FIDA Muhammad Shah constables left for Monza Under along with the accused/respondents who were mm custody of the police and across the river, near Burbot Bridge from the bank of the river, at the instance and plantation of accused/respondent Broader Aman, in the presence of Numbardar Mag sad Ali Khan, Boo Jan, GUL Ghana, Fair Muhammad and Malik Muhammad, residents of village Under, from underneath, two big stones a bag of white color was recovered and on opening the same, the Investigating Officer found two plastic pieces. In one plastic, 30 bore pistol made in China, one spare magazine besides live rounds of 30 bore pistol and in other piece of plastic', contraband opium was found, and the opium was weighed in the nearby shop of one Mira Ali Khan in the presence of the aforesaid marginal witnesses. On weighing the contraband opium, the total quantity was found 3750 grams and the opium was sealed into a parcel. ] 3. On the basis of the recovery of contraband opium and the unlicenced 30 bore pistol along with live rounds of 30 bore pistol etc. the Investigating Officer registered a case against the accused/respondents Broader Aman and Sultan Adam. 4. The accused/respondents approached the Sessions Judge Guitar for bail, who in his tum after hearing the arguments, pro and contra, enlarged the accused/respondents on bail, subject to their furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.50,000 WW. with two sureties each, in the like amount to the satisfaction of S.D.M. Penial, vide his order dated 6-3-1997. 5. Feeling dissatisfied with the impugned order, passed by the Sessions Judge Guitar, the State moved the present application for cancellation of bail granted to the accused/respondents. 6. I have heard Mr. Haviour Rehman, District Attorney on behalf of the State and Malik Had Nawab, Advocate for the accused/respondents and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1998 MLD 997?
Answer: From case 1998 MLD 997 (GILGIT CHIEF COURT, 1997-11-08): 5. Feeling dissatisfied with the impugned order, passed by the Sessions Judge Guitar, the State moved the present application for cancellation of bail granted to the accused/respondents. 6. I have heard Mr. Haviour Rehman, District Attorney on behalf of the State and Malik Had Nawab, Advocate for the accused/respondents and also studied the file. 7. The accused/respondents while in custody m another case, admitted before the S.H.O. Ghulam Hussain that they are innocent so far the theft is concerned, and they farther informed the Investigating Officer that they are dealing in contraband opium and arms; that they had come to village Under in search of a customer in order to sell contraband OPM and one unlicenced pistol, but they could not get any customer, therefore, they started for village Gin day and have concealed the opium and the unlicenced 30 bore pistol across the river near Burbot Bridge on the bank of the river. The accused/respondents while in handcuffs led the police to the bridge in question and from near the bridge on the bank of the river, at the instance and rotation of Broader Aman, accused/respondent, recovered one China Made 30 bore pistol, one spare magazine along with live rounds of 30 bore pistol and 3750 grams of contraband opium duly wrapped in different plastic pieces, in the presence of the marginal witnesses. The offense of dealing in contraband OMM falls under the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C. as the punishment provided for the same is imprisonment for life. 8. For the aforesaid reasons, the Sessions Judge Guitar was not justified to allow bail to the accused/respondents. I, therefore, recall the impugned order and cancel the bail granted to the accused/respondents. The accused/respondents present in Court are to be taken into custody and remanded to judicial lock-up as under trial prisoners. Bail cancelled. WW.

Question: What is case 1955 PLD 2 about?
Answer: Case 1955 PLD 2 was decided by CUSTODIAN (PB.) on 2016-10-29. The case involved CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, PUNJAB W. GOPAL DAS AND MRS. GOPAL DAS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS REHABILITATION AUTHORITY (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) -S. 23-A. The case was heard by A. M. JAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1955 PLD 2?
Answer: In case 1955 PLD 2, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) -S. 23-A. This case was heard in CUSTODIAN (PB.) and decided on 2016-10-29.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1955 PLD 2?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1955 PLD 2 were: W. GOPAL DAS IN PERSON WITH MALIK ALLAH DIN R. O. (LEGAL) FOR REHABILITATION AUTHORITY.. The judges presiding were: A. M. JAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1955 PLD 2?
Answer: The parties in case 1955 PLD 2 were: CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, PUNJAB W. GOPAL DAS AND MRS. GOPAL DAS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS REHABILITATION AUTHORITY (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in CUSTODIAN (PB.).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1955 PLD 2.
Answer: A. M. Jan, (Custodian)-(8th December, 1954).-The petitioners Mr. and Mrs. Goal Was made an application to the Deputy Custodian Lahore, under section 17, Evacuee Property Ordinance, for a certificate that the property which they whish to sell is not evacuee property. Or the property of tending evacuees and that the proposed sale may be. sanctioned. The Deputy Custodian recorded the statement of Mr. Goal Was and declined to give the certificate asked for on the ground that the petitioners are either evacuees or intending evacuees. This is a vague finding. The term “evacuee” has been clearly defined and if the petitioners came within the purview of that definition they should have been declared evacuees. The term “intending evacuee” includes any person against whom an intention to settle in the territories now comprising India or in any area occupied by India is established from his conduct or form documentary evidence. The learned Deputy Custodian has relied upon this Provision of law, contained in section 2 (3-A), Evacuee Property Ordinance. He should, therefore, have said that the petitioners were, MN his opinion, intending evacuees. But, for declaring people as intending evacuees the procedure laid down in section 23-A Evacuee Property Ordinance, must be followed 1-e. where the Custodian, or the A Deputy Custodian, has reason to believe that, a person is an intending evacuee he should give notice to such person and call upon him to show cause why he should not be declared an intending evacuee. After holding such inquiry into the matter as the circumstances of the case require an order should be passed, stat mg the reasons therefor, declaring such person to be an intending evacuee or not; and any declaration so made must be published in the official Gazette. No notice was given to the petitioners to show cause why they should not be declared intending evacuees and the case must be heard de novo in accordance with law. As the learned Deputy Custodian Lahore has expressed his opinion in the matter it would not be right to send the case back to him for re-adjudication. I, therefore, send it to the Deputy Custodian (General) who will give proper notice to the petitioners under section 23-A and then decide whether they are intending evacuees or not. From the order of the Deputy Custodian (General) the petitioners will have the might of appeal to me under section 36, Evacuee Property Ordinance. A. h. Order accordingly.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 2?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 2 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 2016-10-29): A. M. Jan, (Custodian)-(8th December, 1954).-The petitioners Mr. and Mrs. Goal Was made an application to the Deputy Custodian Lahore, under section 17, Evacuee Property Ordinance, for a certificate that the property which they whish to sell is not evacuee property. Or the property of tending evacuees and that the proposed sale may be. sanctioned. The Deputy Custodian recorded the statement of Mr. Goal Was and declined to give the certificate asked for on the ground that the petitioners are either evacuees or intending evacuees. This is a vague finding. The term “evacuee” has been clearly defined and if the petitioners came within the purview of that definition they should have been declared evacuees. The term “intending evacuee” includes any person against whom an intention to settle in the territories now comprising India or in any area occupied by India is established from his conduct or form documentary evidence. The learned Deputy Custodian has relied upon this Provision of law, contained in section 2 (3-A), Evacuee Property Ordinance. He should, therefore, have said that the petitioners were, MN his opinion, intending evacuees. But, for declaring people as intending evacuees the procedure laid down in section 23-A Evacuee Property Ordinance, must be followed 1-e. where the Custodian, or the A Deputy Custodian, has reason to believe that, a person is an intending evacuee he should give notice to such person and call upon him to show cause why he should not be declared an intending evacuee. After holding such inquiry into the matter as the circumstances of the case require an order should be passed, stat mg the reasons therefor, declaring such person to be an intending evacuee or not; and any declaration so made must be published in the official Gazette. No notice was given to the petitioners to show cause why they should not be declared intending evacuees and the case must be heard de novo in accordance with law. As the learned Deputy Custodian Lahore has expressed his opinion in the matter it would not be right to send the case back to him for re-adjudication. I, therefore, send it to the Deputy Custodian (General) who will give proper notice to the petitioners under section 23-A and then decide whether they are intending evacuees or not. From the order of the Deputy Custodian (General) the petitioners will have the might of appeal to me under section 36, Evacuee Property Ordinance. A. h. Order accordingly.

Question: What is case 1955 PLD 265 about?
Answer: Case 1955 PLD 265 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1954-09-24. The case involved BHAGWANDAS MOTUMAL—PETITIONER VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND ANOTHER — RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CUSTODIAN PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) -S, 23. The case was heard by CONSTANTINE, C. J, AND MUNSHI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1955 PLD 265?
Answer: In case 1955 PLD 265, the court applied the following statutes: CUSTODIAN PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) -S, 23. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1954-09-24.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1955 PLD 265?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1955 PLD 265 were: DINGOMALN. FOR PETITIONER. NASIR SHAHMIR FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: CONSTANTINE, C. J, AND MUNSHI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1955 PLD 265?
Answer: The parties in case 1955 PLD 265 were: BHAGWANDAS MOTUMAL—PETITIONER VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND ANOTHER — RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1955 PLD 265.
Answer: [This was a writ petition to quash the order of the Deputy Custodian, Sukkur, that certain buildings and the confectionery known as M. B. Anagram Factory installed in them, including machinery etc. was evacuee property to the extent of 0-15-0 share, belonging to an evacuee Hassan and. The petitioner later abandoned his claim m regard to a parcel of the buildings. After setting out fully the course of the litigation, between the petitioner and the evacuee, before the Deputy, Assistant and Additional Custodians and the Custodian, the judgment proceeded:] Constantine, C. J—We are therefore left with the order of the Deputy Custodian as the only order relating to the confectionery business, and Mr. Diagonal contends that this order has been passed without any evidence. We have summarized the judgment of the Deputy Custodian, and it will be seen that evidence on the part of Hassan and consisted of letters written by Hassan and, letters of the Income-tax Officer and of the City Survey Officer. No proof of these letters was called. The facts stated in these letters were facts which were to be proved by oral evidence. Thus the provisions of section 60 of the Evidence Act were contravened. The Evidence Act by section provides that it applies to all judicial proceedings in or before any Court. The definition of Court m section 3 is that unless a contrary intention appears from the context, Court includes all Judges and Magistrates and all persons, except arbitrators, legally authorized to take evidence. It is common ground that the Deputy Custodian was conducting an inquiry, Mr. Nasir argues that these proceeding - were only quasi-judicial. We do not think that these proceedings were merely quasi-judicial proceedings. Section 23 states that when holding an inquiry, the Custodian shall have the same powers as are vested in a Court under the Code of Civil Procedure when trying a suit in respect of enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath or affirmation, compelling the discovery and production of documents, articles and things, issuing a commission for the examination of witnesses, and any prescribed matter. Moreover for the purposes of section 196 and within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, every proceeding shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding. Furthermore, in rule 11 framed under section 47 (1) is stated that the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure shall, as far as possible and subject to such modification as the Custodian may direct, to follow. We have therefore, no doubt that the proceedings before a Custodian when he is conducting an inquiry under the Act, as opposed to B an administration matter, are judicial. It maybe also posted that the Custodian’s Department itself recognizes the difference between the judicial functions of the Custodian and its administrative functions since certain officials are designated as judicial. Nowhere in the Deputy Custodian’s judgment is there stated to be any admission on the part of Bhagwan or his witnesses that the alleged transaction related to not only the building, but to the confectionary business as well. The sale-deed of 1944 mentioned no machinery except “an electric meter and electricity which were closed.” The Kabuhayat of 1945 mention meter and electric fittings.” The receipt states “and machmerywala”. The application under section 18 was headed “and Machinery” and that the word “machinery” was mentioned in the first paragraph. That is all. We can find therefore nothing which can be construed as an admission that the contents of the buildings ever belonged at all to Hassan and. We think, therefore, that the Deputy Custodian’s order declaring the confectionery factory evacuee property, was passed without any evidence, and we consider that such an order was contrary to the principles of natural justice. The order ordering possession to be taken of not only Suit Nos. 784 1-A and B, but also possession of the machinery in those buildings which was passed, being founded upon the judicial order of the Deputy Custodian, is unsupported in so far as it relates to the machinery (except the meter and electric fittings) and other movables constituting the confectionary factory. As regards build mg 784 2-A and 2-B, Mr. Nasir was uncertain whether possession of buildings had been taken in fact or not, and conceded that if possession had been taken, it had been wrongly taken. The order, therefore, will be that the order of the Deputy Custodian E. F. Sukkur in application No. dated 28th August 1952 in so far as it states that the 0-15-0 Anna share in the confectionery machinery installed therein belongs to respondent Hassan and is evacuee property, is quashed; The possession of the build mg 784 2-A and 2-B and the machinery therein, if taken, is illegal. A. h. Order quashed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 265?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 265 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1954-09-24): [This was a writ petition to quash the order of the Deputy Custodian, Sukkur, that certain buildings and the confectionery known as M. B. Anagram Factory installed in them, including machinery etc. was evacuee property to the extent of 0-15-0 share, belonging to an evacuee Hassan and. The petitioner later abandoned his claim m regard to a parcel of the buildings. After setting out fully the course of the litigation, between the petitioner and the evacuee, before the Deputy, Assistant and Additional Custodians and the Custodian, the judgment proceeded:] Constantine, C. J—We are therefore left with the order of the Deputy Custodian as the only order relating to the confectionery business, and Mr. Diagonal contends that this order has been passed without any evidence. We have summarized the judgment of the Deputy Custodian, and it will be seen that evidence on the part of Hassan and consisted of letters written by Hassan and, letters of the Income-tax Officer and of the City Survey Officer. No proof of these letters was called. The facts stated in these letters were facts which were to be proved by oral evidence. Thus the provisions of section 60 of the Evidence Act were contravened. The Evidence Act by section provides that it applies to all judicial proceedings in or before any Court. The definition of Court m section 3 is that unless a contrary intention appears from the context, Court includes all Judges and Magistrates and all persons, except arbitrators, legally authorized to take evidence. It is common ground that the Deputy Custodian was conducting an inquiry, Mr. Nasir argues that these proceeding - were only quasi-judicial. We do not think that these proceedings were merely quasi-judicial proceedings. Section 23 states that when holding an inquiry, the Custodian shall have the same powers as are vested in a Court under the Code of Civil Procedure when trying a suit in respect of enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath or affirmation, compelling the discovery and production of documents, articles and things, issuing a commission for the examination of witnesses, and any prescribed matter. Moreover for the purposes of section 196 and within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, every proceeding shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding. Furthermore, in rule 11 framed under section 47 (1) is stated that the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure shall, as far as possible and subject to such modification as the Custodian may direct, to follow. We have therefore, no doubt that the proceedings before a Custodian when he is conducting an inquiry under the Act, as opposed to B an administration matter, are judicial. It maybe also posted that the Custodian’s Department itself recognizes the difference between the judicial functions of the Custodian and its administrative functions since certain officials are designated as judicial. Nowhere in the Deputy Custodian’s judgment is there stated to be any admission on the part of Bhagwan or his witnesses that the alleged

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 265?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 265 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1954-09-24): that the Custodian’s Department itself recognizes the difference between the judicial functions of the Custodian and its administrative functions since certain officials are designated as judicial. Nowhere in the Deputy Custodian’s judgment is there stated to be any admission on the part of Bhagwan or his witnesses that the alleged transaction related to not only the building, but to the confectionary business as well. The sale-deed of 1944 mentioned no machinery except “an electric meter and electricity which were closed.” The Kabuhayat of 1945 mention meter and electric fittings.” The receipt states “and machmerywala”. The application under section 18 was headed “and Machinery” and that the word “machinery” was mentioned in the first paragraph. That is all. We can find therefore nothing which can be construed as an admission that the contents of the buildings ever belonged at all to Hassan and. We think, therefore, that the Deputy Custodian’s order declaring the confectionery factory evacuee property, was passed without any evidence, and we consider that such an order was contrary to the principles of natural justice. The order ordering possession to be taken of not only Suit Nos. 784 1-A and B, but also possession of the machinery in those buildings which was passed, being founded upon the judicial order of the Deputy Custodian, is unsupported in so far as it relates to the machinery (except the meter and electric fittings) and other movables constituting the confectionary factory. As regards build mg 784 2-A and 2-B, Mr. Nasir was uncertain whether possession of buildings had been taken in fact or not, and conceded that if possession had been taken, it had been wrongly taken. The order, therefore, will be that the order of the Deputy Custodian E. F. Sukkur in application No. dated 28th August 1952 in so far as it states that the 0-15-0 Anna share in the confectionery machinery installed therein belongs to respondent Hassan and is evacuee property, is quashed; The possession of the build mg 784 2-A and 2-B and the machinery therein, if taken, is illegal. A. h. Order quashed.

Question: What is case 1955 PLD 10 about?
Answer: Case 1955 PLD 10 was decided by CUSTODIAN (PB.) on 1955-04-15. The case involved CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY PROGRESSIVE PAPERS LID. LAHORE VERSUS THE REHABILITATION AUTHORITY, PUNJAB. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - SS. 15 AND 16. The case was heard by A. M. JAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: In case 1955 PLD 10, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - SS. 15 AND 16. This case was heard in CUSTODIAN (PB.) and decided on 1955-04-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1955 PLD 10 were: MAHMOOD ALL QASURI, FOR THE PETITIONER. SAEED-UD-DIN, R. O. LEGAL, FOR THE R. A.. The judges presiding were: A. M. JAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: The parties in case 1955 PLD 10 were: CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY PROGRESSIVE PAPERS LID. LAHORE VERSUS THE REHABILITATION AUTHORITY, PUNJAB. This case was heard in CUSTODIAN (PB.).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1955 PLD 10.
Answer: A. M. Jan, (Custodian).-This order will be read in continuation of my order dated 24th July, 1954, whereby I sent the case to the Deputy Custodian (General) for taking evidence on the points mentioned in that order. The evidence recorded by the Deputy Custodian WW. (General) is of eight witnesses, P. W. 1, Malik Anwar Khan, Associate of Indian Institute of Architects, has given the rates of second class buildings and characterized the building of the Tribune Press as a 2nd class public building. P. W. 2, Abdul Aziz Khan, Architectural Engineer gave the area occupied by the building and the value of the land adjacent to it. P. W. 3, Abdul Rashid, Proprietor, Lion Press, Lahore, gave a description of the machinery and its market value. P. W. 4, Syed Amir Hussain Shah, Managing Director Progressive Papers Ltd. stated the facts relating to the agreement to sell, the details of the amount paid by them to the Government, its various Departments, the Lahore Corporation and some third party claims. The total amount comes to Rs. 1,27,755-11-6. P. W. 5, Main Eftekhari- adding gave a history of the negotiations resulting in the agreement to sell the property. He also deposed that the machinery the Progressive Papers Limited purchased from the Tribune Trust was worthless, and he had to go to America for buying new machinery which cost about Rs. 10,00,000. P. W. 6, Misti Oahu- adding says that if he had to purchase the machinery installed in the Tribune Press, he would not have paid more than for scrap iron. P. W. 7, Diaz Ahmad, owner of It Press, Lahore, said that the machinery in the Tribune Press was old and worn out. P. W. 8, Hammed Allah made a statement to the same effect.- The evidence of Syed Amir Hussain Shah, M. L. A. Managing Director, Progressive Papers Limited, which, has not been challenged, proves that Rs. 1,26,085-13-6 has been paid by them to the Government and other local bodies. The rest of the evidence shows that the price agreed upon was adequate consideration. Counsel for the petitioners tendered in evidence the file of case No. 39 of 1949. The documentary evidence on this file shows that the Trustees of the Tribune Press had agreed to sell the property in question to the petitioners and by their resolution dated 10th June 1949, they empowered Rai Broader Bari Days to execute a special power of attorney in favor of Mr. Sharma and Mr. Bali authorizing them to execute and register the sale deed in favor of the petitioners. The Trustees had at that time left Pakistan on account of the setting up of the two dominions of Pakistan and India, or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances. They were unable to personally occupy, supervise or manage the Trust property, and it was not occupied, supervised or managed by anyone whose authority to do so had been approved by the Custodian. It had, therefore, become evacuee property which has been defined to mean any property in which an. evacuee has any right or interest whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or in any other capacity. According to para 20 of Vardar Deal Singh’s Will, dated the 15th June, 1895, the property WW. pertaining to the Tribune Press was to vest in the Trustees thereof: After the partition, when the Trustees went away from Pakistan and became evacuees their property became vested in the Custodian under section 6 of the Evacuee Property Ordinance (XV of 1949) The Progressive Papers Limited have, therefore, applied to the Custodian for the confirmation of the agreement made by the Trustees. According to section 6, para. 2, of the Evacuee Property Ordinance any evacuee property which is held in Trust for religious or charitable purposes shall remain vested in the Custodian only till such time as fresh trustees are apported in the manner provided by Law and pending the appointment of fresh trustees the Trust property and the income thereof shall be applied by the Custodian for fulfilling as far as possible, the purposes of the Trust. The question arises whether the Custodian can, during the time when he is in charge of the property, sell the property or he can merely use it for the -purposes of the Trust. Counsel for the petitioners says that in this case the property is already under an agreement of sale made by the Trustees and the Custodian is asked merely to give his approval to that contract. This gives rise to the next question whether, the Trustees had, after they had become evacuees, any power to make a contract in respect of this property. The answer to this question is that there was nothing to prevent them from making a contract, but the contract cannot be enforced without the permission of the Custodian. Section 15 of the Evacuee Property Ordinance prohibits the transfer of property, in areas relating to which a Notification has been issued, except with the previous approval in writing of the Custodian. If the Custodian gives his approval to the completion of this contract, the Trustees have the power to complete the sale ; otherwise not. Section 16 says that no creation or transfer of any right or merest in or encumbrance upon any property made in any manner whatsoever, on or after the first day of March, 1947, by or on behalf of any evacuee or by or on behalf of a person \Who has or may hereafter become an evacuee after the date of such creation or transfer shall be effective so as to confer any right or remedy on any party thereto or on any person claiming under any such party, unless it is confirmed by the Custodian. This section relates to transfers or creation of merest effected without the previous approval of the Custodian and here too what is required to regularize the transfer, or the creation of interest, is the approval of the Custodian. Section 17 says that where any transfer has been made, or any interest has been created by virtue of a document, without the approval of the Custodian under section 16, the document will not be registered unless the party presenting it produces a certificate from the Custodian showing that the property is not evacuee property, or that the transaction has been confirmed by the Custodian. The only question that remains, therefore, is whether the WW. Custodian should give his approval to this agreement for sale and allow the sale to be completed and registered. There is no reason to suppose that it was not a bona fide transaction or that the consideration was not adequate. The condition imposed by the Notification of the Central Government regarding the payment of consideration appears to have been complied with. The Central Government and the Rehabilitation Authority have no objection to the grant of approval for the completion of the sale. Last month received letter No. 1366-Reh-IV/55, dated the 8th March, 1955 from the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Secretary to the Government, Punjab, saying that the Central Government had in their letter dated 20th May, 1954 asked the Custodian to examine the case in the light of their Notification dated 10th April, 1954 and, if it was found that the case was eligible for completion, it should be allowed to be completed. It was also said that in an earlier communication, dated 22nd December 1948, the Custodian was advised by the Hon’BLE Minister for Refugees that permission might be given to the Progressive Papers Limited to purchase this property and to treat it as a special case and that lately the Central Minister for Refugees and Rehabilitation had expressed anxiety! for the confirmation of this sale on the ground that the requirements of the Notification above-mentioned had been duly fulfilled. In view of these facts the Secretary, to Government, Punjab, Rehabilitation Department wrote that the Counsel for the Rehabilitation Department was being instructed to withdraw from the case and that the case should be decided by me in accordance with the provisions of Law. I directed the R. O. (Legal) to remain in attendance and assist the Court in deciding the case according to the provisions of Law. Counsel for the petitioners points to an application made jointly by the Chairman of the Board of Directors, Progressive Papers Limited, and the Secretary of the Tribune Trust to the Custodian, Punjab, for permission under section 9 of the West Punjab Evacuee Property Protection Act to complete tire sale. The application was sent to the Custodian through the Director of Industries and Rehabilitation Commissioner who made an endorsement on it dated the 22nd June, 1948, that he had no objection to the transfer of the Tribune building and _ the Press with all the machineries, stocks, stores and news-print etc. for a sum of Rs. 1,50,000. The Custodian by his order dated 8th July, 1948 ordered the petition to be registered and issued notice to the Rehabilitation Department. A reference appears to have been made by him to the Ministry of Refugees in reply to which a letter WW. was received from Shawna Shah ab-ud-Din, the then Minister for Refugees. That letter is at page 31 of the file m case No. 30 of 1949. It said that for reasons given by Main Eftekhari- adding, Chairman of the Progressive Papers Limited, he may be permitted to purchase the Tribune Press and this transaction may be treated as a special case. The Custodian recorded the evidence of Mr. Bali, Secretary of the Trust, who stated that the Trust had entered into an agreement for the sale of the Tribune Press, its equipments, fittings, stocks, furniture etc. including a van, for Rs, 1,50,000. The payment was agreed to be made before the Registrar after deducting all payments towards Income-Tax;, electric charges, third party claims, and other charges which had to be paid before the permission could be accorded for completing the sale. The agreement was made in accordance with a resolution passed by the Trustees in their meeting held on the 28th March, 1948, in the interests of the Tribune Trust as it was no longer possible for them to function in Lahore, and they had started bringing out a Tribune Daily newspaper from Ambala Can't. It was considered necessary to sell the property of the Tribune Trust here and purchase property in East Punjab. Mr. Sharma, Manager of the Tribune Trust, deposed that he had been deputed by the Trustees to come to Lahore for the completion of the sale, He had a general power of attorney in his favor for carry mg on the normal business of the Trust but no special power of attorney for executing the sale deed. He said that the Trust was created by the Will of the late Vardar Deal Singh Majestic and there was no specific provision in that Will authorizing the Trustees to sell the property or restrain them from dong so. The Trustees had, however, been disposing of the Trust property in the past without any reference to Court Mr. Amir Hussain Shah, Managing Director of the Progressive Papers Limited, corroborated the statement made by Mr. Bali in his presence. The Custodian then ordered that the requisite clearance certificate and a power of attorney authoring someone to complete the sale should be produced on 2nd July, 1949. The special power of attorney was given by Rai Broader Bari Days to Mr. Sharma and Mr. Bali to execute and register the sale deed. He did so in exercise of the authority conferred upon him by the Trustees and directed the aforesaid attorneys to convey the building, including the open site behind it, and the premises occupied by the Post Office situated on Rattan Hand Road, Lahore, including the Press, office equipment, furniture etc. lying in the aforesaid building for a sum of Rs. 1,50,000 to the Progressive Papers Ltd. The resolutions allowing the sale of the buildings WW. and other moveable property belonging to the Tribune Trust and authorizing Mr. Sharma and Mr. Bali to execute and register the sale deed are on the record. On 2nd July, 1949, Mr. Bali again appeared before the Custodian and said that when the Will was made by Vardar Deal Singh, there was no immovable property attached to the Tribune Trust. The property was acquired later on by the Trustees and that accounted for the omission of any provision in the Will relating to the Trustees’ power to dispose of the property. He produced the special power of attorney and the resolutions above-mentioned. Mr. Amir Hussain Shah produced the clearance certificate from the Income-tax Authority marked Ex. R. A. another from the Property Tax Authority marked Ex. R. B. two from the D. R. C. about the payment of third party clams marked Exes. R. E. 1, and R. E. 2, and the resolution Ex. R. F. signed by the Chairman of the' Progressive Papers Ltd. authorizing him to complete the transaction of sale on their behalf After recording this evidence the Custodian ordered that unless the competency of the Tribune Trust to sell the property was placed beyond doubt by suitable directions from a competent Court further proceedings shall be stayed. On 27th February, 1950, he reviewed his order and said that as the bulk of the consideration for the sale in this case would be absorbed by demands made by the Government and other authorities and as the Tribune Trust was not carrying on any business in Pakistan, their property would have to be sold, sooner or later, to meet the above-mentioned demands and as the purchasers were willing to run the risk BF buying without any specific instructions from a Court there was no necessity to hold up proceedings on the ground that no instructions for sale had been obtained from a Court. In view however, of a Notification by the Pakistan Government dated the 10th January, 1950 he advised the petitioners to approach the Central Government for the removal of the ban on sales contained in the above-mentioned Notification. On 8th April, 1954, the Progressive Papers Limited filed an application under section 15 of Evacuee Property Ordinance and asked for the approval of the Custodian for the completion of the sale in pursuance of the agreement made in 1948. The Habitat'on Authority filed a written statement on 27th May, 1954 opposing the petition but later withdrew the opposition. On 20th May, 1954, letter No. F. (22)/53-R-II, was sent by the Ministry of Refugees and WW. Rehabilitation, Government of Pakistan, to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Punjab, referring to the latter’s order dated the 27th February, 1950 and saying that the Chairman, Board of Directors, Progressive Papers Limited had represented to the Ministry that out of the sum of Rs. 1,50,000, the sum of Rs. 56,124-12-0 represented the price of moveable property included in the transaction and the payment made by the Progressive Papers should be considered with reference to the price of the immovable property only, Le. Rs. 1,50,000 minus Rs. 56,124-12-0 Rs. 93,875-4-0. The payments made by the Progressive Papers were shown as under Item Rs. (1) Income-tax 1,04,428-12-0 (2) House-tax 4,049-2-0 (3) Property tax 4,816-7-0 (4) Third party claims 1,669-14-0 (5) Electricity charges 3,323-9-0 (6) Administration charges 7,710-0-0 Total 1,25,997-12-0 The amount paid was stated to be well above the minimum required by the Notification above-mentioned, as amended by Notification No. F. (8)/54-R-II, dated 10th April, 1954, and the Custodian was requested to examine this case IP accordance with the provisions of the last Notification and if the case was considered eligible for completion, it should be ordered to be completed. It may be pointed out here that in clause 20 of the Will of Vardar Deal Singh Militia, it was said that his “property in the stock and good-will of the Tune Press and newspaper in Antral, Lahore” was to vest permanently in a Committee of Trustees consisting of Messes Jitendra Hand Bose, Charles Golan Path, and Harshen All, Barrister-at-Law, and clause 21 provided that it shall be the duty of the said Trustees to maintain the Press and the Newspaper in an efficient condition, keep mg the liberal policy of the said newspaper and devoting the surplus income of the said Press and Newspaper, after defying'all current expenses in improving the said newspaper and placing it on a footing of permanency. In clause 22, which is applicable to all the three Trusts created1 by the donor, it is said that on the death, resignation or disability of any Trustee the remaining Trustees of the Trust concerned shall fill up the vacancy. It appears from clause 20 of the Will that there were no buildings belonging to the Tribune Press or attached to it at the time of the will and all that Vardar Deal Singh owned was the stock and goodwill of the Tribune Press and newspaper in Alkali, Lahore. Counsel for the petitioners states, on instructions received by him, that there was no immovable property attached to the Tribune Press and whatever property now exists was acquired by the Trustees after the Will This statement was made as far back as 2nd July, 1949 before Mr. Justice S. A. Rahman, the then Custodian of WW. Evacuee Property, and the provisions of the Will show that the statement is correct. It has not been controverted by anyone and there is nothing on the record against TT. It is urged by the counsel for the petitioners that the Trustees have always the inherent right to dispose of the Trust property in the interest of the Trust. In this case the Trustees had saved money and built property to Malta the Press and.to put it on a footing of permanency. They had the undoubted right to sell that property if they considered it to be in the interests of the Trust as stated by. Mr. Balt, the Secretary of the Tribune Trust, in his statement dated 31st May, 1949. In Hals bury’s Laws of England, 3rd Edition, Vol. IV, at page 334, it is said that, subject to the restrictions imposed by the Charitable Trusts Act, the Trustees of Charities have power to sell the Charity estates upon their own initiative, whether expressly authorized by the instrument of Trust or not, provided that the sale is in the interests of this charity. In Law Report 1911-Chancery Division, page 442, it is said that ordinarily a direction to Trustees to invest in particular investments implies a power to vary the investments and that implied power gives the Trustees the power to sell real estate. In the Commentaries under section 22 of the Trust Act by Aggarwal, IST Edition, page 261, it is stated that where there are no special directions to sell in the Instrument creating the Trust, the Trustees may sell under circumstances which render a sale necessary. In Onward Doorganath Roy v. Ram Chunder Sen (1) it was held by the Privy Council that the Manager of an estate had the power to raise money by alienating a part of that estate if the purposes of the endowment required it. A Division Bench of the Madras High Court held in Kuttayakath Via Karma v. Brinjal Karaganda Flappy (2) that though, ordinarily, a Trustee of a temple should not alienate the crops of the Trust by way of mortgage or sale and'” should try to raise the sum required for necessary purposes of the temple, such as repairs etc. by public subscriptions or by curtailment of other expenses, yet an alienation made by the Trustee for such a purpose is perfectly valid. Instances can be multiplied whereby it can be shown that a Trustee, for the proper discharge of his duties, must have the meant power of disposal over the Trust property. For example, suppose a Trust property is burnt to ashes. It was insured, according to the price of the building at the time of the construction, for only Rs. 25,0OD. The cost of building having gone up in recent y ears, the reconstruction of the property would cost Rs. 50,000. Will not the Trustees have the right to borrow Rs. 25,000 oh the security of that property in order to rebuild it and repay the amount borrowed from the future rent of the property. This would be an act of good WW. management, and it would be a failure of duty on the part of the Trustees to let the site lie waste and the Trust to die. The R. O. (Legal) has not been able to show that the Trustees cannot dispose of the Trust property if it is in the merest, of the Trust. I am of the opinion that the Trustees had the right to enter into an agreement for the sale of this property. The only question is whether it was in the interest of the Trust. And I should give my approval or not. As stated above, the Central Government and the Rehabilitation are in favor of the approval being granted and the sale being sanctioned. There is nothing to show that the agreement to sell was not in the interest of the Trust as it was stated to be by the Secretary of the Trust. No Law nor any other cause has been shown against the approval being given, and I give the approval asked for under section 15 of the Evacuee Property Ordinance for the execution and registration of the. sale deed in question. A. H., Transfer approved. w.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 10 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-04-15): A. M. Jan, (Custodian).-This order will be read in continuation of my order dated 24th July, 1954, whereby I sent the case to the Deputy Custodian (General) for taking evidence on the points mentioned in that order. The evidence recorded by the Deputy Custodian WW. (General) is of eight witnesses, P. W. 1, Malik Anwar Khan, Associate of Indian Institute of Architects, has given the rates of second class buildings and characterized the building of the Tribune Press as a 2nd class public building. P. W. 2, Abdul Aziz Khan, Architectural Engineer gave the area occupied by the building and the value of the land adjacent to it. P. W. 3, Abdul Rashid, Proprietor, Lion Press, Lahore, gave a description of the machinery and its market value. P. W. 4, Syed Amir Hussain Shah, Managing Director Progressive Papers Ltd. stated the facts relating to the agreement to sell, the details of the amount paid by them to the Government, its various Departments, the Lahore Corporation and some third party claims. The total amount comes to Rs. 1,27,755-11-6. P. W. 5, Main Eftekhari- adding gave a history of the negotiations resulting in the agreement to sell the property. He also deposed that the machinery the Progressive Papers Limited purchased from the Tribune Trust was worthless, and he had to go to America for buying new machinery which cost about Rs. 10,00,000. P. W. 6, Misti Oahu- adding says that if he had to purchase the machinery installed in the Tribune Press, he would not have paid more than for scrap iron. P. W. 7, Diaz Ahmad, owner of It Press, Lahore, said that the machinery in the Tribune Press was old and worn out. P. W. 8, Hammed Allah made a statement to the same effect.- The evidence of Syed Amir Hussain Shah, M. L. A. Managing Director, Progressive Papers Limited, which, has not been challenged, proves that Rs. 1,26,085-13-6 has been paid by them to the Government and other local bodies. The rest of the evidence shows that the price agreed upon was adequate consideration. Counsel for the petitioners tendered in evidence the file of case No. 39 of 1949. The documentary evidence on this file shows that the Trustees of the Tribune Press had agreed to sell the property in question to the petitioners and by their resolution dated 10th June 1949, they empowered Rai Broader Bari Days to execute a special power of attorney in favor of Mr. Sharma and Mr. Bali authorizing them to execute and register the sale deed in favor of the petitioners. The Trustees had at that time left Pakistan on account of the setting up of the two dominions of Pakistan and India, or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances. They were unable to personally occupy, supervise or manage the Trust property, and it was not occupied, supervised or managed by anyone whose authority to do so had been approved by the Custodian. It had, therefore, become evacuee

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 10 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-04-15): or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances. They were unable to personally occupy, supervise or manage the Trust property, and it was not occupied, supervised or managed by anyone whose authority to do so had been approved by the Custodian. It had, therefore, become evacuee property which has been defined to mean any property in which an. evacuee has any right or interest whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or in any other capacity. According to para 20 of Vardar Deal Singh’s Will, dated the 15th June, 1895, the property WW. pertaining to the Tribune Press was to vest in the Trustees thereof: After the partition, when the Trustees went away from Pakistan and became evacuees their property became vested in the Custodian under section 6 of the Evacuee Property Ordinance (XV of 1949) The Progressive Papers Limited have, therefore, applied to the Custodian for the confirmation of the agreement made by the Trustees. According to section 6, para. 2, of the Evacuee Property Ordinance any evacuee property which is held in Trust for religious or charitable purposes shall remain vested in the Custodian only till such time as fresh trustees are apported in the manner provided by Law and pending the appointment of fresh trustees the Trust property and the income thereof shall be applied by the Custodian for fulfilling as far as possible, the purposes of the Trust. The question arises whether the Custodian can, during the time when he is in charge of the property, sell the property or he can merely use it for the -purposes of the Trust. Counsel for the petitioners says that in this case the property is already under an agreement of sale made by the Trustees and the Custodian is asked merely to give his approval to that contract. This gives rise to the next question whether, the Trustees had, after they had become evacuees, any power to make a contract in respect of this property. The answer to this question is that there was nothing to prevent them from making a contract, but the contract cannot be enforced without the permission of the Custodian. Section 15 of the Evacuee Property Ordinance prohibits the transfer of property, in areas relating to which a Notification has been issued, except with the previous approval in writing of the Custodian. If the Custodian gives his approval to the completion of this contract, the Trustees have the power to complete the sale ; otherwise not. Section 16 says that no creation or transfer of any right or merest in or encumbrance upon any property made in any manner whatsoever, on or after the first day of March, 1947, by or on behalf of any evacuee or by or on behalf of a person \Who has or may hereafter become an evacuee after the date of such creation or transfer shall be effective so as to confer any right or remedy on any party thereto or on any

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 10 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-04-15): 1947, by or on behalf of any evacuee or by or on behalf of a person \Who has or may hereafter become an evacuee after the date of such creation or transfer shall be effective so as to confer any right or remedy on any party thereto or on any person claiming under any such party, unless it is confirmed by the Custodian. This section relates to transfers or creation of merest effected without the previous approval of the Custodian and here too what is required to regularize the transfer, or the creation of interest, is the approval of the Custodian. Section 17 says that where any transfer has been made, or any interest has been created by virtue of a document, without the approval of the Custodian under section 16, the document will not be registered unless the party presenting it produces a certificate from the Custodian showing that the property is not evacuee property, or that the transaction has been confirmed by the Custodian. The only question that remains, therefore, is whether the WW. Custodian should give his approval to this agreement for sale and allow the sale to be completed and registered. There is no reason to suppose that it was not a bona fide transaction or that the consideration was not adequate. The condition imposed by the Notification of the Central Government regarding the payment of consideration appears to have been complied with. The Central Government and the Rehabilitation Authority have no objection to the grant of approval for the completion of the sale. Last month received letter No. 1366-Reh-IV/55, dated the 8th March, 1955 from the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the Secretary to the Government, Punjab, saying that the Central Government had in their letter dated 20th May, 1954 asked the Custodian to examine the case in the light of their Notification dated 10th April, 1954 and, if it was found that the case was eligible for completion, it should be allowed to be completed. It was also said that in an earlier communication, dated 22nd December 1948, the Custodian was advised by the Hon’BLE Minister for Refugees that permission might be given to the Progressive Papers Limited to purchase this property and to treat it as a special case and that lately the Central Minister for Refugees and Rehabilitation had expressed anxiety! for the confirmation of this sale on the ground that the requirements of the Notification above-mentioned had been duly fulfilled. In view of these facts the Secretary, to Government, Punjab, Rehabilitation Department wrote that the Counsel for the Rehabilitation Department was being instructed to withdraw from the case and that the case should be decided by me in accordance with the provisions of Law. I directed the R. O. (Legal) to remain in attendance and assist the Court in deciding the case according to the provisions of Law. Counsel for the petitioners points to an application made jointly by the Chairman of the Board of Directors, Progressive Papers Limited, and the Secretary of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 10 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-04-15): Law. I directed the R. O. (Legal) to remain in attendance and assist the Court in deciding the case according to the provisions of Law. Counsel for the petitioners points to an application made jointly by the Chairman of the Board of Directors, Progressive Papers Limited, and the Secretary of the Tribune Trust to the Custodian, Punjab, for permission under section 9 of the West Punjab Evacuee Property Protection Act to complete tire sale. The application was sent to the Custodian through the Director of Industries and Rehabilitation Commissioner who made an endorsement on it dated the 22nd June, 1948, that he had no objection to the transfer of the Tribune building and _ the Press with all the machineries, stocks, stores and news-print etc. for a sum of Rs. 1,50,000. The Custodian by his order dated 8th July, 1948 ordered the petition to be registered and issued notice to the Rehabilitation Department. A reference appears to have been made by him to the Ministry of Refugees in reply to which a letter WW. was received from Shawna Shah ab-ud-Din, the then Minister for Refugees. That letter is at page 31 of the file m case No. 30 of 1949. It said that for reasons given by Main Eftekhari- adding, Chairman of the Progressive Papers Limited, he may be permitted to purchase the Tribune Press and this transaction may be treated as a special case. The Custodian recorded the evidence of Mr. Bali, Secretary of the Trust, who stated that the Trust had entered into an agreement for the sale of the Tribune Press, its equipments, fittings, stocks, furniture etc. including a van, for Rs, 1,50,000. The payment was agreed to be made before the Registrar after deducting all payments towards Income-Tax;, electric charges, third party claims, and other charges which had to be paid before the permission could be accorded for completing the sale. The agreement was made in accordance with a resolution passed by the Trustees in their meeting held on the 28th March, 1948, in the interests of the Tribune Trust as it was no longer possible for them to function in Lahore, and they had started bringing out a Tribune Daily newspaper from Ambala Can't. It was considered necessary to sell the property of the Tribune Trust here and purchase property in East Punjab. Mr. Sharma, Manager of the Tribune Trust, deposed that he had been deputed by the Trustees to come to Lahore for the completion of the sale, He had a general power of attorney in his favor for carry mg on the normal business of the Trust but no special power of attorney for executing the sale deed. He said that the Trust was created by the Will of the late Vardar Deal Singh Majestic and there was no specific provision in that Will authorizing the Trustees to sell the property or restrain them from dong so. The Trustees had, however, been disposing of the Trust property in the past without any reference

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 10 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-04-15): was created by the Will of the late Vardar Deal Singh Majestic and there was no specific provision in that Will authorizing the Trustees to sell the property or restrain them from dong so. The Trustees had, however, been disposing of the Trust property in the past without any reference to Court Mr. Amir Hussain Shah, Managing Director of the Progressive Papers Limited, corroborated the statement made by Mr. Bali in his presence. The Custodian then ordered that the requisite clearance certificate and a power of attorney authoring someone to complete the sale should be produced on 2nd July, 1949. The special power of attorney was given by Rai Broader Bari Days to Mr. Sharma and Mr. Bali to execute and register the sale deed. He did so in exercise of the authority conferred upon him by the Trustees and directed the aforesaid attorneys to convey the building, including the open site behind it, and the premises occupied by the Post Office situated on Rattan Hand Road, Lahore, including the Press, office equipment, furniture etc. lying in the aforesaid building for a sum of Rs. 1,50,000 to the Progressive Papers Ltd. The resolutions allowing the sale of the buildings WW. and other moveable property belonging to the Tribune Trust and authorizing Mr. Sharma and Mr. Bali to execute and register the sale deed are on the record. On 2nd July, 1949, Mr. Bali again appeared before the Custodian and said that when the Will was made by Vardar Deal Singh, there was no immovable property attached to the Tribune Trust. The property was acquired later on by the Trustees and that accounted for the omission of any provision in the Will relating to the Trustees’ power to dispose of the property. He produced the special power of attorney and the resolutions above-mentioned. Mr. Amir Hussain Shah produced the clearance certificate from the Income-tax Authority marked Ex. R. A. another from the Property Tax Authority marked Ex. R. B. two from the D. R. C. about the payment of third party clams marked Exes. R. E. 1, and R. E. 2, and the resolution Ex. R. F. signed by the Chairman of the' Progressive Papers Ltd. authorizing him to complete the transaction of sale on their behalf After recording this evidence the Custodian ordered that unless the competency of the Tribune Trust to sell the property was placed beyond doubt by suitable directions from a competent Court further proceedings shall be stayed. On 27th February, 1950, he reviewed his order and said that as the bulk of the consideration for the sale in this case would be absorbed by demands made by the Government and other authorities and as the Tribune Trust was not carrying on any business in Pakistan, their property would have to be sold, sooner or later, to meet the above-mentioned demands and as the purchasers were willing to run the risk BF buying without any specific instructions from a Court there was no necessity to hold up

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 10 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-04-15): Trust was not carrying on any business in Pakistan, their property would have to be sold, sooner or later, to meet the above-mentioned demands and as the purchasers were willing to run the risk BF buying without any specific instructions from a Court there was no necessity to hold up proceedings on the ground that no instructions for sale had been obtained from a Court. In view however, of a Notification by the Pakistan Government dated the 10th January, 1950 he advised the petitioners to approach the Central Government for the removal of the ban on sales contained in the above-mentioned Notification. On 8th April, 1954, the Progressive Papers Limited filed an application under section 15 of Evacuee Property Ordinance and asked for the approval of the Custodian for the completion of the sale in pursuance of the agreement made in 1948. The Habitat'on Authority filed a written statement on 27th May, 1954 opposing the petition but later withdrew the opposition. On 20th May, 1954, letter No. F. (22)/53-R-II, was sent by the Ministry of Refugees and WW. Rehabilitation, Government of Pakistan, to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Punjab, referring to the latter’s order dated the 27th February, 1950 and saying that the Chairman, Board of Directors, Progressive Papers Limited had represented to the Ministry that out of the sum of Rs. 1,50,000, the sum of Rs. 56,124-12-0 represented the price of moveable property included in the transaction and the payment made by the Progressive Papers should be considered with reference to the price of the immovable property only, Le. Rs. 1,50,000 minus Rs. 56,124-12-0 Rs. 93,875-4-0. The payments made by the Progressive Papers were shown as under Item Rs. (1) Income-tax 1,04,428-12-0 (2) House-tax 4,049-2-0 (3) Property tax 4,816-7-0 (4) Third party claims 1,669-14-0 (5) Electricity charges 3,323-9-0 (6) Administration charges 7,710-0-0 Total 1,25,997-12-0 The amount paid was stated to be well above the minimum required by the Notification above-mentioned, as amended by Notification No. F. (8)/54-R-II, dated 10th April, 1954, and the Custodian was requested to examine this case IP accordance with the provisions of the last Notification and if the case was considered eligible for completion, it should be ordered to be completed. It may be pointed out here that in clause 20 of the Will of Vardar Deal Singh Militia, it was said that his “property in the stock and good-will of the Tune Press and newspaper in Antral, Lahore” was to vest permanently in a Committee of Trustees consisting of Messes Jitendra Hand Bose, Charles Golan Path, and Harshen All, Barrister-at-Law, and clause 21 provided that it shall be the duty of the said Trustees to maintain the Press and the Newspaper in an efficient condition, keep mg the liberal policy of the said newspaper and devoting the surplus income of the said Press and Newspaper, after defying'all current expenses in improving the said newspaper and placing it on a footing of permanency. In clause 22, which is applicable to all the three Trusts created1

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 10 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-04-15): condition, keep mg the liberal policy of the said newspaper and devoting the surplus income of the said Press and Newspaper, after defying'all current expenses in improving the said newspaper and placing it on a footing of permanency. In clause 22, which is applicable to all the three Trusts created1 by the donor, it is said that on the death, resignation or disability of any Trustee the remaining Trustees of the Trust concerned shall fill up the vacancy. It appears from clause 20 of the Will that there were no buildings belonging to the Tribune Press or attached to it at the time of the will and all that Vardar Deal Singh owned was the stock and goodwill of the Tribune Press and newspaper in Alkali, Lahore. Counsel for the petitioners states, on instructions received by him, that there was no immovable property attached to the Tribune Press and whatever property now exists was acquired by the Trustees after the Will This statement was made as far back as 2nd July, 1949 before Mr. Justice S. A. Rahman, the then Custodian of WW. Evacuee Property, and the provisions of the Will show that the statement is correct. It has not been controverted by anyone and there is nothing on the record against TT. It is urged by the counsel for the petitioners that the Trustees have always the inherent right to dispose of the Trust property in the interest of the Trust. In this case the Trustees had saved money and built property to Malta the Press and.to put it on a footing of permanency. They had the undoubted right to sell that property if they considered it to be in the interests of the Trust as stated by. Mr. Balt, the Secretary of the Tribune Trust, in his statement dated 31st May, 1949. In Hals bury’s Laws of England, 3rd Edition, Vol. IV, at page 334, it is said that, subject to the restrictions imposed by the Charitable Trusts Act, the Trustees of Charities have power to sell the Charity estates upon their own initiative, whether expressly authorized by the instrument of Trust or not, provided that the sale is in the interests of this charity. In Law Report 1911-Chancery Division, page 442, it is said that ordinarily a direction to Trustees to invest in particular investments implies a power to vary the investments and that implied power gives the Trustees the power to sell real estate. In the Commentaries under section 22 of the Trust Act by Aggarwal, IST Edition, page 261, it is stated that where there are no special directions to sell in the Instrument creating the Trust, the Trustees may sell under circumstances which render a sale necessary. In Onward Doorganath Roy v. Ram Chunder Sen (1) it was held by the Privy Council that the Manager of an estate had the power to raise money by alienating a part of that estate if the purposes of the endowment required it. A Division Bench of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 10?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 10 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-04-15): a sale necessary. In Onward Doorganath Roy v. Ram Chunder Sen (1) it was held by the Privy Council that the Manager of an estate had the power to raise money by alienating a part of that estate if the purposes of the endowment required it. A Division Bench of the Madras High Court held in Kuttayakath Via Karma v. Brinjal Karaganda Flappy (2) that though, ordinarily, a Trustee of a temple should not alienate the crops of the Trust by way of mortgage or sale and'” should try to raise the sum required for necessary purposes of the temple, such as repairs etc. by public subscriptions or by curtailment of other expenses, yet an alienation made by the Trustee for such a purpose is perfectly valid. Instances can be multiplied whereby it can be shown that a Trustee, for the proper discharge of his duties, must have the meant power of disposal over the Trust property. For example, suppose a Trust property is burnt to ashes. It was insured, according to the price of the building at the time of the construction, for only Rs. 25,0OD. The cost of building having gone up in recent y ears, the reconstruction of the property would cost Rs. 50,000. Will not the Trustees have the right to borrow Rs. 25,000 oh the security of that property in order to rebuild it and repay the amount borrowed from the future rent of the property. This would be an act of good WW. management, and it would be a failure of duty on the part of the Trustees to let the site lie waste and the Trust to die. The R. O. (Legal) has not been able to show that the Trustees cannot dispose of the Trust property if it is in the merest, of the Trust. I am of the opinion that the Trustees had the right to enter into an agreement for the sale of this property. The only question is whether it was in the interest of the Trust. And I should give my approval or not. As stated above, the Central Government and the Rehabilitation are in favor of the approval being granted and the sale being sanctioned. There is nothing to show that the agreement to sell was not in the interest of the Trust as it was stated to be by the Secretary of the Trust. No Law nor any other cause has been shown against the approval being given, and I give the approval asked for under section 15 of the Evacuee Property Ordinance for the execution and registration of the. sale deed in question. A. H., Transfer approved. w.

Question: What is case 1955 PLD 5 about?
Answer: Case 1955 PLD 5 was decided by CUSTODIAN (PB.) on 1955-02-03. The case involved CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, PUNJAB ZAMIR AHMAD KHAN VERSUS R. A. NABI BAKHSH SONS. The relevant statutes include PAGRI PAKISTAN REHABILITATION) ORDINANCE (XIX OF 1948) - S. 13-A. The case was heard by A. M. JAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: In case 1955 PLD 5, the court applied the following statutes: PAGRI PAKISTAN REHABILITATION) ORDINANCE (XIX OF 1948) - S. 13-A. This case was heard in CUSTODIAN (PB.) and decided on 1955-02-03.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1955 PLD 5 were: PETITIONER IN PERSON. M.A. KHADAM FOR NABI BAKHSH SONS.. The judges presiding were: A. M. JAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: The parties in case 1955 PLD 5 were: CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, PUNJAB ZAMIR AHMAD KHAN VERSUS R. A. NABI BAKHSH SONS. This case was heard in CUSTODIAN (PB.).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1955 PLD 5.
Answer: A. M. Jan (Custodian).-This is a petition under section 13-A of the Rehabilitation Ordinance (XIX of 1948) against an order allotting shop No. 72 situated on The Mall Lahore in favor of Messes Nazi Baths Sons of 26 Mc Load Road Lahore. The facts of the case are that on 30th December 1947, this shop was allotted to one Aftab Lodi. He later on took a partner named Mamdani, but it appears that their business did not prosper and on 12th September 1953 they made an application to the D. R. C. Lahore that they were willing to surrender the allotment of this shop in favor of Amir Ahmad Khan, one of the partners of Syed Thais Ltd. who was stated in the petition to be a refugee from Meerut. On the same day ZAM Ahmad Khan made an application to the D. R. C. Lahore on behalf of his firm, Syed Thais Ltd. showing that they were very well off in Meerut put had fallen on evil days owing to Partition. They added that Mr. Aftab Lodi and Mr. Mamdani, Proprietors of the International Trading Corporation, were willing to surrender possession of the shop to the petitioners and prayed that the shop may be allotted to them. The D. R. C. asked for a report from the R. O. Civil Lines who reported that Mr. Aftab Lodi and his partner Mr. Mamdani said that hey had lost about thirty thousand rupees in their business and were unable to carry on anymore. They were, therefore, prepared to surrender possession of the shop in favor of Syed Thais Ltd. who were financially sound and recommended for the allotment of the shop. The D. R. C. Lahore, vide his order dated 21st September 1953, accepted the recommendation and allotted the shop to Syed Thais Ltd. On the next day Syed Thais Ltd. bought over the furniture, fittings and stock belonging to the International Trading Corporation, entered in the list marked A, for Rs. 7,500 as shown in receipt marked B. After about a month the petitioners received a letter from the Rehabilitation Officer, Civil Lines, directing them to appear before the Rehabilitation Commissioner (General) on 26th October 1953 in connection with this shop. Mr. Amir Ahmad Khan appeared on behalf of Syed Thais in the Court of the Rehabilitation Commissioner on 26th October 1953, but the case was adjourned to 5th November 1953 When the Rehabilitation Commissioner cancelled the allotment in favor of the petitioners of the ground that it had been alleged that Mr. Amir. Ahmad Khan had got this shop by paying part, Mr. ZAM Ahmad Khan’s contention that he had paid Rs. 7,500 for the goods purchased by him as shown MN the list and the receipt above-mentioned was not taken any notice of: No one who may have made the allegation that this money was paid as part was named or examined by the R. C. (G) but he held the allotment in favor of the petitioners to be suspicious and directed the premises to be sealed within three days during which the petitioners were required to remove their property and the shop was ordered to be advertised for allotment. The petitioner too were allowed to apply and they did so. Mr. Amir Ahmad Khan however, made a representation to the Central Government against the order of the R. C. (G) and the Central Government wrote to the R, C. (G) that the petitioners had complained that the charges on account of which their allotment was cancelled had not been properly considered or proved. It was added in the letter mentioned above, No. Dy. -MRI dated IST April 1954, that the petitioner was a bona fide refugee who had suffered considerable loss in India for which he had not been compensated, that he had invested a substantial amount of money in the business he was carrying on in No. 72, The Mall Lahore, that his case should be reconsidered, and it should be made sure that a settled refugee is not unsettled on mere suspicion. In another letter dated 12th April 1954, the Central Government asked the Rehabilitation Commissioner to submit a full report relating to the facts of this case. On 2nd June 1954 the R. C. (G) wrote to the Central Government and undertook to submit the report called for but somehow forgot to do so and oh 13th July 1954 allotted the shop in question to the respondents Messes. Nazi Baths Sons, without any reference to the Central Government, and ordered that the petitioners should be ejected and all applicants for allotment should be informed that the shop had been allotted to the, respondents. On 17th July 1954 the Central Government sent a reminder to the R. C. (G) asking for the report promised in his letter dated 2nd June 1954. On the same day, 1e. 17th July 1954, the petitioners filed a petition for revision against the order of the R. C. (G) in my Court and prayed for postponement of ejectment proceedings. This prayer was granted, and the case was fixed for hearing on 29th July 1954. On 27th July 1954 the Central Government sent an express telegram asking me to postpone the hearing of the case because Mr. Amir Ahmad Khan had asked for time to collect evidence which he wished to produce before me. A copy of the representation made by him was sent to me with the telegram and postponed the case to enable the petitioners to produce the evidence. They have produced copies of the above-mentioned letters from the Central Government. They were sent to me by the Musty of Refugees and Rehabilitation at the request of the petitioner because the file of the case in the R. C. (G.s) Office was either destroyed or stolen. Messes. Nazi Baths Sons, the new allottees, made an application that they should be made a party to this case and I allowed that by order dated 20th October 1954. The case for the petitioners was argued by Mr. Aqua Ali Khan who emphasized that there was no evidence whatsoever that the petitioners had paid any part or bribe to the previous allottees, that the sum of Rs. 7,500 paid by them was the price of the goods purchased as shown in the list and the receipt marked A and B, that the order for the petitioner’s ejectment from shop No. 72 was wholly unwarranted and based upon no evidence, that it was highly undesirable to unsettle a settled refugee on mere suspicion as posted out by the Central Government, that the petitioners had applied for allotment as directed by the R. C. (G)and R. C. (G’s) Order, dated 13th July 1954, allotting the shop to Messes Nazi Baths Sons was unjust and showed no reason why preference was given to Nazi Baths Sons over the petitioners who were in lawful possession of the shop by order of the D. R. C. dated 21st September 1953. It was further urged that the petitioners had spent about Rs. 10,000 on repairing the shop and had invested a large sum of money in buying the'stock, furniture and fittings of the old allottees and a great deal of new stock. They were already ruined by the losses suffered in India and if the business now built up by them is allowed to be ruled by the Rehabilitation Department, which was set up to help the refugees, there would be no hope of the petitioners’ survival. The points urged by the counsel for the respondents are (1) that the partnership between Aftab Lodi and Mamdani was never recognized by the Rehabilitation Authority, (2) that the petitioners did not say in their application for allotment dated 12th September 1953 that they had agreed to buy the stock of the previous allottees, though several days before this application the Rehabilitation Authority had been informed by the respondents that Hamadan was asking for a part. Neither post has any force or relevancy. Whether the partnership between Aftab Lodi and Mamdani was recognized by the Rehabilitation Authority or not has any bearing on the allotment in favor of the petitioners made by the Rehabilitation Authority on 21st September 1953 and the fact that the Rehabilitation Authority had been informed that Mamdani was asking for a part merely shows that they had been warned before the allotment in favor of the petitioners. It is interesting to note that the letter dated 25th August 1953, marked C, in which the information about the part was given by the respondents to the Rehabilitation Commissioner (General) does not say that the. petitioners had offered any part to Aftab Lodi or Hamadan. On the contrary, it is said that the respondents had offered Mamdani Rs. 9,000 as part, but he was not prepared to take anything less than Rs. 15,000. Their offer of Rs. 9,000 as part to the previous allottees was relied upon by the respondents to show the extent of their need for this shop, and it was prayed that the shop should be immediately allotted to them. This letter does not show any malpractice on the part of the petitioners though it does on the part of the respondents. It was not necessary for the petitioners to state in their application for allotment that they had agreed to buy the stock MN trade of the previous allottees. This was a matter between them and the previous allottees and depended upon the shop being allotted to the petitioners. When it was allotted to them, they purchased the goods belonging to the previous allottees. This was a perfectly legal contract and there was nothing improper about it. There had been a good deal of confused thinking regarding what is popularly called part. It can be described as a consideration paid by a person to an allottee for giving the allotted property, wholly or partially, to the person making the payment. The payment of such consideration is not recognized as AF ground for allotment by the Rehabilitation Authority and claim to! possession based on such payment is not accepted. The allottees of evacuee property do not acquire any right to allot that property to others and as soon as the allotment relating to a property comes to an end, either by the efflux of time or abandonment, the property becomes subject to a fresh allotment by the Rehabilitation Authority. In this case the petitioners do not claim possession of the shop because they have paid any part to the previous allottees ; nor because they have purchased the stock-in-trade of the previous allottees. There is no evidence whatsoever that the petitioners had paid any part to the! previous allottees, and the purchase of stock and goods was a perfectly legal transaction. Even if the petitioners had paid part it would have; made no difference because their claim to possession is not based on the willingness of the previous allottees to surrender possession in the! Favor but upon a valid order of allotment passed on 21st September! 1953, by the Rehabilitation Authority. There is no allegation nor proof that the Rehabilitation Authority had received any part for making the allotment. The Rehabilitation Commissioner (General) has stated in his order dated Sth November 1953 that there were instructions that shops on The Mall should not be allotted without the previous approval of the Rehabilitation Commissioner. He, therefore, cancelled the allotment and ordered fresh applications to be invited. The petitioners applied again in obedience to this order and so did some others but without showing any reason why preference was given to the respondents, over the other applicants the shop was allotted to the respondents. Only the petitioners have come up in revision which shows that the other applicants are not interested in the shop and, in any case, the time within which they could have applied for revision has expired and the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner (General) has become final against them. I he choose, therefore, lies between the petitioners and the respondents. Under section 13-A subsection Rehabilitation Ordinance, a revision petition against the order of a Rehabilitation Commissioner can be disposed of by the Central Government or by such officer as it may apport from time to time in this behalf: The Central Government has appointed the Custodian of Evacuee Property to dispose of such petitions. The power to dispose of implies the power to make allotment MN favor of any of the parties to the petition. It is well established law that when once the jurisdiction to revise is established there is no imitation imposed on the power of the revising! Court regarding the mode of disposal. The revising Court may finally dispose of the case itself or pass any other order which may satisfy the! ends of justice. Several authorities on this post are given in Note 16 of Chita ley’s. Commentaries on the Civil Procedure Code under section 115 which relates to the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court. In Lab Singh v. Aim Din (Civil Revision No. 792 of 1930), published in the appellate Court had acted without jurisdiction and Ten Hand, J. held that in revision there were three courses open to him: (1) to refuse to interfere info injustice had been done, (2) to set aside the judgment and return the appeal for presentation to the proper Court, and (3) to go through the record and decide the case himself. He found they,t Justice had been done in that case and did not consider (1) AI R 1931 LAH. P. 748. it proper to remand the case as it meant subjecting the parties to further expenses of litigation the lower courts and possibly again in the High Court. He, therefore, went through the case and decided it himself: I too, after gong through the record and hearing the counsel for both sides, find that injustice has been done to the petitioners in this case, and it will not be fair to send the case back to the Rehabilitation Commissioner for advertising the shop once again and inviting fresh applications for allotment. The petitioners are refugees and entitled to the allotment of this shop. They have invested a large sum of money in the business that they are carrying on here and there is no reason for ejecting them. I, therefore, cancel the allotment in favor of the respondents and order that the petitioners shall remain in peaceful possession of this shop so long as they abide by the terms of allotment in their favor. If the respondents are also refugees and in need of shop they should apply to the Rehabilitation Authority whose duty it is to bring about the orderly settlement of refugees. The petition for revision is accepted. A. H Petition acc épée d WWW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 5 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-02-03): A. M. Jan (Custodian).-This is a petition under section 13-A of the Rehabilitation Ordinance (XIX of 1948) against an order allotting shop No. 72 situated on The Mall Lahore in favor of Messes Nazi Baths Sons of 26 Mc Load Road Lahore. The facts of the case are that on 30th December 1947, this shop was allotted to one Aftab Lodi. He later on took a partner named Mamdani, but it appears that their business did not prosper and on 12th September 1953 they made an application to the D. R. C. Lahore that they were willing to surrender the allotment of this shop in favor of Amir Ahmad Khan, one of the partners of Syed Thais Ltd. who was stated in the petition to be a refugee from Meerut. On the same day ZAM Ahmad Khan made an application to the D. R. C. Lahore on behalf of his firm, Syed Thais Ltd. showing that they were very well off in Meerut put had fallen on evil days owing to Partition. They added that Mr. Aftab Lodi and Mr. Mamdani, Proprietors of the International Trading Corporation, were willing to surrender possession of the shop to the petitioners and prayed that the shop may be allotted to them. The D. R. C. asked for a report from the R. O. Civil Lines who reported that Mr. Aftab Lodi and his partner Mr. Mamdani said that hey had lost about thirty thousand rupees in their business and were unable to carry on anymore. They were, therefore, prepared to surrender possession of the shop in favor of Syed Thais Ltd. who were financially sound and recommended for the allotment of the shop. The D. R. C. Lahore, vide his order dated 21st September 1953, accepted the recommendation and allotted the shop to Syed Thais Ltd. On the next day Syed Thais Ltd. bought over the furniture, fittings and stock belonging to the International Trading Corporation, entered in the list marked A, for Rs. 7,500 as shown in receipt marked B. After about a month the petitioners received a letter from the Rehabilitation Officer, Civil Lines, directing them to appear before the Rehabilitation Commissioner (General) on 26th October 1953 in connection with this shop. Mr. Amir Ahmad Khan appeared on behalf of Syed Thais in the Court of the Rehabilitation Commissioner on 26th October 1953, but the case was adjourned to 5th November 1953 When the Rehabilitation Commissioner cancelled the allotment in favor of the petitioners of the ground that it had been alleged that Mr. Amir. Ahmad Khan had got this shop by paying part, Mr. ZAM Ahmad Khan’s contention that he had paid Rs. 7,500 for the goods purchased by him as shown MN the list and the receipt above-mentioned was not taken any notice of: No one who may have made the allegation that this money was paid as part was named or examined by the R. C. (G) but he held the allotment in favor of the petitioners to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 5 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-02-03): as shown MN the list and the receipt above-mentioned was not taken any notice of: No one who may have made the allegation that this money was paid as part was named or examined by the R. C. (G) but he held the allotment in favor of the petitioners to be suspicious and directed the premises to be sealed within three days during which the petitioners were required to remove their property and the shop was ordered to be advertised for allotment. The petitioner too were allowed to apply and they did so. Mr. Amir Ahmad Khan however, made a representation to the Central Government against the order of the R. C. (G) and the Central Government wrote to the R, C. (G) that the petitioners had complained that the charges on account of which their allotment was cancelled had not been properly considered or proved. It was added in the letter mentioned above, No. Dy. -MRI dated IST April 1954, that the petitioner was a bona fide refugee who had suffered considerable loss in India for which he had not been compensated, that he had invested a substantial amount of money in the business he was carrying on in No. 72, The Mall Lahore, that his case should be reconsidered, and it should be made sure that a settled refugee is not unsettled on mere suspicion. In another letter dated 12th April 1954, the Central Government asked the Rehabilitation Commissioner to submit a full report relating to the facts of this case. On 2nd June 1954 the R. C. (G) wrote to the Central Government and undertook to submit the report called for but somehow forgot to do so and oh 13th July 1954 allotted the shop in question to the respondents Messes. Nazi Baths Sons, without any reference to the Central Government, and ordered that the petitioners should be ejected and all applicants for allotment should be informed that the shop had been allotted to the, respondents. On 17th July 1954 the Central Government sent a reminder to the R. C. (G) asking for the report promised in his letter dated 2nd June 1954. On the same day, 1e. 17th July 1954, the petitioners filed a petition for revision against the order of the R. C. (G) in my Court and prayed for postponement of ejectment proceedings. This prayer was granted, and the case was fixed for hearing on 29th July 1954. On 27th July 1954 the Central Government sent an express telegram asking me to postpone the hearing of the case because Mr. Amir Ahmad Khan had asked for time to collect evidence which he wished to produce before me. A copy of the representation made by him was sent to me with the telegram and postponed the case to enable the petitioners to produce the evidence. They have produced copies of the above-mentioned letters from the Central Government. They were sent to me by the Musty of Refugees and Rehabilitation at the request of the petitioner

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 5 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-02-03): him was sent to me with the telegram and postponed the case to enable the petitioners to produce the evidence. They have produced copies of the above-mentioned letters from the Central Government. They were sent to me by the Musty of Refugees and Rehabilitation at the request of the petitioner because the file of the case in the R. C. (G.s) Office was either destroyed or stolen. Messes. Nazi Baths Sons, the new allottees, made an application that they should be made a party to this case and I allowed that by order dated 20th October 1954. The case for the petitioners was argued by Mr. Aqua Ali Khan who emphasized that there was no evidence whatsoever that the petitioners had paid any part or bribe to the previous allottees, that the sum of Rs. 7,500 paid by them was the price of the goods purchased as shown in the list and the receipt marked A and B, that the order for the petitioner’s ejectment from shop No. 72 was wholly unwarranted and based upon no evidence, that it was highly undesirable to unsettle a settled refugee on mere suspicion as posted out by the Central Government, that the petitioners had applied for allotment as directed by the R. C. (G)and R. C. (G’s) Order, dated 13th July 1954, allotting the shop to Messes Nazi Baths Sons was unjust and showed no reason why preference was given to Nazi Baths Sons over the petitioners who were in lawful possession of the shop by order of the D. R. C. dated 21st September 1953. It was further urged that the petitioners had spent about Rs. 10,000 on repairing the shop and had invested a large sum of money in buying the'stock, furniture and fittings of the old allottees and a great deal of new stock. They were already ruined by the losses suffered in India and if the business now built up by them is allowed to be ruled by the Rehabilitation Department, which was set up to help the refugees, there would be no hope of the petitioners’ survival. The points urged by the counsel for the respondents are (1) that the partnership between Aftab Lodi and Mamdani was never recognized by the Rehabilitation Authority, (2) that the petitioners did not say in their application for allotment dated 12th September 1953 that they had agreed to buy the stock of the previous allottees, though several days before this application the Rehabilitation Authority had been informed by the respondents that Hamadan was asking for a part. Neither post has any force or relevancy. Whether the partnership between Aftab Lodi and Mamdani was recognized by the Rehabilitation Authority or not has any bearing on the allotment in favor of the petitioners made by the Rehabilitation Authority on 21st September 1953 and the fact that the Rehabilitation Authority had been informed that Mamdani was asking for a part merely shows that they had been warned before the allotment in favor of the petitioners.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 5 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-02-03): bearing on the allotment in favor of the petitioners made by the Rehabilitation Authority on 21st September 1953 and the fact that the Rehabilitation Authority had been informed that Mamdani was asking for a part merely shows that they had been warned before the allotment in favor of the petitioners. It is interesting to note that the letter dated 25th August 1953, marked C, in which the information about the part was given by the respondents to the Rehabilitation Commissioner (General) does not say that the. petitioners had offered any part to Aftab Lodi or Hamadan. On the contrary, it is said that the respondents had offered Mamdani Rs. 9,000 as part, but he was not prepared to take anything less than Rs. 15,000. Their offer of Rs. 9,000 as part to the previous allottees was relied upon by the respondents to show the extent of their need for this shop, and it was prayed that the shop should be immediately allotted to them. This letter does not show any malpractice on the part of the petitioners though it does on the part of the respondents. It was not necessary for the petitioners to state in their application for allotment that they had agreed to buy the stock MN trade of the previous allottees. This was a matter between them and the previous allottees and depended upon the shop being allotted to the petitioners. When it was allotted to them, they purchased the goods belonging to the previous allottees. This was a perfectly legal contract and there was nothing improper about it. There had been a good deal of confused thinking regarding what is popularly called part. It can be described as a consideration paid by a person to an allottee for giving the allotted property, wholly or partially, to the person making the payment. The payment of such consideration is not recognized as AF ground for allotment by the Rehabilitation Authority and claim to! possession based on such payment is not accepted. The allottees of evacuee property do not acquire any right to allot that property to others and as soon as the allotment relating to a property comes to an end, either by the efflux of time or abandonment, the property becomes subject to a fresh allotment by the Rehabilitation Authority. In this case the petitioners do not claim possession of the shop because they have paid any part to the previous allottees ; nor because they have purchased the stock-in-trade of the previous allottees. There is no evidence whatsoever that the petitioners had paid any part to the! previous allottees, and the purchase of stock and goods was a perfectly legal transaction. Even if the petitioners had paid part it would have; made no difference because their claim to possession is not based on the willingness of the previous allottees to surrender possession in the! Favor but upon a valid order of allotment passed on 21st September! 1953, by the Rehabilitation Authority. There is no allegation nor

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 5 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-02-03): paid part it would have; made no difference because their claim to possession is not based on the willingness of the previous allottees to surrender possession in the! Favor but upon a valid order of allotment passed on 21st September! 1953, by the Rehabilitation Authority. There is no allegation nor proof that the Rehabilitation Authority had received any part for making the allotment. The Rehabilitation Commissioner (General) has stated in his order dated Sth November 1953 that there were instructions that shops on The Mall should not be allotted without the previous approval of the Rehabilitation Commissioner. He, therefore, cancelled the allotment and ordered fresh applications to be invited. The petitioners applied again in obedience to this order and so did some others but without showing any reason why preference was given to the respondents, over the other applicants the shop was allotted to the respondents. Only the petitioners have come up in revision which shows that the other applicants are not interested in the shop and, in any case, the time within which they could have applied for revision has expired and the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner (General) has become final against them. I he choose, therefore, lies between the petitioners and the respondents. Under section 13-A subsection Rehabilitation Ordinance, a revision petition against the order of a Rehabilitation Commissioner can be disposed of by the Central Government or by such officer as it may apport from time to time in this behalf: The Central Government has appointed the Custodian of Evacuee Property to dispose of such petitions. The power to dispose of implies the power to make allotment MN favor of any of the parties to the petition. It is well established law that when once the jurisdiction to revise is established there is no imitation imposed on the power of the revising! Court regarding the mode of disposal. The revising Court may finally dispose of the case itself or pass any other order which may satisfy the! ends of justice. Several authorities on this post are given in Note 16 of Chita ley’s. Commentaries on the Civil Procedure Code under section 115 which relates to the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court. In Lab Singh v. Aim Din (Civil Revision No. 792 of 1930), published in the appellate Court had acted without jurisdiction and Ten Hand, J. held that in revision there were three courses open to him: (1) to refuse to interfere info injustice had been done, (2) to set aside the judgment and return the appeal for presentation to the proper Court, and (3) to go through the record and decide the case himself. He found they,t Justice had been done in that case and did not consider (1) AI R 1931 LAH. P. 748. it proper to remand the case as it meant subjecting the parties to further expenses of litigation the lower courts and possibly again in the High Court. He, therefore, went through the case and decided it himself: I too,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1955 PLD 5?
Answer: From case 1955 PLD 5 (CUSTODIAN (PB.), 1955-02-03): and did not consider (1) AI R 1931 LAH. P. 748. it proper to remand the case as it meant subjecting the parties to further expenses of litigation the lower courts and possibly again in the High Court. He, therefore, went through the case and decided it himself: I too, after gong through the record and hearing the counsel for both sides, find that injustice has been done to the petitioners in this case, and it will not be fair to send the case back to the Rehabilitation Commissioner for advertising the shop once again and inviting fresh applications for allotment. The petitioners are refugees and entitled to the allotment of this shop. They have invested a large sum of money in the business that they are carrying on here and there is no reason for ejecting them. I, therefore, cancel the allotment in favor of the respondents and order that the petitioners shall remain in peaceful possession of this shop so long as they abide by the terms of allotment in their favor. If the respondents are also refugees and in need of shop they should apply to the Rehabilitation Authority whose duty it is to bring about the orderly settlement of refugees. The petition for revision is accepted. A. H Petition acc épée d WWW.

Question: What is case 1999 PLD 1026 about?
Answer: Case 1999 PLD 1026 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1999-06-23. The case involved FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS SHAUKAT ALI MIAN AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include FOREIGN EXCHANGE (TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS) ACT (IV OF 1998) - S.2 PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REIFORMS ACT (XII OF 1992) - S. (4) PROTECTION OF - ECONOMIC REFORMS - ACT (XII OF 1992) -S. (4) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1999/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1999_1026.html 1/37 28/10/2025, 00:34 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1999/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1999_1026.htmI PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REFORMS ACT (XII OF 1992) - S.5(4) BANKING COMPANIES ORDINANCE (LVII OF 1962) - SS.25 AND 41 BANKING COMPANIES ORDINANCE (LVII OF 1962) - S. 25 NOTIFICATION-- ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN ACT (XXXII OF 1956) - S. CONSTITUTIONORPAKISTAN. (1973) - ART: 233(1) BANKING COMPANIES ORDINANCE (LVII OF 1962) - S. 25 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 199, 233(1) AND CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE,4 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 23, AND 233(L) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES AND 2A CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 25 FOREIGN EXCHANGE (TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS) ACT (IV OF 1998) - S. CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 141 FOREIGN EXCHANGE (TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS) ACT (IV OF 1998) - S. PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REFORMS ACT (XII OF 1992) - SS.(5)4) AND 10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ART.141 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REFORMS ACT (XII BF-1.992) - SS. 5(4) AND 10 PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REFORMS ACT (XII BF, 1992), PREAMBLE CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 9- STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN CIRCULAR NO-12 OF 1973. The case was heard by ‘AJMAL MIAN, C.J. SAIDUZZAMAN SIDDIQUI. IRSHAD HASAN KHAN, RAJA AFRASIAB KHAN,' MUHAMAMD BASHIR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: In case 1999 PLD 1026, the court applied the following statutes: FOREIGN EXCHANGE (TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS) ACT (IV OF 1998) - S.2 PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REIFORMS ACT (XII OF 1992) - S. (4) PROTECTION OF - ECONOMIC REFORMS - ACT (XII OF 1992) -S. (4) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1999/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1999_1026.html 1/37 28/10/2025, 00:34 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1999/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1999_1026.htmI PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REFORMS ACT (XII OF 1992) - S.5(4) BANKING COMPANIES ORDINANCE (LVII OF 1962) - SS.25 AND 41 BANKING COMPANIES ORDINANCE (LVII OF 1962) - S. 25 NOTIFICATION-- ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN ACT (XXXII OF 1956) - S. CONSTITUTIONORPAKISTAN. (1973) - ART: 233(1) BANKING COMPANIES ORDINANCE (LVII OF 1962) - S. 25 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 199, 233(1) AND CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE,4 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 23, AND 233(L) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES AND 2A CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 25 FOREIGN EXCHANGE (TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS) ACT (IV OF 1998) - S. CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 141 FOREIGN EXCHANGE (TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS) ACT (IV OF 1998) - S. PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REFORMS ACT (XII OF 1992) - SS.(5)4) AND 10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ART.141 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REFORMS ACT (XII BF-1.992) - SS. 5(4) AND 10 PROTECTION OF ECONOMIC REFORMS ACT (XII BF, 1992), PREAMBLE CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 9- STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN CIRCULAR NO-12 OF 1973. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1999-06-23.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1999 PLD 1026 were: CH. MUHAMMAD FAROBQ, ATTOFNEY-GENERAL, SHER ZAMAN KHAN, DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND CH.AKHTAR. ALI, ADVOCATE-ON- RECORD FOR. APPELLANTS (IN ALL EXCEPT C.P! NO. 26 OF 1%98).DR. FAROOQ HASSAN, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT, FOR PETITIONER (IN C-P.; NO. 26 OF 1998). RV'; —V-j°*.- 7}. PETITIONER IN PERSON (IN C. A. NO. NIL OF 1999).. The judges presiding were: ‘AJMAL MIAN, C.J. SAIDUZZAMAN SIDDIQUI. IRSHAD HASAN KHAN, RAJA AFRASIAB KHAN,' MUHAMAMD BASHIR.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: The parties in case 1999 PLD 1026 were: FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS SHAUKAT ALI MIAN AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1999 PLD 1026.
Answer: AJMAL MIAN, C.J.-By the following short order dated 18-6-1999, we have disposed of the above appeal, two Constitution petitions and petitions. for leave to appeal:. ORDER For the reasons to be recorded later, the above appeal, petitions for leave to appeal and, Constitution petitions are disposed of, as under: - Reforms Act, 1992 (Act XII of 1992) to the effect that "The State Bank of Pakistan or. other banks shallot impose any restrictions' oh deposits "O-.FYI.> ’:n arid withdrawals from the foreign Currency accounts and restrictions’, J if arty; shall stand withdrawn forthwith", the successive- Governments WW. - improperly utilized the’ foreign: exchange deposits of the Foreign Currency Account holders.in breach of the above solemn commitment 1: and the. State Bank of Pakistan also failed to perform its statutory duty -to protect the merest of the Foreign Currency Account- holders, thereby creating a ’situation where at present it has.' become practically impossible’ to honor the above solemn undertaking given by the ’ Legislature. v. r'"'- VRS"? (11) Section 2 of the Foreign Exchange. (Temporary Restrictions) Act, 1998 (Act IV of 1998) (hereinafter referred to as. the Act) is intra vires of the ' / Constitution, subject to the declaration “that the same does not confer y power on the Federation or on the State Bank of Pakistan to compel Foreign Currency Account-holders to convert their foreign’ exchange. holdings to PAK Rupees at the officially notified rate of exchange, or J. to compel the said account-holders to liquidate their above accounts into. Pak Rupees which foreign exchange holdings had been accepted by the respective banks; as security against any: loans’ 'or 'other facilities extended to them. (TTT) That B.P.R.D. Circular No 23, dated 2-7-1998 read with B.P.R.D. Circular. No.29, dated 1,7-1.11.998 to the,extent of providing that "It has, been, decided that encumbrance or,lien of any. Km upon any foreign currency deposit/foreign, currency certificate as a cover against any - direct or indirect lability of the depositors must be removed by July 31, 1998, through set off or direct liquidation of the liabilities so covered by, r V the borrowers”, is illegal and,of no legal consequence, besides the above Circular has been withdrawn by the State Bank of Pakistan as stated by the learned Attorney-General in the Court before, us on ; 9-6-1999 and, therefore, it does not hold the field. ‘. (TV) That, the Foreign. Currency,Account-holders are. entitled to receive ; interest/profits in foreign exchange on their deposits, at rates already agreed as per original arrangements between them and the respective ' banks. ‘ (vi) That in order to restore the confidence of the existing/prospective Foreign Currency Account-holders, the Federation/State Bank of Pakistan shall evolve a scheme within a reasonable period keeping in view the foreign exchange position of the country for gradual removal ' of restrictions on operation of Foreign Currency Accounts imposed by section 2 WW. of the Act, and that, in any case, in every annual budget a ' reasonable provision in this regard shall be made. 2. That pursuant to the direction of the Court, the learned Attorney-General has famished on 17-6-1999 particulars of the Foreign Currency Account holders who had withdrawn foreign currency from their respective accounts during the period from 11-5-1998 to 28-5- 1998. The same will be examined for initiating suitable action in accordance with law, if so watranted." 2. Pursuant to the above short order, we tend to record the supporting reasons. The brief facts are that on 11-5-1998 India exploded three nuclear devices. Then on 13-5-1998, it farther exploded two more nuclear devices. The ; above explosions of nuclear devices generated in Pakistan a lot of anxiety, particularly on account of hostile and aggressive postures of the Indian political leaders which they adopted after the above explosions. There was much debate orally as well as in writing through press articles on the question, whether Pakistan should also give a befitting reply to India by carrying out its own nuclear device tests. The international leaders including Bill Clinton, President of U.S.A. Tony Beam, Prime Minister of U.K. and Jacques Chirac, President of France, impressed upon the Prime Munster of Pakistan not to retaliate India's above’ unwarranted and uncalled-for action of exploding above nuclear devices. However, eventually keeping in -view the interest of the country and the demand of the people of Pakistan, the Government of Pakistan conducted five nuclear device tests on 28- 5-1998. On the evening of the same day, the Proclamation of Emergency under Article 233 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Constitution) was issued. On the same day the President of Pakistan also issued an Order under clause (2) of Article 233 of the Constitution suspending all the Fundamental Rights. The above Proclamation of Emergency and the Order of suspension of Fundamental Rights were assailed before this Court through direct Constitution Petitions under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, which culminated in the judgment rendered on 13-10-1998 inter alia in the case of Vardar Farooq Ahmad Khan [ Safari and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others PLD 1999 SC 57, whereby it was held that the issuance of Proclamation under clause (1) of Article 232 of the Constitution was valid, but the order of suspending the Fundamental Rights under clause of Article 233 was not valid and warranted under the Constitution/law. WW. It may be observed that on the above same day (i.e. 28-5- 1998) the Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions),Ordinance, 1998 was promulgated. Section 2 thereof provided as follows:, /-'-\"2;\Nptwithstaridin\[anything contained.’: in the Protection", of ™Ajax Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (XII of 1992) but subject to section 3 it. is hereby provided that during the period in which a Proclamation of ] - Emergency under Article 232 of the :Constitution of the'-[Islamic’, Republic of. Palcistans in force, the various protections contained 1h the - said Act or in any other law for the time being in force, or MN any ‘ agreement or contract. for or in relation to foreign-exchange, or the. 1; tight to bring, hold,1 sell, withdraw, transfer, pay or take out, foreign exchange/shall remain suspended. : ; The Federal'Government. may buy.; rules make provision for regulating, y dealings and payment in foreign exchange and such rules may, without ; ’, prejudice to the generality of the foregoing empower, the State. Bank of. Pakistan to. grant; permission to make or jiyeaymehts.- in- foreign. exchange,; or to permit, the conversion Of foreign exchange into hi pees, '. either 'on a'case" to case. basis or on the basis of classification of. V. various Typepad categories. ",,,(2) theitframing;of.rules, under, _'romances, prepayments- in. Foreign exchange;,shall be made,-with the. ' priorpermissior.oftheStateBa of Pakistan/1 ‘////: H;P. 3. The above Ordinance was followed by F.E/Circular No/12 dated. 29-5-1998, which] prohibited the opening of WW. né.foreign currency accounts-byte resident Pakistrnatiphals, resident, firms and companies including foreign’ controlled companies* functioning in Pakistan‘ It also prohibited withdrawalsrfrom the-existing foreign currency-accounts except the foreign currency accounts maintained by the diplomatic missions: accredited to Pakistan’,' their non-resident employees all international organizations in ' Pakistani namely; IMF;: IBRD,' ADB and their non-resident employees. However. it permitted the/foreign currency account holders to withdraw their foreign" currency deposit in Pakistani Rupee if they so- desired at the rate of ', Rs.46 per/U.S. Dollar The same option was also given to the holders of ’ Foreign Exchange Bearer Certificates/US Dollar, Bearer Certificates and Foreign. Currency Bearer Certificates;-, The above F.;E. Circular: Nopl2 was followed by Circular No;17 dated :. 6-6-1998 modifying the above JFE Circular No.12 to the extent mentioned ! Their;and providing for a number of new items: It -also provided for the withdrawal from the foreign currency accounts by foreign nationals and in any/ other, hardship case.; It may be pertinent, to reproduce para. 7. thereof, which. reads as follows: -. y.1.’ Applications in. respect. of withdrawals by foreign. Nationals, as. mentioned in paragraph 3, and any other hardship case not covered by ’ this circular, may be referred by the Authorized Dealer maimntammg the account, or by r the Head Office/Principal Office in Pakistan to the Additional Director, Foreign Exchange Department, State Bank of' Pakistan, Central Directorate, Karachi (Fax No.2422083)." 4. The State Bank of Pakistan inter alia also issued BPRD Circular No.23 dated 2-7-1998 providing as under: "BPRD CIRCULAR NO.23 2nd July, 1998 All Banks/NBF Is Dear SSR. SELECTIVE CREDIT CONTROL Please refer to section A(III)2 of BCD Circular No.5 dated the 5th July, 1987. read with section (2) of BCD Circular Letter No. -00-92 dated the 4th June, 1992 and Rule 10(m) of Rules of Business for NBF Is regarding margin requirement prescribed for advances against bank deposits and - deposit certificates. It has been decided that encumbrance or lien of any kind upon any foreign currency '. deposit/foreign currency certificate as a cover against any direct or direct ability of the depositors must be removed by July 31, 1998, through set off or direct liquidation of the abilities so covered by the borrowers. 2. No new encumbrance or lien should thereafter, be created against foreign currency deposits/certificates held on May 28, 1998. 3. All banks/NBF Is are further directed to give a compliance report to the State Bank within 3 days of the expiry of the deadline. ”’ It may also be stated that FE Circular No.31 was also issued by the State Bank of Pakistan on the above date Le. 2-7-1998 inter alia providing that all immunities in relation’ to the foreign exchange referred to in para. of Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions) Ordinance, 1998 stand restored for an indefinite period both for old and new foreign currency accounts as well as for the amounts that have been or will be converted into rupees. It was also stated therein that the Government was in the process of providing the necessary legal cover to this effect. It also provided that the foreign currency deposits as on 28-5-1998 could continue to be converted in rupees at the official exchange rate, but restrictions on their withdrawal in foreign exchange would continue and that amounts of incremental deposits after 1-7-1998 could be withdrawn in foreign exchange, although the Prime Minister has appealed to all such depositors to, keep, even the incremental amount in their accounts-as. far as-possible.' It may further be stated that para.3 of the above Circular No.3 1. reiterated what was provided in above Circular No.23f, The above para. Reels as follows: ‘ ; "3. Borrowing facilities against ;the.security of balances held in the foreign currency accounts/certificates as on 30-,6r1998 has -been :' withdrawn. The banks/NBF Is will meet this requirement by July 31,1998. A:separate circuit is being issued the subject." WW. It may be observed that Circular No.29 dated 17-11 -1998 extended the period from 317-1998 mentioned in Circular No.23 to 30-11-1998 for compliance with the direction contained in the latter circular quoted. hereinabove.'. J >. 5. It seems that 76. Writ Petitions were. Filed ' Jr ‘the Lahore High Court, ' assailing the validity of Circular No.i23,; which were'dismissed in liming by a learned Single Judge of the above High Court through his order, dated v 30-7-1998. It Was held that the above circular did not in any manner violate any: provision, of the Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (heremafterPreferred to as Act XII Of 1992) article 2A:of the Constitution. \ \ r; It farther’ seems that against the above order of the learned Single Judge, 68 Intra-Court Appeals were filed, namely,' I.C. As. Nos-,,,,, 708/98v ;,,,,,, -. ",,,,, -,,,,,-,.,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,, 925/,98, ',,,,,,,, 724'/98,.,.,,,, ;, and. : V23":''9./ :.’t also appears that while the above Intra-Court Appeals'were pending some more Writ Petitions} were filed, namely, Nos’.,',,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.,,,, 1757.', ', ",-,,,,,:,r,,,,,,,, and. r">V':: / The above. Intra-Cpurt Appeals and, the Writ Petitions were, heard. Together by.-a Full Bench of the Lahore High Court comprising. Mian, Allah.;-Nawab, Amir Adam. [Dian and. Karamat’ Nazi,BhandariJJ.y’. 6. The above Intra-Court Appeals and the Writ Petitions were allowed by a judgment dated 27-1-1999. Main Allah Nawab, J. who rendered the leading opinion granted the following reliefs: Declaration is granted that section 2 of Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions) Act (IV of 1998) is ultra vires of Article and Article 2A of the Constitution being repugnant to equality protection-clause as well as on account of conferment of naked, arbitrary, unstructured power on - the functionaries of the State Bank. This section so is declared as of no lawful consequences. (2) Declaration is granted to the effect that Circular No.23 is confiscatory in nature and 1s violative of equality protection clause and that the same is so repugnant to Article and Article 2A of the Constitution. The State Bank of Pakistan however, will be well within its right to direct the lending institutions to call for fresh securities from borrowers if they find that the securities/collaterals of their foreign currency deposits as furnished by the petitioners/appellants are not satisfactory or contrary to its credit policy. (3) The Circular No.23 1s, so, declared contrary to law to the extent of directing the lending institutions to liquidate the foreign currency. deposits of borrowers/petitioners/appellants at the rate of 46 rupees for a dollar and. then get fresh securities, ifs needed. (4) Having regard to economic indicators as given in the report of State Bank and having regard to suggestion of Mr. Saved Shankar/one of the petitioners; and having not been objected by any one of appellants/petitioners we are persuaded to direct State Bank to treat the foreign currency account held by petitioners on 23rd May, 1998 under section of Protection of Economic Reforms Act (XII of 1992) as fixed account for a period of 3 years and frame rules with regard to that type of fixed deposits/permitting account-holders to withdraw any amount. SO permitted, from these accounts to be utilised for their necessary expenses to be incurred by account holders on the education of their issues outside the country on medical expenditures and so on and so forth. The State Bank shall frame rules in line with the policy of such fixed accounts within a period of three weeks commencing from this order so as to clear the mist of uncertainty. (5) We are also inclined to direct the Federal Government and to get the. Act XII of 1992 so amended by the Federal Legislature that it may eliminate the two classes of economy as permitted by it and subject foreign, currency accounts to payment of income-tax, wealth tax and. compulsory deduction of Zakat and so as to eliminate the manipulative ' power of dollars/Sterling pounds or any other foreign currency over. ' rupees."’ It may be mentioned that Kara mat Nazi Bhandari, J.' agreed with; Main Allah Nawab, J. as to the grant of reliefs mentioned in above quoted paras. to 3, but dissented from as regards the reliefs mentioned in above quoted paras. and 5. The learned third Judge, namely, Amir Adam Khan, J. agreed with the option of Kara mat Nazi Bhandari, J. In other words, the three learned Judges of the Full Bench; concurred with the grant of the above reliefs mentioned in paras. 1; to 3, whereas the majority 2:1 declined to grant the relief mentioned in above quoted paras.14 and 5. :> A 7. It seems that the Federation of Pakistan filed Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.155-L of 1999, which has. Been how converted into Civil Appeal. No.3.19 of 1999. Along with : the. CPL Av Civil Miscellaneous Application NO.1.13-L of 1999 for suspension of the operation of the impugned judgment of the Full Bench was also filed, whereon a learned Single Judge passed a Chamber order on 28rl- 19991 staying the. operation of. the impugned judgment. Nasser Ahmad and others filed CPLA No.457 of 1997 (which west converted into Civil Appeal No.320 of 1999) and M/s. All Nasser Company (Pvt.) Ltd. filed CPLA No.458.of J999. (which, was converted into Civil Appeal 10.321' of 1999). The above three petitions Were taken up together,and; leave was granted on 25-3-1999 on the. Points, noticed MN the leave granting order. In the above, leave granting order it was also ordered that the appeals arising from the above. petitions should be listed for regular hearing before the summer'vacation of the year. It may be stated that in addition to the'.above CPLA No. I5j5-L/99 in which leave Was granted, the Federation; also filed above Colas against the same judgment of the Full Bench which were ordered to be listed along with the appeals. It may be mentioned'that prior to the filing of above Colas, the Association of Foreign Currency Account Holders.in Pakistan, 19 Belgrade. Road,'London through its President [Vfasudul Hassan had filed Constitution Petition No.26 of 1998 oil 17-9-1998 under Article, 184(3).of the Constitution, directly in this "Court assailing the aforesaid Ordinance and Circular. No.12. ' It may, further be stated that one Said Muriel HUD Chowdhury also presented a Constitution Petition under Article 184(3) of, the Constitution directly in this Court on 24- 3-1999, which was returned to him on’the ground that it was not eritertainable'as it related to dividual grievance.'. However, upon his. application, a Bench of this Court on 25-3- 1999 ordered that> his above Constitution Petition be heard with the connected cases.in the’ subject: Upon another, application. filed by him, he was allowed to argue the case. It may be stated that aforesaid Civil Appeals Nos. 20 and 321 of 1999 were disposed of by a judgment dated 9-6-1999 at Karachi. 8. It may be posted out that while above Intra-Court Appeals were pending in the Lahore High Court, on 26-9,-1998 the Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions) Act, 1998 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) was gazetted and was made effective retrospectively with effect from 28-5-1998. Section 5 whereof repealed the aforesaid Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions) Ordinance, 1998. Section 2 of the Act provided as under-. "2. Restriction on withdrawal of foreign exchange etc.- Notwithstanding anything contained in the Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (XII of 1992) or m any other law for the time being in force, or in any agreement or contract, it is hereby provided that the right to hold, sell, withdraw, transfer, pay or take out foreign exchange held by any person in Pakistan as on the twenty-eighth day of May, 1998 (the 'specified date’) without the prior permission of the State Bank of Pakistan shall ream suspended: WW. Provided that there shall be no legal restriction on any person converting his foreign exchange held as above into rupees at the officially notified rate of exchange. Explanation.-For the purpose of this section "foreign exchange" means foreign exchange held in a foreign currency account or in such other form as the Federal Government may specify." - 9. In support of the above Civil Appeal and the Petitions for Leave to Appeal, Ch. Muhammad Farooq, learned Attorney-General, has contended as under: (i) That the learned Full Bench was not justified in declaring section 2 of the Act as ultra vires the Articles and 2A of the Constitution being - repugnant to equal protection clause as well as on account of alleged conferment of naked, arbitrary. and unstructured power on the functionaries of the State Bank of Pakistan. (i) That even no exception can be taken to Circular No.23 as the State Bank of Pakistan has the requisite power under section 25 of the Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the-Ordinance of 1962). -. (um) That the Federation m order to restore confidence among the present/prospective foreign currency account holders have introduced Special US Dollar Bond Scheme on 22- 7-1998 of the denomination of $100, $1000, $10000, $100000 for a period of 3 years, 5 years and 7. years from the date’ of their issue providing six monthly payment of profit thereon in foreign currency and by Circular No.8 of 1999 has - abolished multiple exchange rate systemoid adopted floating interbank rate. According to him, the foreign currency account holders are free to. either purchase the ABO VE Foreign Currency Bonds or to convert their;, foreign,currency into. Rupees at the interbank rate obtaining on :.1 dates when they, intend to convert the same. Thus.according to, him now. they cannot have any justifiable grievance. ; ;.10. On the other hand, Mr. Salman. Abram Raja, Advocate, " who has appeared with special permission of this Court, representing the respondents. in, the above appeal and the respondents in some of the above petitions for leave to appeal, urged as under:. ; :.]' (i) That Circular No;23 is beyond the power of the StateBankof Pakistan. t: contained infections <25 and 41 of the Ordinance of 1962 and hence the : same is illegal. VE -1SrL (11) “That the above impugned Circular has been issued for collateral object. ; and not for the purpose envisaged. in.the above. sections. of the Ordinance of 1962 and, therefore/it is colorable exercise of the : powers. ---V. (1) That since the above Circuit-No.123 ! ertvisaigea THB conversion of -.-J.-foreign. Unfancy. Le. US. Dollar at a rate below the market price, the ".‘.I"; “same is'confiscator yin new (iv) That since section 2 OF the Act confers on' the State Bank ungalvanized, unregulated/and arbitrary powers, the. same-is,hit by- the doctrine of. Abfi-verv-delegpn.-, Sh?.-yr'-y HRI'room, 1l. Dr. Farooq Hassan. learned Senior Advocate Supreme Court appearing for the petitioners in,Constitution Petition; No: 26 of 1999; has contended that v since, the? foreign currency account holders' had deposited their foreign exchange in Pakistan.pursuance.to: the in Circular. No. 12 dated ':29-L 1973-;and; subsection;(4) of sections :and section 10 of Act XII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms.’ Act, 1992), section 21 of the Act is ultra vires the Articles 4, 9 and 24 of the Constitution and so also Circular No. 12 of 1998. This father submission was that'Circuit N6.'2~6£1998'.was! also ultra vires of "the power, of the State ’ Bank of Pakistan, besides it as‘.also violative of '‘Article 25' being discriminatory between a‘ foreigner of Pakistani- origin and a. foreigner of foreign origin. J2. JfSatyid Untrue:. Huda Chowdhury. The petitioner. in -the above'. Constitution, Petition. No. Nil of 19,9,9,; has -.urged that. Since,he' had’ deposited Rajput,X'S, a million’.US Dollars, in. Pakistan after disposing:of all his and his Europe;,on. the.basis of.representation. contained, in. above Circular No.12 of 1973 and the above provisions of the Act, it was not open to the Federation of Pakistan to plead that it had no foreign exchange which it could allow to be remitted. His further submission was that even now the high Government functionaries are having foreign trips with' large delegations and spending a lot of foreign exchange. It was also contended by hm that a number of influential persons of the Government and of the public managed to withdraw substantial amounts from their foreign currency accounts during the period commencing from 11-5-1998 to 28-5-199.8, and that even after the imposition of the above restriction under the Act. 13. We had directed the Governor of State Bank of Pakistan on 9-6-1999 to file a statement medicating names of the persons, accounts numbers and the amounts remitted abroad during the period commencing from 11-5-1998 to 28-5-1999 out of the foreign currency accounts. It was also ordered that me. would also like to have a statement indicating whether any permission had been granted to any private persons to remit the foreign exchange abroad after the enforcement of the Act, and if it was granted, it should be stated on what basis and to whom such permission was granted and for what amount. Pursuant to the above order, the learned Attorney-General has submitted on 17-6-1999 a number of folders containing the requisite information. The foreign currency account holders have been divided MTO A, B and C categories. Category 'A' 1s reflected in ten volumes of folders containing 1931 pages, which show the withdrawal from 43 bank branches during the above period. Folder of Category 'B' contains 38 pages and includes the withdrawal by foreign nationals specially Chinese working in Pakistan, foreign news agencies staff and foreign N.G. Os. carrying out rehabilitation work m Afghanistan to whom the State. Bank of Pakistan had granted permission of withdrawals through Circular No. 17. Folder of Category 'C' contains 83 pages and includes those persons (about one thousand) who withdrew US $1,00,000 or more from 37 bank branches. Since the time available to us was not sufficient to examine the above voluminous record as we intended to announce the judgment on the following day 1e. on 18-6-1999, it has been provided in para. of the short order quoted hereinabove that the same will be examined for initiating suitable action in accordance with law, if so warranted. 14. Before touching upon the above contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, we may reproduce the statement reflecting the position of the foreign currency deposits WW. furnished by the learned Attorney-General, which reads as follows:. Foreign Exchange Reserves as. on Friday the 4th June, 1999: $1,744 (M) (2) Debt Service Estimate during net financial year Le. July, $.2,877 (M) 1999 to June 2000. (3) Foreign Currency Deposits, As on 28-5-1998:, ; Institutional v. $1,426;79(M) f Other. Non-residents 2,563.69 (M) Residents 6.967.50 (M) Total:,."V $10,957.98 Sr.7' "As on 30-4-1999: - 9=7""". Institutional y. ’ v/ $1,385.98 (M), Other, Non-residents 1,430.18 (M). Residents J $2.918.92 (M) V'/ V; Total: 1' $5,735.08 (M) 'J/:4r.;'. "-V As on 31-5-1999: y' \ Total:. T V 3s;. $5,144.70 7 - VIH- (Institution Idqjcisits figure ’y:' remains Unchanged),,, -; by: (Break-up in terms of Residents, and Non-Residents not yet. received).; ; WW. / (4) Foreign Currency deposits. v. y under lien as of 30-4-1999 922.83 (M) 7(5)' Special ;USpdll£trBonds Issued'” ; 777 ~'1 r; ’ against F.C. deposits up to "' fly'7 7'"7 Of; ; 4th June, 199?: 7 v;$1,182.10 (M) / Interest paid on Special U.S. Dollar j, Bonds up to 8-6-$1099 1,860,363 (The ' first, sale o bonds took place on13-8-1998);.r, VJ.; (6) Total amounts of Foreign Currency y'yS7, Deposits encased up to 4th June, 1999 :$4,993.90 (M) (7), Figures of Home Remittances since July, 1998:,/y Months. 7 Amount July, 1998.' 133,59 (M) - August, 1998 96.10 (M). September, 1998 71.13 (M) October, 1998/. 78.19 November,1998', 109.20 (M). December, 1998 '. 88.31,’ January, 1999–77.40 (M)'“ February, 1999 67.93 (M). March, 1999 80.74 (M) - April, 1999 72.02 (M). (With effect from 22nd July, 1998, Home Remittances were encased at Composite Rate)." A perusal of the above-quoted statement indicates that on 28-5-1998 the total of foreign currency deposits was US $10957.98 million. WW. However, on 30-4-1999 this was reduced to US $5,735.08 million on account of conversion of foreign currency in PAK Rupee. It may further be noticed that the deposits of US $922.83 million in foreign currency accounts were under lien as of 30-4r1999. It may also be stated that aforesaid special US Dollar Bonds issued against foreign currency deposits up to 4-6-1999 valued US $1,182.10 million, whereas interest paid on Special US $ Bonds up to 8-6-1999 comes to US $1,860,363. The first sale of above bonds took place on 30-8-1998. It may further he stated that foreign currency account holders got US $4,993.90 million converted into PAK Rupee up to 4-6-1999. The figures of home remittance since July, 1998 to April.1999 indicate that a total amount of US $874.61 million was received. 15. Against the above liability, the foreign exchange reserve position of Pakistan during the period from 28-5-1998 to 27-1-1999 was as under: FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVE POSITION Date Amount in Million US $ 28-5-1998 ' 1,282.8 29-6-1998 894.0 30-10-1998 440.2 31-12-1998 1,057.7. 27-1-1999 1,580.2. From the above quoted figures it is evident that the total foreign’ reserve on 28-5-1998 was only US $1282.8 million against the total liability of foreign currency deposit of US $10,957.98 million. In this view of the matter, it was not possible for the Federation of Pakistan or the State Bank of Pakistan to allow the remittance of the above foreign currency deposit of US $10,957.98 million keeping in view the aforesaid meager amount of foreign exchange reserve. It may also be stated that besides the above ability of the Federation in respect of the aforesaid foreign currency deposits it had other abilities in foreign exchange 1.e. payments which were to be made for debt servicing and on import etc. 16. With the above factual background, we may now advert to the question, whether the restrictions imposed by section 2 of the Act were so warranted. We have already reproduced the above: section 2 of the Act. Which provides that notwithstanding anything contained in, Act XII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992) or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any agreement, or - contract, : 1t is-hereby provided that the right to.; hold, sell, withdraw transfer, pay or take out foreign exchange held. by any person in Pakistan as on the >.twenty.*eighth day of May, 1998 ' (the./specified date’) without-'the. prior -permission’ of] the State- Bank. of Pakistan " shall remain suspended. It may also;, be posted out that, the provost.'the:, above section -lays. J. down:that there,shall be no. legal restriction-on any person converting his. Foreign exchange held as;;ABO,ve into, rupees,;at the officially notified rate off exchange.-. Whereas explanation to.the. above proviso provides that. "for'the purpose of this, section’ " foreign{exchange" means foreign exchange held in. a foreign currency account ORM such other form as the. Federal, Government: may, specify". It may ; also be stated that the above Circular No.12 of 1998 (dated 29j75-1998) notified;, the rate of conversion of US Dollars AURS.46. Versus Dollar. -That it.will; not-.be. out.of context,at:. this, stage, to post, out. that' subsection (1) of section 3,of the Act provides that subject to the’ provision of this Act all the protections and immunities conferred in terms of the Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (XII of 1992), shall remain-unaffected. ' 17, We may now advert to the Preamble, sections 5 and 6 of Act XXII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms'. Act.1992)," which read Las follows. -.' "Whereas it is necessary_create.a liberal environment for,savings and. investments; and other matters. Relating thereto; it And whereas a number of economic reforms havebeeri introduced and, are MN, the process of being introduced'? to achieve-‘ the-aforesaid. objectives; ‘ : And whereas it is necessary to provide legal protection to these reforms in- order to create confidence in the'e'establishment and continuity BF the -liberal economic;environment created thereby’.’. - r 5. Immunities to foreign currency ‘accounts.-(IVAII citizens of Pakistan resident >in Pakistan or outside Pakistan who hold 'foreign' currency accounts in Pakistan and all other persons'who hold such accounts,-shall continue to enjoy immunity against any entry- from the Income Tax.' Department Oran other taxation authority as to the,source of financing. of the foreign currency accounts. (2) The balances in the foreign currency and income therefrom. Shall, remain exempted from the levy of wealth tax arid COMETA and compulsory deduction of Zakat at source. (3) The banks shall Malta complete secrecy in respect of transactions m the foreign currency accounts. (4) The State Bank of Pakistan or other banks shall not impose any restrictions on deposits in and withdrawals from the foreign currency accounts and restrictions, if any, shall stand withdrawn forthwith. 10. Protection of financial obligation.-All financial obligations incurred including those under any instrument, or any financial and contractual commitment made by or on behalf of the Government shall remain in force, and shall not be altered to the disadvantage of the beneficiaries." It may be noticed that the Preamble to the above Act described the object of the Act by providing that it is necessary to create a liberal environment for savings and investments, and other matters relating thereto. It also referred to a number of economic reforms having been introduced and are m the process of being produced to achieve the aforesaid objective. It also states that it is necessary to provide legal protection to the reforms in order to create confidence in the establishment and continuity of the liberal economic environment created thereby. It may further be noticed that section 5 provides immunities to foreign currency accounts from the payment of income-tax and Zakat, subsection (4) thereof contains a solemn undertaking by providing that the State Bank of Pakistan or other banks shall not impose any restrictions on deposits in and withdrawals from the foreign currency accounts and restrictions, if any, shall stand withdrawn forthwith. Whereas section 10 expressly lays down that all financial obligations incurred including those, under any instrument, or any financial and contractual commitment made by or on behalf of the Government shall remain in force, and shall not be altered to the disadvantage of the beneficiaries. 18. We were perturbed to note that in spite of the above solemn commitment made by the Legislature, the successive Governments improperly utilized the foreign exchange deposits of the foreign currency account holders in breach of the above solemn commitment and the State Bank of Pakistan also failed to perform its statutory duty enter Asia envisaged under section 25 of the Ordinance (Bank mg Companies Ordinance, 1962) to,protect the interests of the foreign currency account holders thereby creating a situation, where at present it has become practically impossible to honor the above solemn undertaking given by the Legislature. Senator Santa Aziz, who-was the Finance Minister at the relevant: time'in his Article under the caption "Why Foreign Currency Accounts were Frozen" Has given the version of the Federation as to the reasons for freezing, the foreign currency accounts. He inters- Asia.stated;that as a result of the cumulative current account deficit the. the difference between total imports of goods and, services between 1-7-1993 and 30-6-1997 was 12.9 billion and at least 87 ' of the above deficit was thus financed by these foreign currency accounts (Annex-II). He further stated-that in the absence of aforesaid freezing the meager reserves of 1.2 billion would have disappeared within three to seven days.'He also admitted that though the decision to freeze the foreign currency. accounts was inevitable but TT adversely affected the credibility of the : Government; 7 s - 19, Mr. Salman Abram Raja has candidly Conceded that notwithstanding the above solemn commitment given,by the Parliament in Act XII of :1992, the Parliament was competent to enact section- 2 of the Act imposing temporary I restrictions on-the withdrawal of the amounts from the: foreign currency. accounts. However, his submission was that the State Bank of Pakistan had no power under section 25 or 4.1 of the Ordinance of 1962 to "direct the foreign. ' Currency ; account" holders whose foreign currency-deposits were accepted as a collateral. Security against the local loans by. the various banks to. provide fresh ( security, in place of foreign currency deposit or to liquidate the lability - The above contention seems to be correct. In this behalf it may be pertinent to refer to section 25 of the Ordinance of 1962 which reads as under: '™25. Power of State Bank to control advances BV banking companies- - (1) Whenever the State Bank, is satisfied that it is necessary, or expedient ’ ‘, in the public interest so to do, IFMA determine the policy in. relation to advances to be followed by. Banking companies generally or by any ‘ banking company mm particular, and, when the policy has been so. determined, all banking companies or the banking company concerned, AIs the case may be, shall be bound to follow the-policy ’ is so “ "determined. (2) - Without’ prejudice to the generality of the power. conferred: by subsection the State Bank may. give directions to : banking, companies either generally or to any banking company or group of. banking companies TN particular,- "flu'W1 '1;'? ! :(a)'q!as to;the credit ceiling to:be mattified credit targets to be achieved. Or f:.Hawaii{ttertt>'-. -'Regions; the purposes for*which. o0.’Ie IP;;advances'may,or may not-fbe 'made -the margins to/be maintained in / f Respect "of - advances,the Tate's'- of-interest applied on advances and the maximum or minimum. profit sharing '' ratios; and - (b) prohibiting the giving of loans, advances and credit to any borrower or group of borrowers” on the basis of interest, either for a specific purpose ' or for any purpose whatsoever; and each banking company shall be bound to comply with any direction so given. (3) If any default is made by a banking company in complying with the policy determined under subsection (1) or direction given under subsection every director and other officer of the banking company and every other person who is knowingly a party to such default shall, by order of the State Bank, be liable to a penalty of any amount which. may extend to twenty thousand rupees and, where the default is a continuing one, of a further amount which may extend to one thousand rupees for every day after the first during which the default continues. (4) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsection the State Bank may, for the purposes of securing implementation of any special credit schemes or monetary policy or observance of. credit ceilings by a banking company, by order in writing require banking companies generally, or any banking company MN particular, to make special deposits with it for such amount and on such terms and conditions as. may be laid down by the State Bank in this behalf. (5) The amount deposited with the State Bank under subsection or any part thereof may, at the discretion of the State Bank, be released by it to the. Banking company which deposited it as and when the State Bank deems fit either unconditionally or on such terms and subject to such conditions as the State Bank may, by order in writing, determining from time to time. (6) Any penalty imposed under subsection (3) shall be payable on demand made by the State Bank and, in the event of refusal or failure by the Director, officer or other person concerned to pay on such demand, shall be recoverable as arrear of land revenue." The perusal of the.above quoted section indicates that the above section empowers the State Bank of Pakistan to control advances by banking companies by laying down the policy in respect of matters referred to in its subsection (2) Le. as to the credit ceiling, credit targets, the purposes for which advances may or may not be made, the margins, to be maintained in respect of advances, the rates of interest, charges or mark-up to be applied on advances and the maximum or minimum profit sharing ratios, and prohibiting the giving of loans, advances and credit to any borrower or group of borrowers on the basis of interest, either for a specific purpose or for any purpose whatsoever, but had no power to alter the terms and conditions of an agreement of loan already entered mint to and acted upon between a bank and. Its customers through a circular. It may be. stated that. it is a well settled; proposition of law that a notification or an executive order which may adversely. affect the rights of any person cannot be given.'retrospective effect: In this regard reference may be invade to the case of Ashwani Hotels Limited v: Federation of Pakistan WW. and others PLD. 1997'SC 315, in Which this Court while c'oristruirig the State Bank Circular held as under:. 16.:Reverting to the question, whether such a direction can. affect the loan agreement which were. Already concluded prior to such direction, it' may be observed that it is a well-settled principle of interpretation of. ‘ A - notification and/or an executive order that, the same can operate. /” prospectively and not retrospectively. This : principle -'is equally 1 applicable to a statute in the absence of 'any express dr implied intendment contrary to if, It maybe observed that Mr. Manor Ahmed ‘ ; ’ Khan,!in support of the above ‘proposition* has referred to the following :'’ cases:--’ r' ! (2) Chicago Hypocotyl Constancia Coronal. v;- Day Devi and others PLD 1954 PC 22; v- vi A-1*. Adnan Axial v.-Capt. Her Axial PLP'1969 SC 1871 - "' Gun)T’ The Income Tax Officer Investigation), Circle I, Dacca and another v. : Sulaiman BhaiandanotherPLD 1970 SC 80; : 1. (iv) Main Reified- Din and' 6 others v. The Chief Settlement and - Rehabilitation Commissioner and 2 others PLD1971 SC 232;\. (v) Mahmood' Shah etc. v: Additional Settlement Commissioner Revenue In the above report the: subject-matter was a circular issued under section 25 of the Ordinance of 1962 by the State Bank of Pakistan. Reference may also be made to the. Case of Messes Army Welfare Sugar. Mills. Limited, and others.v. Federation of Pakistan ran.others™'.! SCMR. 1652, in which it has been, held by; this;:Court that.a notification adversely affecting, the right of any person cannot operate retrospectively but if, the same confers any benefit; it can be.made.applicable retrospectively:. \. Even.otherwise.the.impugned portion of the above Circular,No123, cannot be, sustained for, the reason that.it is confiscatory,in,nature and interferes with contractual rights and obligations under the concluded contracts, inasmuch, 9S, it prohibits; the. Use of the.foreign currency deposits with. Pakistan :as a security, which, was already, ;accepted by. the. banks against the loans prior.to the issuance, of the. above Circuit without-acquiring the. above foreign currency deposits under, appropriate.provision'.of law, against the.payment. of compensation. However, the above Circular has been withdrawn byte State Bank of Pakistan as stated by the learned Attorney-General in the Court before us on 9-6- 1999 and, therefore, it does not hold the field. 20. Mr. Salman Abram Raja has also pointed out that by the above Circular No. 23 the State Bank was intended and designed to coerce the foreign currency account holders to convert the foreign currency deposit into rupees at the rate of Rs.46 per US Dollar notified under FE Circular No 12 dated 29-5-1998, which rate was below the market rate. His further submission was that since the foreign currency account holders whose foreign currency deposits were accepted as a security were directed to substitute the security or to liquidate the lability by 31-7- 1998, it amounted to coerce them to convert their foreign currency deposits into rupees or to liquidate the lability. According to him, the foreign currency account holders even otherwise could not have been offered above rate of Rs.46 per US Dollar for conversion into rupees, as the market rate on 31-7-1998, was Rs.54.25 buying rate and Rs.55.25 selling rate per US Dollar as reflected in the statement filed by the State Bank of Pakistan (at page 188 of paper book-I of Civil Appeal No. )! In. support of his above submission, he has relied upon the cases of Jitendra Kishore. Achharyya Chowdhury and 58 others v. The Province of East Pakistan and Secretary, Finance and Revenue (Revenue) Department, Government of East Pakistan PLD 1957 SC (PAK.) 9 and Azaleas Wage and others v. Chief Land Commissioner, Punjab, Lahore and others PLD 1990 SC 99. In the above first case this Court while construing the provisions of East Bengal State Acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1950 held that the above Act is essentially a confiscatory enactment because it takes man's property by paying him, say twice the annual net income of that-property and not the market value as the compensation. Whereas in the latter case Sharia Appellate Bench of the Court had dilated upon the Islamic concept of compulsory acquisition of private property. It would be pertinent to reproduce para.4 from the option of Justice Muhammad Taxi Usman (Member), which'reads as follows: WW. market- V/UE). “a v\. "CJ "o W /. ''?' _*res?'r V ;The legal position. seems to. be that no, person,can be deprived of,his property aero under any Acquisition. Law for public purposes without payment of compensation which. Should,bebased: on the market, rate and not at the rate fixed by the authority, which this acquired or which is instrumental in; acquiring the. Property involved. ; t\., :‘S'\' 21!: CFR. Muhammad Farooq, learned’ Attorney-General has also contended that ; ;since; the Emergency has, been imposed -under Article 232 of the Constitution, the impugned Circular acid the section. of the Act are protected HY'clause (1) of Article 233 of the Constitution which' provides that "Nothing contained in Articles 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 24 shall, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in force, restrict the power of the State as ‘'deemed in Article 7; to make y law BR; to take ‘any executive action which it would, but for the' provisions in the said. Articles- be coiripetenf to make or to take, but any law so, Male.still, to the. Extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect,’; and shall be. deemed to have been repealed; - at’ the time when' the' Proclamation 1s; revoked or. ; has ceased to be in force". --Vs-:;: V'.' - ' The above'contention is not well, founded as the Circular has. been issued by the’-State Bank of, Pakistan which,is.not covered by the. definition of State AS'GIVEN in Article 7 of this Constitution which, defies that ‘"the State" means'the Federal Government [Males-e-Shoora (Parliament)], a Provincial Government a Provincial’ Assembly, ' and. such’ local or other authorities in Pakistan as are'by law'empowered to impose any tax process"-. The, State Bank is the creature of a statute, namely, the State Bank BF Pakistan Act,"1956. It has no power. to, impose a tax or Cessna's envisaged by above Article of the Constitution. Furthermore,: simpliciter. the.fac tum that the Proclamation of Emergency holds the field would not’ justify passing of an executive order, contrary TP any Constitutional provision under the cover of clause. (1) of Article 233?- but such executive order or- action should have the backing, of law which should be enacted after the imposition of Emergency. In this regard, reference only be made TB the case'of Bennett Coleman COV Ltd!-acid others v. Union of India and:others (AIR 1973) SC'106), IH which Indian Supreme Court while considering virus'of.the import policy-for newspapers prints held that Article 358, (which corresponds to Article 233(1),"PFL'Pakistani Constitution), does not apply, to an executive action taken during the emergency if the same is a continuation of the prior executive action-or an emanation of the previous law; and. Which prior’executive action/or previous law would otherwise be violative of Article, 19 or be otherwise, unconstitutional. It.has been further, held that the executive. Action which.is constitutional;'-is.' not’ immune during” the proclamation of emergency unless the same is supported by some legislative which is enacted after the imposition of emergency. The same view was taken by a Division Bench of the Lahore High Court in the case of Province of Punjab through its Home Secretary and 3 others V. Gular Hussain, Advocate and 8 others (PLD 1978 Lahore 1298), in which it was held that no executive authority could take any executive action without the support of valid law and any action taken in violation of the above rule could be struck down by the High Court under Article 190 of the Constitution as being without lawful authority. It was also held that Article 8(2) of the Constitution prohibited making of any legislation, in violation of Fundamental Rights except six Fundamental Rights mentioned in clause (1) of Article 233 during the emergency. It was further held that the guarantee under Article is quite separate and distinct from the Fundamental Rights and no inroads could have been permitted even during the emergency. It may be pointed out that after the imposition Of emergency in Pakistan no law has been enacted conferring additional power on the State Bank of Pakistan. The impugned Circular was not founded on section 2 of the Act but was issued pursuant to the power conferred on the State Bank under the Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962, namely, section 25 thereof In this view of the matter, the impugned portion of the Circular cannot be defended on the plea that. the Circular was issued after the proclamation of emergency. 22. It- may be observed that interference with the right of the account holders to' use the above foreign currency deposits even in Pakistan as a security constitutes taking over of the same, without payment of compensation and, therefore, the same is violative, inter alia, of Article of the. WW. Constitution. In this behalf, reference may be made to the following passage from the book Treatise on Constitutional Law Substance and Procedure, Second Edition by Ronald D. Rotunda:. ' "The fifth amendment provides that private property may not be ’taken' by the Federal Government without just compensation. The central issue in many eminent domain cases is whether the Governmental - interference amounts to a 'taking’. Although the concept of a taking may originally have: contemplated only physical appropriation, it is play today that non-acquisitive Governmental action may amount to a taking in a Constitutional sense. A 'taking’, therefore, may be found when Governmental activity results in significant physical damage to property that impairs its use. Although the State, possesses the power to regulate property without payment of compensation, if the regulation goes too far, a taking may also be found. Furthermore, a taking may occur as to a tangible-property interest. where the owner had a reasonable expectation that such property, would not be used by the Government and such expectation was impaired." :' Reference’'may. also, be made to the. case of Petinusylyania "Coal Company plaintiff in Err; v. HJ. Mahon and Margaret Craig,Mahon (260 US 322 67 Law/Edition 393) where Mr. Justice Holmes observed as follows; ; "It is our opinion-that' the act. cannot’ be sustained as an exercise of the police-power, so far as'it :,affects;the: Ming'of coal under streets or cities in places where’the right to mine such coal has been reserved. As. said in a Pennsylvania case:.'. Eor practical, purposes, the right to coal consists in.the. right to mine t', Com. ex.REL. Keaton v. Clearview Coal Co,2561Pa. 328,-331. L.R.A. 1917E, :6.72; 100 ATL 820. What makes;.” the right to mine coal valuable is that it can be exercised with profit. To V make it commercially impracticable to mine certain coal has very nearly: the. same effect for Constitutional purposes as appropriating or destroying it. This [415] we think that we AI;c warranted in assuming that the statute does."’.», The above treatise and the. Judgment of the US Supreme: Court indicate that] taking over of property may. take place even though there is no. physical : taking overbuy the property is damaged or impaired who cleaner presents its use, or reduces/its usefulness to a level; which. May, become non-profitable to' an extent unbearable as a normal risk. of the SUBJECT-RMATTER involved,,,. 23. If may/also :b;e. Pertinent to opt-out that section~2 of the Act would have been, ultra vires if it. was to deprive the foreign currency account holders the domain over the foreign, currency. Deposits, or. if is had compelled the. account. holders to convert the : foreign - currency deposits in Pakistani Rupees against their volition IAT- a notified rate- acid because ;of that we have Clarified in/ our short order that section 2; of the Act is intra vires. Of the Constitution-subject to the declaration that the same does not confer any power on the Federation or on the State Bank of Pakistan to compel foreign currency account holders to convert their foreign exchange holdings into PAK Rupee at the officially, notified rate of exchange, PR to compel the said account holders TP liquidate their above accounts into PAK Rupee which foreign exchange holdings. Had been accepted by the respective banks as,security against. Any' [Part of other-facilities extended to them. r'/ /. We may also.post out that notwithstanding the imposition of the Emergency and. the j suspension of Articles 15, 16, 17, 18, 191 and 24 of the Constitution by -virtue of clause of Article 233-v Article 199 of the. Constitution remains available not,only for the enforcement of the Fundamental ' Rights which remain unsuspended but also enforce the rights, ARF obligations as contained, inter alia. I'm Article of the- Constitution which provides as follows:, Right of individuals to be dealt with in accordance with law.1 etc.--(1) ). To enjoy the protection of law and to be treated ‘in accordance with law phi. is the alienable right of every citizen, wherever he may be, and of ever}' other person for the time. Being within Pakistan. (2) In particular- (a) no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of any person shall be taken except in accordance with law; ‘ (b) no person shall be prevented from or be hindered in doing that which is not prohibited by law; and, (c) no person shall be compelled to do that which the law does not require him to do. ‘ The perusal of the above quoted Article indicates that every citizen and every other person for the time being in Pakistan is guaranteed as his alienable right to enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in accordance with law wherever he may be and' in particular no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of any person can be taken except in accordance with law. The scope of the above Article has been very ably discussed by Aladdin, J. in his opinion in the case of Ch. Manzoor Elah v. Federation of Pakistan etc. (PLD 1975 SC 66), which was approved by this very Full Bench in the case of Vardar Farooq Ahmad Khan Safari and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others (supra), as under: (xiv) That the Fundamental Rights not suspended under Article 233 of the Constitution remain fully operative and everybody in Pakistan is under an obligation to respect it. The mere fact that an aggrieved person TS temporarily prevented from moving any Court for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights does not relieve an authority of its obligation to comply with it. [Aladdin Ahmed, J. (Ch. Manzoor Elah's case) (supra)]. (xv) That a High Court has the jurisdiction under'Article 199 of the Constitution to grant relief to a person arrested illegally with its jurisdiction, although he is for the time being detained outside its jurisdiction. [Aladdin Ahmed, J. (Ch. Manor Elah's case) (supra)]. (xvi)That Article 199 of the Constitution is available not only for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights but also to enforce the rights and obligations as contained in Articles and 5 of the Constitution. ' [Aladdin Ahmed, J. (Ch. Manor Elah's case) (supra)]. (N.B. above paras, (xii) to (xvi) relate to late 1962 Constitution.)" Besides the above Article 4, Article 23 (which is one of the Articles contained under Part II of the Constitution relating to Fundamental Rights) enjoys that every citizen shall have the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property in any part of Pakistan subject to the Constitution and any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the public-interest'. The above'Article 23 is still m the field as it is hot mentioned mm clause of Article 233 of the Constitution. However, we are unable to subscribe to the view that section 2 of the Act confers unbridled, naked, arbitrary and, unstructured powers, on the functionaries of the State Bank. Of Pakistan AHD therefore it is hit by the doctrine of excessive delegation, or. that it 1s ultra vires the Articles and 2A of the Constitution. No doubt, that no foreign currency account, holder could operate foreign currency account without the prior permission of the State Bank of Pakistan, but it is implied and inherent that such permission 1s.to.be granted! on the basis of reasonable classification which should be based on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes person ;or companies that are grouped together from those who have been left,out and that, the. Differentia must have: retained. nexus to the object sought to be achieved by such classification,asi held by, this Court in the-case of I.A. Sharman v. Government of :Pakistan through. Secretary, Finance."Division, Islamabad (1991 SCMR 1041).and the ease.;p Messes Gadroon Textile Mills and’v 8 LH. ‘others: v. WAPE)A and others.(199' scmr641). Jr” Any circular which1 may be issued by the State Bank; of Pakistan fog ranting permission to; the *foreign currency account holders to 'operate' the foreign currency accounts not founded on the above reasonable: classification will, not be'sustainable. In this regard, it may be pertinent to mention,tha Dr. Faroogq Hassan, Senior Advocate. Supreme Court has pointed out they foreigners. Of Pakistani origin r are discriminated from. Foreigners of foreign origin. In order- to eliminate the above, discrimination, in our above-cited show order we have held ;ATN(-tint';stem';and. foreigners maintaining foreign currency accounts as. on" 2875-1998 ' will, be entitled to. Utilise the( interest/profits payable TP them under the above arrangements between them an< the bank concerned in any manner including the right to remit the same abroad In this view of the matter,-the discrimination, if any, has been removed. 24, We'may also point, out that:,there, is. a -marked distinction’ between ; provision BF a statute which may be ex face discriminatory. And a. provision thereof which may be capable of BMG pressed, into service in discriminator} manner. The former, would be label to be struck ;down on. The ground o violation of Article 25 of the Constitution, but the latter provision cannot b< struck down on the ground that it is.capable.of being used in discriminator) manner. However, any discriminatory action which may be taken pursuant! to such provision can be struck down. In.this regard, reference may be made to the case of Mehran Ali and others.v. Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD 1998 JSC 1445), in which it was contended that since section 34 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997 (Act XXI of 1997) conferred on. the Government the power to amid the Schedule to the said Act so as to add any entry thereto or modify or ; omit any entry therein by a notification, the’same was ultra vires the. Constitution as it was capable of being misused by the Government. The above contention was repelled as under: "(iv) It may be observed that, the learned counsel for the petitioners urged with vehemence that the power given under section 34 of the Act to the Government to amend the Schedule to the Act so as to add any entry thereto or modify or omit any entry there by a notification is ultra vires the Constitution. It has been further urged by them that the above power has been abused inasmuch as many offenses have been included which have no nexus with the object of the Act or with the offenses covered by sections 6, 7 and 8 thereof: In this regard, it may be pertinent to mention that delegation of such power to the Government by the Legislature is not an unusual phenomenon. In order to implement the object of a statute or to work out certain detail, such power is normally delegated. In this regard, reference may. be made to the case of Zambian Textile Mills Ltd. v. Central Board of Revenue and others (PLD 1983 SC 358). In the above case, the Legislature had conferred : power on the Central Board of Revenue, to formulate guidelines to determine rate of production, capacity tax and even to levy tax-under section 3(4), (6), of the Central Excises and Salt. Act, 1944, as. amended by the Finance Act, 1966. The above provision was assailed, but this Court held that the Legislature was competent to employ, proper agency to accomplish its legislative purpose. Reference may also be made to the case of Muhammad Hussain Ghulam Muhammad and another v. The State of Bombay and another Ishwarbhai Becharbhai and WW. others. Interveners (AIR 1962 SC 97), in which also such delegation was upheld by the Indian Supreme Court.". The case in hand is squarely covered by the above judgment, as at the most it can be urged that section 2 of the Act is capable of being used Ina. Discriminatory manner, but it cannot be said that the same, is ex face discriminatory. In our short order we have held the above section as intra vires subject to the declaration contamed their. 25. Dr. Faroog Hassan, learned Senior Advocate Supreme Court and Mr. Salman Abram Raja, Advocate have assailed the impugned section 2 on the ground that the same is a colorable legislation. In support of the above submission Mr. Salman Abram Raja has referred to the treatise on Constitutional Law of India, A Critical Commentary (Third Edition) by H.M. Serval, the case of Attorney-General of Alberta v. Attorney-General of Canada and others (AJR 1939 Privy Council 53) and the case of The State of Bihar v. Sir Kashgar Singh (AIR 1952 SC 252). In the above treatise the author has described colorable legislation, as under: "3.15. A Legislature lacking legislative, power or subject to a Constitutional, prohibition may frame its legislation so as to make it appear to be 1 / V -t within ' TTS 'legislative' power or to be free from the Constitutional - Such a law. is *colorable’ legislation,'meaning thereby that " >". : while pretending to be a Jaw in the exercise of undoubted power, it is in I'y-,"kHz v FTA'lagoon a prohibited FUFTK’"” <<, I. In the above first case the question ifordetermmnation before the Privy Council ’ was/ whether the taxation which /was for raising the revenue for provincial purposes was within the meaning ?of section 92(2). of the British North America :Act,1867 or whether it was in; substance a tax: on banks and savings BSNKS which-fell within section 91;(15)(16) respectively of.that. Act: It was held, that the law-is in no sense the one' relating to taxation! fofprdyincial purposes but was'V law designed to prevent: the function of banks;and:savings banks in the Provinces. Both of* which subjects‘-were /exclusively t, subjects! of} the Dominion ;Legislature :and thus the law was colorable for;the reason recorded their;. Whereas' in the: second case’ the whole Act1 relating to. acquisition of the estate cereals' legislation or as: a: fraud-on the Constitution. The Indian {Supreme: Court by 'a majority WW. *of 2:3 held that the 4(b) and 23(f) BF the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 were colorable legislation,ahd were void. Section.4(b) ‘provided - that ail -arrears - of -re. ; whether, they had merged ITO a ‘decree 6Y:HQ- !ere"to'yest- the'Geraint, ;IND.-fifty':)nascent'. Those.rents. were / to be ’ added to ;:the.compensate’oh’ ?payable; to 'the; landholders. Whereas section ' 23(f) 'prided for deduction; representing’; to -.12-1 /2/per' cent, of the gross.assets' as: " costs' of work for the benefits' of Rattans VIN ascertain’ the net assets’ :on which compensation was to be;based. The :Court held;' that the above: provision/was purely arbitrary arid-. had/no: relation.;to facts and. was merely designed to avoid payment of ‘compensation, underdone /.gifts of, laying down-prmpiples of compensation./;;.’/"J. 26. From the above treatise’ and the case-law, ttdsievident =that a colorable legislation is that which is enacted! by a legislature which.lacks/ the legislative power/ or is subject to Constitutional prohibition, but it is framed in such a way that it may appear to; be within the "legislative power ;or to be free. from Constitutional prohibition or; Jillian' the object/ -Of*this;"law." 1s;: not. what is Contemplated; under'the. Cotihitio?>f{slight\pm ult whereof: it -1s'1 framed Ii. The case in hand," if JEV'UEFI'STIs 2 is hit-by the above doctrine of colorable’ legislation/ We have already" pointed out hereinabove that the foreign currency reserves of Pakistan on 28–51998 were meager and -particularly keeping in view/the impending’ restrictions in/the foreign currency; trains July/tie Word/Bank, International Financial Institutions and the foreign countries as a retaliation against Pakistan’s carrying out nuclear device tests; despite appeal's from the hybrid leaders not-to do so, the imposition of the above temporary. Restrictions subject to s‘,clartftion.I'm;'by us in Thai short order was'justified.-r. --.V.RT/-r'/,27/" We have asked Mn Salman AFAM Raja as- Wal as/Dr. Farooq Hassan to]j. Cite some case-law or show some treatise in order to demonstrate that in view of the assurance contained in subsection (4) of section 5 and section 10 of the Act XII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992), the Parliament was not competent to enact section 2 BF the Act. Mr. Salman Abram Raja has candidly conceded that the Parliament is competent to pass any law in the absence of any constraint contained in the Constitution. He is unable to post out any violation of any Constitutional provision, However, Dr. Farooq WW. Hassan has contended that this Court on the basis of international law can hold that in view of solemn assurance of the legislature contained in above Sections 5(4) arid 10 of Act XII of 1992, the impugned section 2 is ultra vires the power of the Legislature. To reinforce the above submission, he submitted that the World Court has taken the above view inter alia in the South West Africa Case. According to him, such a legislation the Words of Lord McNair is "It is utterly shocking to mankind's conscience’. In Pakistan the Courts apply municipal law and not international Jaws in order to examine the virus of a provision'of a statute. However, if a municipal law and an international law are ' consistent with each other and there is no conflict or consistency, the Court to rem force its view- as to the interpretation of a Constitutional provision or of a provision of statute may press into service international law and/or conventions. The above approach has been adopted by this Court in the case of Vardar Farooq Ahmed Khan Safari (supra). ’ 28. Then it was contended by Dr. Farooq Hassan that in fact impugned section 2 1s violative of Article 9 of the Constitution which enjoins that no person shall be deprived of life and liberty save in accordance with law. His submission was that denial of the foreign currency deposits and/or the profit therefrom is in fact violative of the above Article as the non-resident foreign currency account holders have deposited the above foreign currency in Pakistan in view of the assurance contained, inter alia, in Circular No. 12 of 1973 and the above provisions of Act XII of 1992 under the belief that they would be able to withdraw the deposits of foreign currency and/or interests/profits thereon without any let or hindrance to meet their liabilities in their native countries and I that because of the above restrictions, they cannot lead life as envisaged by above Article. He has invited our attention to para.6 of his above petition, which reads as follows:. "6. That the Members of the Association as well as the Association have vigorously pursued this matter MN the U.K. where many of the Account Holders of this category are placed. Some press reports and articles written by them are, appended. These press accounts reveal the abnormal harm done to the Members of the Association. Most of them had saved their foreign currency in their native country to pay for the education of their children, there marriages and to pay off their loans, a regular feature of life in Western nations in respect of their cars or, homes'. Non- payment of such obligations can lead to the discontinuation 31. of the, the foreclosure,of their homes or the:.prepossession oftheircars. NotPnlytheseare irreparable losses, it. Wyo. bring bad name to the country, as; having natives and expatriates who are ; /unable to ;pay the/loans or honor their financial commitments. f J; Already such drastic action is; in. place against some’ of them'and :Pakistan;shuffle VV-’: >;:«ERF. v-/ - 29. The above averments seem to be correct/plausible for the reason that’ Pakistanhadp / protection TP the then prospective foreign currency account holders In the above ' factual background, TT may be correct, that and/or the foreign nationals of Pakistani, orig may have deposited their entire savings in, Pakistan, with. the object, to earn more profit and also, to/ help their motherland. We regret to- note ’ that. The successive Governments and testate. Barik; of Pakistan ’ betrayed /the above trust reposed by. The foreign currency account Holders We would have no, hesitation in directing’ the; federation TP honor the above solemn assurance of the Legislature contained in _is'ubseictiori (4) of section Sand section' 0ofAct:XIIof1992, but;sincesuchajudgmenrw riot be the country,;we - have not ordered so. However, we havemadeevery effort; to extend maximum benefits to’ ikthepfesent situation/We may post out that/at present there’ are three options available to the foreign currency account holders, namely: /-.’,/. (i)-r //Under F. E; - Circular -No; 8 /issued by ; the State Bank of Pakistan on / 19-5- 1999, the State fiankhasaboiished multiple Exchange rate system :-It/////’V.'.and.- has:introduced the'iflbatirig interbank. rate the relevant para. of the above Circular reads as follows: 7” ' g; Introduction) OKA Unitary "Rate ;Svsteniv--It has. Been decided to. replace above system by. a market based ’unified exchange; rate S'system>with effect from May 19, 1999. For the purpose, Theo facial’; ! exchange rate has been abolished and the 'floating interbank' rate shall w.;’ f!; apply to- all foreign exchange receipts and payments both in public and h,«?, FJT private sectors I Thus /effective from the above date, the country has -V adopted a market based unitary exchange rate system." :. V-Very"-'The/above;: circular has/also ‘brought Ina:;member of; other improvements inasmuch ' as it abolished the system; of surrender of foreign exchange by the banking companies to the State Bank and thereby ensuring that /the foreign currency deposits of the account holders will riot be touched by the :State Bark of by Thai State through the State Bank. It has also provided, that the spread’ between the spot buying arid selling rate should not. Exceed Rs.6.50 per US S. TN this view of thevmatterf it is now open to a foreign currency, account holder to convert its foreign currency holdings into PAK Rupees at the floating (i) That the foreign currency account holders can purchase special US Dollar Bonds in the denomination of $100, $1,000, $10,000, $1,00,000 for a period of 3 years, 5 years and 7 years from the date of issue under the special US Dollar Bonds Rules, 1998, in which profit shall be payable on completion of every six months in US Dollars which would be remittable. (m) That the foreign currency account holders can ream their foreign currency account deposits and. may earn merest/profit thereon in ' foreign currency as per original arrangement between them and their respective banks, which they can utilize in Pakistan or can remit the same abroad as per our short order. We have provided the above relief- to the foreign currency account holders as there was no rationale in denial of the above benefit to them when the same was available to those foreign currency account holders, who have converted their deposits into the above Special US Dollar Bonds. 30. Besides the above options available to the foreign currency account holders, we have also directed in our short order reproduced hereinabove that in order to restore the confidence of the existing/prospective foreign currency account holders the Federation/State Bank, of Pakistan shall evolve a scheme within a reasonable period keeping in view the foreign exchange position of the country for gradual removal of restrictions on operation of foreign currency, accounts imposed by section 2 of the Act and that in any case in every annual budget a reasonable provision MN this regard shall be made. The above direction is issued on the premise that the above legislative assurance contained in section 5(4) of Act XII of 1992 was binding on the State and the State Bank of Pakistan. 31/ We may again point out that the directions contained in para. 28(4)(5) of Main Allah Nawab, J.'s opinion have not been concurred with by the other two learned Judges and, therefore, the same are not part of the judgment of the High Court. Furthermore, the above directions could not have been granted. It may be observed that the deposits of foreign currency account holders could not have been ordered to be treated as a fixed account for a period of three years without the consent of all the foreign currency account holders. Nor direction could have been issued that two classes of economy envisaged by Act XII of 1992 be eliminated. The latter Act is a device to attract foreign investments, which is in line with the modern concept of economic development. Additionally in Civil Appeals Nos.320 and 321 of 1999, which have been disposed of by us' on 9-6-1999 at Karachi, we have nullified the above direction contained in sub-para. (5) of para.28 of the above opinion of Main Allah Nawab, J. by holding as follows: "5. Ch. Muhammad Farooq, learned Attorney-General ports out that the above. declaration is contamed in the option recorded,by one of the learned Judges, namely, Main Allah. Nawab, J. and that the. Two other " learned. Judges have not concurred with theabove declaration! Be that, as it maybe; further submits that, the Government, has no intention; to. amend the above Act,XII' of.1992. In this View. of the matter /the above appeals are disposed of with the clarification, that the. above declaration is not part of the judgment and is not to be ' implemented." ; 32'. The'above Civil Appeal; Constitution Petitions and Civil Petitions for, Leave to Appeal are disposed BF in terms of the short order quoted hereinabove in para. 1, which is to be read as a part of this judgment. /. 'M.-B.A'./F-56/S.- accordingly*:

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): AJMAL MIAN, C.J.-By the following short order dated 18-6-1999, we have disposed of the above appeal, two Constitution petitions and petitions. for leave to appeal:. ORDER For the reasons to be recorded later, the above appeal, petitions for leave to appeal and, Constitution petitions are disposed of, as under: - Reforms Act, 1992 (Act XII of 1992) to the effect that "The State Bank of Pakistan or. other banks shallot impose any restrictions' oh deposits "O-.FYI.> ’:n arid withdrawals from the foreign Currency accounts and restrictions’, J if arty; shall stand withdrawn forthwith", the successive- Governments WW. - improperly utilized the’ foreign: exchange deposits of the Foreign Currency Account holders.in breach of the above solemn commitment 1: and the. State Bank of Pakistan also failed to perform its statutory duty -to protect the merest of the Foreign Currency Account- holders, thereby creating a ’situation where at present it has.' become practically impossible’ to honor the above solemn undertaking given by the ’ Legislature. v. r'"'- VRS"? (11) Section 2 of the Foreign Exchange. (Temporary Restrictions) Act, 1998 (Act IV of 1998) (hereinafter referred to as. the Act) is intra vires of the ' / Constitution, subject to the declaration “that the same does not confer y power on the Federation or on the State Bank of Pakistan to compel Foreign Currency Account-holders to convert their foreign’ exchange. holdings to PAK Rupees at the officially notified rate of exchange, or J. to compel the said account-holders to liquidate their above accounts into. Pak Rupees which foreign exchange holdings had been accepted by the respective banks; as security against any: loans’ 'or 'other facilities extended to them. (TTT) That B.P.R.D. Circular No 23, dated 2-7-1998 read with B.P.R.D. Circular. No.29, dated 1,7-1.11.998 to the,extent of providing that "It has, been, decided that encumbrance or,lien of any. Km upon any foreign currency deposit/foreign, currency certificate as a cover against any - direct or indirect lability of the depositors must be removed by July 31, 1998, through set off or direct liquidation of the liabilities so covered by, r V the borrowers”, is illegal and,of no legal consequence, besides the above Circular has been withdrawn by the State Bank of Pakistan as stated by the learned Attorney-General in the Court before, us on ; 9-6-1999 and, therefore, it does not hold the field. ‘. (TV) That, the Foreign. Currency,Account-holders are. entitled to receive ; interest/profits in foreign exchange on their deposits, at rates already agreed as per original arrangements between them and the respective ' banks. ‘ (vi) That in order to restore the confidence of the existing/prospective Foreign Currency Account-holders, the Federation/State Bank of Pakistan shall evolve a scheme within a reasonable period keeping in view the foreign exchange position of the country for gradual removal ' of restrictions on operation of Foreign Currency Accounts imposed by section 2 WW. of the Act, and that, in any case, in every annual budget a ' reasonable provision in this regard shall be made. 2.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): keeping in view the foreign exchange position of the country for gradual removal ' of restrictions on operation of Foreign Currency Accounts imposed by section 2 WW. of the Act, and that, in any case, in every annual budget a ' reasonable provision in this regard shall be made. 2. That pursuant to the direction of the Court, the learned Attorney-General has famished on 17-6-1999 particulars of the Foreign Currency Account holders who had withdrawn foreign currency from their respective accounts during the period from 11-5-1998 to 28-5- 1998. The same will be examined for initiating suitable action in accordance with law, if so watranted." 2. Pursuant to the above short order, we tend to record the supporting reasons. The brief facts are that on 11-5-1998 India exploded three nuclear devices. Then on 13-5-1998, it farther exploded two more nuclear devices. The ; above explosions of nuclear devices generated in Pakistan a lot of anxiety, particularly on account of hostile and aggressive postures of the Indian political leaders which they adopted after the above explosions. There was much debate orally as well as in writing through press articles on the question, whether Pakistan should also give a befitting reply to India by carrying out its own nuclear device tests. The international leaders including Bill Clinton, President of U.S.A. Tony Beam, Prime Minister of U.K. and Jacques Chirac, President of France, impressed upon the Prime Munster of Pakistan not to retaliate India's above’ unwarranted and uncalled-for action of exploding above nuclear devices. However, eventually keeping in -view the interest of the country and the demand of the people of Pakistan, the Government of Pakistan conducted five nuclear device tests on 28- 5-1998. On the evening of the same day, the Proclamation of Emergency under Article 233 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Constitution) was issued. On the same day the President of Pakistan also issued an Order under clause (2) of Article 233 of the Constitution suspending all the Fundamental Rights. The above Proclamation of Emergency and the Order of suspension of Fundamental Rights were assailed before this Court through direct Constitution Petitions under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, which culminated in the judgment rendered on 13-10-1998 inter alia in the case of Vardar Farooq Ahmad Khan [ Safari and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others PLD 1999 SC 57, whereby it was held that the issuance of Proclamation under clause (1) of Article 232 of the Constitution was valid, but the order of suspending the Fundamental Rights under clause of Article 233 was not valid and warranted under the Constitution/law. WW. It may be observed that on the above same day (i.e. 28-5- 1998) the Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions),Ordinance, 1998 was promulgated. Section 2 thereof provided as follows:, /-'-\"2;\Nptwithstaridin\[anything contained.’: in the Protection", of ™Ajax Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (XII of 1992) but subject to section 3 it. is hereby provided that during the period in which a Proclamation of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): day (i.e. 28-5- 1998) the Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions),Ordinance, 1998 was promulgated. Section 2 thereof provided as follows:, /-'-\"2;\Nptwithstaridin\[anything contained.’: in the Protection", of ™Ajax Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (XII of 1992) but subject to section 3 it. is hereby provided that during the period in which a Proclamation of ] - Emergency under Article 232 of the :Constitution of the'-[Islamic’, Republic of. Palcistans in force, the various protections contained 1h the - said Act or in any other law for the time being in force, or MN any ‘ agreement or contract. for or in relation to foreign-exchange, or the. 1; tight to bring, hold,1 sell, withdraw, transfer, pay or take out, foreign exchange/shall remain suspended. : ; The Federal'Government. may buy.; rules make provision for regulating, y dealings and payment in foreign exchange and such rules may, without ; ’, prejudice to the generality of the foregoing empower, the State. Bank of. Pakistan to. grant; permission to make or jiyeaymehts.- in- foreign. exchange,; or to permit, the conversion Of foreign exchange into hi pees, '. either 'on a'case" to case. basis or on the basis of classification of. V. various Typepad categories. ",,,(2) theitframing;of.rules, under, _'romances, prepayments- in. Foreign exchange;,shall be made,-with the. ' priorpermissior.oftheStateBa of Pakistan/1 ‘////: H;P. 3. The above Ordinance was followed by F.E/Circular No/12 dated. 29-5-1998, which] prohibited the opening of WW. né.foreign currency accounts-byte resident Pakistrnatiphals, resident, firms and companies including foreign’ controlled companies* functioning in Pakistan‘ It also prohibited withdrawalsrfrom the-existing foreign currency-accounts except the foreign currency accounts maintained by the diplomatic missions: accredited to Pakistan’,' their non-resident employees all international organizations in ' Pakistani namely; IMF;: IBRD,' ADB and their non-resident employees. However. it permitted the/foreign currency account holders to withdraw their foreign" currency deposit in Pakistani Rupee if they so- desired at the rate of ', Rs.46 per/U.S. Dollar The same option was also given to the holders of ’ Foreign Exchange Bearer Certificates/US Dollar, Bearer Certificates and Foreign. Currency Bearer Certificates;-, The above F.;E. Circular: Nopl2 was followed by Circular No;17 dated :. 6-6-1998 modifying the above JFE Circular No.12 to the extent mentioned ! Their;and providing for a number of new items: It -also provided for the withdrawal from the foreign currency accounts by foreign nationals and in any/ other, hardship case.; It may be pertinent, to reproduce para. 7. thereof, which. reads as follows: -. y.1.’ Applications in. respect. of withdrawals by foreign. Nationals, as. mentioned in paragraph 3, and any other hardship case not covered by ’ this circular, may be referred by the Authorized Dealer maimntammg the account, or by r the Head Office/Principal Office in Pakistan to the Additional Director, Foreign Exchange Department, State Bank of' Pakistan, Central Directorate, Karachi (Fax No.2422083)." 4. The State Bank of Pakistan inter alia also issued BPRD Circular No.23 dated 2-7-1998 providing as under: "BPRD CIRCULAR NO.23 2nd July, 1998 All Banks/NBF Is Dear SSR. SELECTIVE CREDIT CONTROL Please refer to section A(III)2 of BCD Circular No.5 dated

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): Bank of' Pakistan, Central Directorate, Karachi (Fax No.2422083)." 4. The State Bank of Pakistan inter alia also issued BPRD Circular No.23 dated 2-7-1998 providing as under: "BPRD CIRCULAR NO.23 2nd July, 1998 All Banks/NBF Is Dear SSR. SELECTIVE CREDIT CONTROL Please refer to section A(III)2 of BCD Circular No.5 dated the 5th July, 1987. read with section (2) of BCD Circular Letter No. -00-92 dated the 4th June, 1992 and Rule 10(m) of Rules of Business for NBF Is regarding margin requirement prescribed for advances against bank deposits and - deposit certificates. It has been decided that encumbrance or lien of any kind upon any foreign currency '. deposit/foreign currency certificate as a cover against any direct or direct ability of the depositors must be removed by July 31, 1998, through set off or direct liquidation of the abilities so covered by the borrowers. 2. No new encumbrance or lien should thereafter, be created against foreign currency deposits/certificates held on May 28, 1998. 3. All banks/NBF Is are further directed to give a compliance report to the State Bank within 3 days of the expiry of the deadline. ”’ It may also be stated that FE Circular No.31 was also issued by the State Bank of Pakistan on the above date Le. 2-7-1998 inter alia providing that all immunities in relation’ to the foreign exchange referred to in para. of Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions) Ordinance, 1998 stand restored for an indefinite period both for old and new foreign currency accounts as well as for the amounts that have been or will be converted into rupees. It was also stated therein that the Government was in the process of providing the necessary legal cover to this effect. It also provided that the foreign currency deposits as on 28-5-1998 could continue to be converted in rupees at the official exchange rate, but restrictions on their withdrawal in foreign exchange would continue and that amounts of incremental deposits after 1-7-1998 could be withdrawn in foreign exchange, although the Prime Minister has appealed to all such depositors to, keep, even the incremental amount in their accounts-as. far as-possible.' It may further be stated that para.3 of the above Circular No.3 1. reiterated what was provided in above Circular No.23f, The above para. Reels as follows: ‘ ; "3. Borrowing facilities against ;the.security of balances held in the foreign currency accounts/certificates as on 30-,6r1998 has -been :' withdrawn. The banks/NBF Is will meet this requirement by July 31,1998. A:separate circuit is being issued the subject." WW. It may be observed that Circular No.29 dated 17-11 -1998 extended the period from 317-1998 mentioned in Circular No.23 to 30-11-1998 for compliance with the direction contained in the latter circular quoted. hereinabove.'. J >. 5. It seems that 76. Writ Petitions were. Filed ' Jr ‘the Lahore High Court, ' assailing the validity of Circular No.i23,; which were'dismissed in liming by a learned Single Judge of the above High Court through his order, dated v 30-7-1998. It Was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): latter circular quoted. hereinabove.'. J >. 5. It seems that 76. Writ Petitions were. Filed ' Jr ‘the Lahore High Court, ' assailing the validity of Circular No.i23,; which were'dismissed in liming by a learned Single Judge of the above High Court through his order, dated v 30-7-1998. It Was held that the above circular did not in any manner violate any: provision, of the Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (heremafterPreferred to as Act XII Of 1992) article 2A:of the Constitution. \ \ r; It farther’ seems that against the above order of the learned Single Judge, 68 Intra-Court Appeals were filed, namely,' I.C. As. Nos-,,,,, 708/98v ;,,,,,, -. ",,,,, -,,,,,-,.,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,, 925/,98, ',,,,,,,, 724'/98,.,.,,,, ;, and. : V23":''9./ :.’t also appears that while the above Intra-Court Appeals'were pending some more Writ Petitions} were filed, namely, Nos’.,',,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.,,,, 1757.', ', ",-,,,,,:,r,,,,,,,, and. r">V':: / The above. Intra-Cpurt Appeals and, the Writ Petitions were, heard. Together by.-a Full Bench of the Lahore High Court comprising. Mian, Allah.;-Nawab, Amir Adam. [Dian and. Karamat’ Nazi,BhandariJJ.y’. 6. The above Intra-Court Appeals and the Writ Petitions were allowed by a judgment dated 27-1-1999. Main Allah Nawab, J. who rendered the leading opinion granted the following reliefs: Declaration is granted that section 2 of Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions) Act (IV of 1998) is ultra vires of Article and Article 2A of the Constitution being repugnant to equality protection-clause as well as on account of conferment of naked, arbitrary, unstructured power on - the functionaries of the State Bank. This section so is declared as of no lawful consequences. (2) Declaration is granted to the effect that Circular No.23 is confiscatory in nature and 1s violative of equality protection clause and that the same is so repugnant to Article and Article 2A of the Constitution. The State Bank of Pakistan however, will be well within its right to direct the lending institutions to call for fresh securities from borrowers if they find that the securities/collaterals of their foreign currency deposits as furnished by the petitioners/appellants are not satisfactory or contrary to its credit policy. (3) The Circular No.23 1s, so, declared contrary to law to the extent of directing the lending institutions to liquidate the foreign currency. deposits of borrowers/petitioners/appellants at the rate of 46 rupees for a dollar and. then get fresh securities, ifs needed. (4) Having regard to economic indicators as given in the report of State Bank and having regard to suggestion of Mr. Saved Shankar/one of the petitioners; and having not been objected by any one of appellants/petitioners we are persuaded to direct State Bank to treat the foreign currency account held by petitioners on 23rd May, 1998 under section of Protection of Economic Reforms Act (XII of 1992) as fixed account for a period of 3 years and frame rules with regard to that type of fixed deposits/permitting account-holders to withdraw any amount. SO permitted, from these accounts to be utilised for their necessary expenses to be incurred by account holders on the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): Reforms Act (XII of 1992) as fixed account for a period of 3 years and frame rules with regard to that type of fixed deposits/permitting account-holders to withdraw any amount. SO permitted, from these accounts to be utilised for their necessary expenses to be incurred by account holders on the education of their issues outside the country on medical expenditures and so on and so forth. The State Bank shall frame rules in line with the policy of such fixed accounts within a period of three weeks commencing from this order so as to clear the mist of uncertainty. (5) We are also inclined to direct the Federal Government and to get the. Act XII of 1992 so amended by the Federal Legislature that it may eliminate the two classes of economy as permitted by it and subject foreign, currency accounts to payment of income-tax, wealth tax and. compulsory deduction of Zakat and so as to eliminate the manipulative ' power of dollars/Sterling pounds or any other foreign currency over. ' rupees."’ It may be mentioned that Kara mat Nazi Bhandari, J.' agreed with; Main Allah Nawab, J. as to the grant of reliefs mentioned in above quoted paras. to 3, but dissented from as regards the reliefs mentioned in above quoted paras. and 5. The learned third Judge, namely, Amir Adam Khan, J. agreed with the option of Kara mat Nazi Bhandari, J. In other words, the three learned Judges of the Full Bench; concurred with the grant of the above reliefs mentioned in paras. 1; to 3, whereas the majority 2:1 declined to grant the relief mentioned in above quoted paras.14 and 5. :> A 7. It seems that the Federation of Pakistan filed Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.155-L of 1999, which has. Been how converted into Civil Appeal. No.3.19 of 1999. Along with : the. CPL Av Civil Miscellaneous Application NO.1.13-L of 1999 for suspension of the operation of the impugned judgment of the Full Bench was also filed, whereon a learned Single Judge passed a Chamber order on 28rl- 19991 staying the. operation of. the impugned judgment. Nasser Ahmad and others filed CPLA No.457 of 1997 (which west converted into Civil Appeal No.320 of 1999) and M/s. All Nasser Company (Pvt.) Ltd. filed CPLA No.458.of J999. (which, was converted into Civil Appeal 10.321' of 1999). The above three petitions Were taken up together,and; leave was granted on 25-3-1999 on the. Points, noticed MN the leave granting order. In the above, leave granting order it was also ordered that the appeals arising from the above. petitions should be listed for regular hearing before the summer'vacation of the year. It may be stated that in addition to the'.above CPLA No. I5j5-L/99 in which leave Was granted, the Federation; also filed above Colas against the same judgment of the Full Bench which were ordered to be listed along with the appeals. It may be mentioned'that prior to the filing of above Colas, the Association of Foreign Currency

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): to the'.above CPLA No. I5j5-L/99 in which leave Was granted, the Federation; also filed above Colas against the same judgment of the Full Bench which were ordered to be listed along with the appeals. It may be mentioned'that prior to the filing of above Colas, the Association of Foreign Currency Account Holders.in Pakistan, 19 Belgrade. Road,'London through its President [Vfasudul Hassan had filed Constitution Petition No.26 of 1998 oil 17-9-1998 under Article, 184(3).of the Constitution, directly in this "Court assailing the aforesaid Ordinance and Circular. No.12. ' It may, further be stated that one Said Muriel HUD Chowdhury also presented a Constitution Petition under Article 184(3) of, the Constitution directly in this Court on 24- 3-1999, which was returned to him on’the ground that it was not eritertainable'as it related to dividual grievance.'. However, upon his. application, a Bench of this Court on 25-3- 1999 ordered that> his above Constitution Petition be heard with the connected cases.in the’ subject: Upon another, application. filed by him, he was allowed to argue the case. It may be stated that aforesaid Civil Appeals Nos. 20 and 321 of 1999 were disposed of by a judgment dated 9-6-1999 at Karachi. 8. It may be posted out that while above Intra-Court Appeals were pending in the Lahore High Court, on 26-9,-1998 the Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions) Act, 1998 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) was gazetted and was made effective retrospectively with effect from 28-5-1998. Section 5 whereof repealed the aforesaid Foreign Exchange (Temporary Restrictions) Ordinance, 1998. Section 2 of the Act provided as under-. "2. Restriction on withdrawal of foreign exchange etc.- Notwithstanding anything contained in the Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (XII of 1992) or m any other law for the time being in force, or in any agreement or contract, it is hereby provided that the right to hold, sell, withdraw, transfer, pay or take out foreign exchange held by any person in Pakistan as on the twenty-eighth day of May, 1998 (the 'specified date’) without the prior permission of the State Bank of Pakistan shall ream suspended: WW. Provided that there shall be no legal restriction on any person converting his foreign exchange held as above into rupees at the officially notified rate of exchange. Explanation.-For the purpose of this section "foreign exchange" means foreign exchange held in a foreign currency account or in such other form as the Federal Government may specify." - 9. In support of the above Civil Appeal and the Petitions for Leave to Appeal, Ch. Muhammad Farooq, learned Attorney-General, has contended as under: (i) That the learned Full Bench was not justified in declaring section 2 of the Act as ultra vires the Articles and 2A of the Constitution being - repugnant to equal protection clause as well as on account of alleged conferment of naked, arbitrary. and unstructured power on the functionaries of the State Bank of Pakistan. (i) That even no exception can be taken to Circular No.23 as the State Bank of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): 2A of the Constitution being - repugnant to equal protection clause as well as on account of alleged conferment of naked, arbitrary. and unstructured power on the functionaries of the State Bank of Pakistan. (i) That even no exception can be taken to Circular No.23 as the State Bank of Pakistan has the requisite power under section 25 of the Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the-Ordinance of 1962). -. (um) That the Federation m order to restore confidence among the present/prospective foreign currency account holders have introduced Special US Dollar Bond Scheme on 22- 7-1998 of the denomination of $100, $1000, $10000, $100000 for a period of 3 years, 5 years and 7. years from the date’ of their issue providing six monthly payment of profit thereon in foreign currency and by Circular No.8 of 1999 has - abolished multiple exchange rate systemoid adopted floating interbank rate. According to him, the foreign currency account holders are free to. either purchase the ABO VE Foreign Currency Bonds or to convert their;, foreign,currency into. Rupees at the interbank rate obtaining on :.1 dates when they, intend to convert the same. Thus.according to, him now. they cannot have any justifiable grievance. ; ;.10. On the other hand, Mr. Salman. Abram Raja, Advocate, " who has appeared with special permission of this Court, representing the respondents. in, the above appeal and the respondents in some of the above petitions for leave to appeal, urged as under:. ; :.]' (i) That Circular No;23 is beyond the power of the StateBankof Pakistan. t: contained infections <25 and 41 of the Ordinance of 1962 and hence the : same is illegal. VE -1SrL (11) “That the above impugned Circular has been issued for collateral object. ; and not for the purpose envisaged. in.the above. sections. of the Ordinance of 1962 and, therefore/it is colorable exercise of the : powers. ---V. (1) That since the above Circuit-No.123 ! ertvisaigea THB conversion of -.-J.-foreign. Unfancy. Le. US. Dollar at a rate below the market price, the ".‘.I"; “same is'confiscator yin new (iv) That since section 2 OF the Act confers on' the State Bank ungalvanized, unregulated/and arbitrary powers, the. same-is,hit by- the doctrine of. Abfi-verv-delegpn.-, Sh?.-yr'-y HRI'room, 1l. Dr. Farooq Hassan. learned Senior Advocate Supreme Court appearing for the petitioners in,Constitution Petition; No: 26 of 1999; has contended that v since, the? foreign currency account holders' had deposited their foreign exchange in Pakistan.pursuance.to: the in Circular. No. 12 dated ':29-L 1973-;and; subsection;(4) of sections :and section 10 of Act XII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms.’ Act, 1992), section 21 of the Act is ultra vires the Articles 4, 9 and 24 of the Constitution and so also Circular No. 12 of 1998. This father submission was that'Circuit N6.'2~6£1998'.was! also ultra vires of "the power, of the State ’ Bank of Pakistan, besides it as‘.also violative of '‘Article 25' being discriminatory between a‘ foreigner of Pakistani- origin and a. foreigner of foreign origin. J2. JfSatyid Untrue:.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): so also Circular No. 12 of 1998. This father submission was that'Circuit N6.'2~6£1998'.was! also ultra vires of "the power, of the State ’ Bank of Pakistan, besides it as‘.also violative of '‘Article 25' being discriminatory between a‘ foreigner of Pakistani- origin and a. foreigner of foreign origin. J2. JfSatyid Untrue:. Huda Chowdhury. The petitioner. in -the above'. Constitution, Petition. No. Nil of 19,9,9,; has -.urged that. Since,he' had’ deposited Rajput,X'S, a million’.US Dollars, in. Pakistan after disposing:of all his and his Europe;,on. the.basis of.representation. contained, in. above Circular No.12 of 1973 and the above provisions of the Act, it was not open to the Federation of Pakistan to plead that it had no foreign exchange which it could allow to be remitted. His further submission was that even now the high Government functionaries are having foreign trips with' large delegations and spending a lot of foreign exchange. It was also contended by hm that a number of influential persons of the Government and of the public managed to withdraw substantial amounts from their foreign currency accounts during the period commencing from 11-5-1998 to 28-5-199.8, and that even after the imposition of the above restriction under the Act. 13. We had directed the Governor of State Bank of Pakistan on 9-6-1999 to file a statement medicating names of the persons, accounts numbers and the amounts remitted abroad during the period commencing from 11-5-1998 to 28-5-1999 out of the foreign currency accounts. It was also ordered that me. would also like to have a statement indicating whether any permission had been granted to any private persons to remit the foreign exchange abroad after the enforcement of the Act, and if it was granted, it should be stated on what basis and to whom such permission was granted and for what amount. Pursuant to the above order, the learned Attorney-General has submitted on 17-6-1999 a number of folders containing the requisite information. The foreign currency account holders have been divided MTO A, B and C categories. Category 'A' 1s reflected in ten volumes of folders containing 1931 pages, which show the withdrawal from 43 bank branches during the above period. Folder of Category 'B' contains 38 pages and includes the withdrawal by foreign nationals specially Chinese working in Pakistan, foreign news agencies staff and foreign N.G. Os. carrying out rehabilitation work m Afghanistan to whom the State. Bank of Pakistan had granted permission of withdrawals through Circular No. 17. Folder of Category 'C' contains 83 pages and includes those persons (about one thousand) who withdrew US $1,00,000 or more from 37 bank branches. Since the time available to us was not sufficient to examine the above voluminous record as we intended to announce the judgment on the following day 1e. on 18-6-1999, it has been provided in para. of the short order quoted hereinabove that the same will be examined for initiating suitable action in accordance with law, if so warranted. 14. Before touching upon the above contentions of the learned counsel for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): the judgment on the following day 1e. on 18-6-1999, it has been provided in para. of the short order quoted hereinabove that the same will be examined for initiating suitable action in accordance with law, if so warranted. 14. Before touching upon the above contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, we may reproduce the statement reflecting the position of the foreign currency deposits WW. furnished by the learned Attorney-General, which reads as follows:. Foreign Exchange Reserves as. on Friday the 4th June, 1999: $1,744 (M) (2) Debt Service Estimate during net financial year Le. July, $.2,877 (M) 1999 to June 2000. (3) Foreign Currency Deposits, As on 28-5-1998:, ; Institutional v. $1,426;79(M) f Other. Non-residents 2,563.69 (M) Residents 6.967.50 (M) Total:,."V $10,957.98 Sr.7' "As on 30-4-1999: - 9=7""". Institutional y. ’ v/ $1,385.98 (M), Other, Non-residents 1,430.18 (M). Residents J $2.918.92 (M) V'/ V; Total: 1' $5,735.08 (M) 'J/:4r.;'. "-V As on 31-5-1999: y' \ Total:. T V 3s;. $5,144.70 7 - VIH- (Institution Idqjcisits figure ’y:' remains Unchanged),,, -; by: (Break-up in terms of Residents, and Non-Residents not yet. received).; ; WW. / (4) Foreign Currency deposits. v. y under lien as of 30-4-1999 922.83 (M) 7(5)' Special ;USpdll£trBonds Issued'” ; 777 ~'1 r; ’ against F.C. deposits up to "' fly'7 7'"7 Of; ; 4th June, 199?: 7 v;$1,182.10 (M) / Interest paid on Special U.S. Dollar j, Bonds up to 8-6-$1099 1,860,363 (The ' first, sale o bonds took place on13-8-1998);.r, VJ.; (6) Total amounts of Foreign Currency y'yS7, Deposits encased up to 4th June, 1999 :$4,993.90 (M) (7), Figures of Home Remittances since July, 1998:,/y Months. 7 Amount July, 1998.' 133,59 (M) - August, 1998 96.10 (M). September, 1998 71.13 (M) October, 1998/. 78.19 November,1998', 109.20 (M). December, 1998 '. 88.31,’ January, 1999–77.40 (M)'“ February, 1999 67.93 (M). March, 1999 80.74 (M) - April, 1999 72.02 (M). (With effect from 22nd July, 1998, Home Remittances were encased at Composite Rate)." A perusal of the above-quoted statement indicates that on 28-5-1998 the total of foreign currency deposits was US $10957.98 million. WW. However, on 30-4-1999 this was reduced to US $5,735.08 million on account of conversion of foreign currency in PAK Rupee. It may further be noticed that the deposits of US $922.83 million in foreign currency accounts were under lien as of 30-4r1999. It may also be stated that aforesaid special US Dollar Bonds issued against foreign currency deposits up to 4-6-1999 valued US $1,182.10 million, whereas interest paid on Special US $ Bonds up to 8-6-1999 comes to US $1,860,363. The first sale of above bonds took place on 30-8-1998. It may further he stated that foreign currency account holders got US $4,993.90 million converted into PAK Rupee up to 4-6-1999. The figures of home remittance since July, 1998 to April.1999 indicate that a total amount of US $874.61 million was received. 15. Against the above liability, the foreign exchange reserve position of Pakistan during the period from 28-5-1998 to 27-1-1999 was as

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): million converted into PAK Rupee up to 4-6-1999. The figures of home remittance since July, 1998 to April.1999 indicate that a total amount of US $874.61 million was received. 15. Against the above liability, the foreign exchange reserve position of Pakistan during the period from 28-5-1998 to 27-1-1999 was as under: FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVE POSITION Date Amount in Million US $ 28-5-1998 ' 1,282.8 29-6-1998 894.0 30-10-1998 440.2 31-12-1998 1,057.7. 27-1-1999 1,580.2. From the above quoted figures it is evident that the total foreign’ reserve on 28-5-1998 was only US $1282.8 million against the total liability of foreign currency deposit of US $10,957.98 million. In this view of the matter, it was not possible for the Federation of Pakistan or the State Bank of Pakistan to allow the remittance of the above foreign currency deposit of US $10,957.98 million keeping in view the aforesaid meager amount of foreign exchange reserve. It may also be stated that besides the above ability of the Federation in respect of the aforesaid foreign currency deposits it had other abilities in foreign exchange 1.e. payments which were to be made for debt servicing and on import etc. 16. With the above factual background, we may now advert to the question, whether the restrictions imposed by section 2 of the Act were so warranted. We have already reproduced the above: section 2 of the Act. Which provides that notwithstanding anything contained in, Act XII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992) or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any agreement, or - contract, : 1t is-hereby provided that the right to.; hold, sell, withdraw transfer, pay or take out foreign exchange held. by any person in Pakistan as on the >.twenty.*eighth day of May, 1998 ' (the./specified date’) without-'the. prior -permission’ of] the State- Bank. of Pakistan " shall remain suspended. It may also;, be posted out that, the provost.'the:, above section -lays. J. down:that there,shall be no. legal restriction-on any person converting his. Foreign exchange held as;;ABO,ve into, rupees,;at the officially notified rate off exchange.-. Whereas explanation to.the. above proviso provides that. "for'the purpose of this, section’ " foreign{exchange" means foreign exchange held in. a foreign currency account ORM such other form as the. Federal, Government: may, specify". It may ; also be stated that the above Circular No.12 of 1998 (dated 29j75-1998) notified;, the rate of conversion of US Dollars AURS.46. Versus Dollar. -That it.will; not-.be. out.of context,at:. this, stage, to post, out. that' subsection (1) of section 3,of the Act provides that subject to the’ provision of this Act all the protections and immunities conferred in terms of the Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992 (XII of 1992), shall remain-unaffected. ' 17, We may now advert to the Preamble, sections 5 and 6 of Act XXII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms'. Act.1992)," which read Las follows. -.' "Whereas it is necessary_create.a liberal environment for,savings and. investments; and other matters. Relating thereto; it And whereas a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): of 1992), shall remain-unaffected. ' 17, We may now advert to the Preamble, sections 5 and 6 of Act XXII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms'. Act.1992)," which read Las follows. -.' "Whereas it is necessary_create.a liberal environment for,savings and. investments; and other matters. Relating thereto; it And whereas a number of economic reforms havebeeri introduced and, are MN, the process of being introduced'? to achieve-‘ the-aforesaid. objectives; ‘ : And whereas it is necessary to provide legal protection to these reforms in- order to create confidence in the'e'establishment and continuity BF the -liberal economic;environment created thereby’.’. - r 5. Immunities to foreign currency ‘accounts.-(IVAII citizens of Pakistan resident >in Pakistan or outside Pakistan who hold 'foreign' currency accounts in Pakistan and all other persons'who hold such accounts,-shall continue to enjoy immunity against any entry- from the Income Tax.' Department Oran other taxation authority as to the,source of financing. of the foreign currency accounts. (2) The balances in the foreign currency and income therefrom. Shall, remain exempted from the levy of wealth tax arid COMETA and compulsory deduction of Zakat at source. (3) The banks shall Malta complete secrecy in respect of transactions m the foreign currency accounts. (4) The State Bank of Pakistan or other banks shall not impose any restrictions on deposits in and withdrawals from the foreign currency accounts and restrictions, if any, shall stand withdrawn forthwith. 10. Protection of financial obligation.-All financial obligations incurred including those under any instrument, or any financial and contractual commitment made by or on behalf of the Government shall remain in force, and shall not be altered to the disadvantage of the beneficiaries." It may be noticed that the Preamble to the above Act described the object of the Act by providing that it is necessary to create a liberal environment for savings and investments, and other matters relating thereto. It also referred to a number of economic reforms having been introduced and are m the process of being produced to achieve the aforesaid objective. It also states that it is necessary to provide legal protection to the reforms in order to create confidence in the establishment and continuity of the liberal economic environment created thereby. It may further be noticed that section 5 provides immunities to foreign currency accounts from the payment of income-tax and Zakat, subsection (4) thereof contains a solemn undertaking by providing that the State Bank of Pakistan or other banks shall not impose any restrictions on deposits in and withdrawals from the foreign currency accounts and restrictions, if any, shall stand withdrawn forthwith. Whereas section 10 expressly lays down that all financial obligations incurred including those, under any instrument, or any financial and contractual commitment made by or on behalf of the Government shall remain in force, and shall not be altered to the disadvantage of the beneficiaries. 18. We were perturbed to note that in spite of the above solemn commitment made by the Legislature, the successive Governments improperly utilized the foreign exchange deposits of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): by or on behalf of the Government shall remain in force, and shall not be altered to the disadvantage of the beneficiaries. 18. We were perturbed to note that in spite of the above solemn commitment made by the Legislature, the successive Governments improperly utilized the foreign exchange deposits of the foreign currency account holders in breach of the above solemn commitment and the State Bank of Pakistan also failed to perform its statutory duty enter Asia envisaged under section 25 of the Ordinance (Bank mg Companies Ordinance, 1962) to,protect the interests of the foreign currency account holders thereby creating a situation, where at present it has become practically impossible to honor the above solemn undertaking given by the Legislature. Senator Santa Aziz, who-was the Finance Minister at the relevant: time'in his Article under the caption "Why Foreign Currency Accounts were Frozen" Has given the version of the Federation as to the reasons for freezing, the foreign currency accounts. He inters- Asia.stated;that as a result of the cumulative current account deficit the. the difference between total imports of goods and, services between 1-7-1993 and 30-6-1997 was 12.9 billion and at least 87 ' of the above deficit was thus financed by these foreign currency accounts (Annex-II). He further stated-that in the absence of aforesaid freezing the meager reserves of 1.2 billion would have disappeared within three to seven days.'He also admitted that though the decision to freeze the foreign currency. accounts was inevitable but TT adversely affected the credibility of the : Government; 7 s - 19, Mr. Salman Abram Raja has candidly Conceded that notwithstanding the above solemn commitment given,by the Parliament in Act XII of :1992, the Parliament was competent to enact section- 2 of the Act imposing temporary I restrictions on-the withdrawal of the amounts from the: foreign currency. accounts. However, his submission was that the State Bank of Pakistan had no power under section 25 or 4.1 of the Ordinance of 1962 to "direct the foreign. ' Currency ; account" holders whose foreign currency-deposits were accepted as a collateral. Security against the local loans by. the various banks to. provide fresh ( security, in place of foreign currency deposit or to liquidate the lability - The above contention seems to be correct. In this behalf it may be pertinent to refer to section 25 of the Ordinance of 1962 which reads as under: '™25. Power of State Bank to control advances BV banking companies- - (1) Whenever the State Bank, is satisfied that it is necessary, or expedient ’ ‘, in the public interest so to do, IFMA determine the policy in. relation to advances to be followed by. Banking companies generally or by any ‘ banking company mm particular, and, when the policy has been so. determined, all banking companies or the banking company concerned, AIs the case may be, shall be bound to follow the-policy ’ is so “ "determined. (2) - Without’ prejudice to the generality of the power. conferred: by subsection the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): banking company mm particular, and, when the policy has been so. determined, all banking companies or the banking company concerned, AIs the case may be, shall be bound to follow the-policy ’ is so “ "determined. (2) - Without’ prejudice to the generality of the power. conferred: by subsection the State Bank may. give directions to : banking, companies either generally or to any banking company or group of. banking companies TN particular,- "flu'W1 '1;'? ! :(a)'q!as to;the credit ceiling to:be mattified credit targets to be achieved. Or f:.Hawaii{ttertt>'-. -'Regions; the purposes for*which. o0.’Ie IP;;advances'may,or may not-fbe 'made -the margins to/be maintained in / f Respect "of - advances,the Tate's'- of-interest applied on advances and the maximum or minimum. profit sharing '' ratios; and - (b) prohibiting the giving of loans, advances and credit to any borrower or group of borrowers” on the basis of interest, either for a specific purpose ' or for any purpose whatsoever; and each banking company shall be bound to comply with any direction so given. (3) If any default is made by a banking company in complying with the policy determined under subsection (1) or direction given under subsection every director and other officer of the banking company and every other person who is knowingly a party to such default shall, by order of the State Bank, be liable to a penalty of any amount which. may extend to twenty thousand rupees and, where the default is a continuing one, of a further amount which may extend to one thousand rupees for every day after the first during which the default continues. (4) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsection the State Bank may, for the purposes of securing implementation of any special credit schemes or monetary policy or observance of. credit ceilings by a banking company, by order in writing require banking companies generally, or any banking company MN particular, to make special deposits with it for such amount and on such terms and conditions as. may be laid down by the State Bank in this behalf. (5) The amount deposited with the State Bank under subsection or any part thereof may, at the discretion of the State Bank, be released by it to the. Banking company which deposited it as and when the State Bank deems fit either unconditionally or on such terms and subject to such conditions as the State Bank may, by order in writing, determining from time to time. (6) Any penalty imposed under subsection (3) shall be payable on demand made by the State Bank and, in the event of refusal or failure by the Director, officer or other person concerned to pay on such demand, shall be recoverable as arrear of land revenue." The perusal of the.above quoted section indicates that the above section empowers the State Bank of Pakistan to control advances by banking companies by laying down the policy in respect of matters referred to in its subsection (2) Le. as to the credit ceiling,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): recoverable as arrear of land revenue." The perusal of the.above quoted section indicates that the above section empowers the State Bank of Pakistan to control advances by banking companies by laying down the policy in respect of matters referred to in its subsection (2) Le. as to the credit ceiling, credit targets, the purposes for which advances may or may not be made, the margins, to be maintained in respect of advances, the rates of interest, charges or mark-up to be applied on advances and the maximum or minimum profit sharing ratios, and prohibiting the giving of loans, advances and credit to any borrower or group of borrowers on the basis of interest, either for a specific purpose or for any purpose whatsoever, but had no power to alter the terms and conditions of an agreement of loan already entered mint to and acted upon between a bank and. Its customers through a circular. It may be. stated that. it is a well settled; proposition of law that a notification or an executive order which may adversely. affect the rights of any person cannot be given.'retrospective effect: In this regard reference may be invade to the case of Ashwani Hotels Limited v: Federation of Pakistan WW. and others PLD. 1997'SC 315, in Which this Court while c'oristruirig the State Bank Circular held as under:. 16.:Reverting to the question, whether such a direction can. affect the loan agreement which were. Already concluded prior to such direction, it' may be observed that it is a well-settled principle of interpretation of. ‘ A - notification and/or an executive order that, the same can operate. /” prospectively and not retrospectively. This : principle -'is equally 1 applicable to a statute in the absence of 'any express dr implied intendment contrary to if, It maybe observed that Mr. Manor Ahmed ‘ ; ’ Khan,!in support of the above ‘proposition* has referred to the following :'’ cases:--’ r' ! (2) Chicago Hypocotyl Constancia Coronal. v;- Day Devi and others PLD 1954 PC 22; v- vi A-1*. Adnan Axial v.-Capt. Her Axial PLP'1969 SC 1871 - "' Gun)T’ The Income Tax Officer Investigation), Circle I, Dacca and another v. : Sulaiman BhaiandanotherPLD 1970 SC 80; : 1. (iv) Main Reified- Din and' 6 others v. The Chief Settlement and - Rehabilitation Commissioner and 2 others PLD1971 SC 232;\. (v) Mahmood' Shah etc. v: Additional Settlement Commissioner Revenue In the above report the: subject-matter was a circular issued under section 25 of the Ordinance of 1962 by the State Bank of Pakistan. Reference may also be made to the. Case of Messes Army Welfare Sugar. Mills. Limited, and others.v. Federation of Pakistan ran.others™'.! SCMR. 1652, in which it has been, held by; this;:Court that.a notification adversely affecting, the right of any person cannot operate retrospectively but if, the same confers any benefit; it can be.made.applicable retrospectively:. \. Even.otherwise.the.impugned portion of the above Circular,No123, cannot be, sustained for, the reason that.it is confiscatory,in,nature and interferes with contractual rights and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): has been, held by; this;:Court that.a notification adversely affecting, the right of any person cannot operate retrospectively but if, the same confers any benefit; it can be.made.applicable retrospectively:. \. Even.otherwise.the.impugned portion of the above Circular,No123, cannot be, sustained for, the reason that.it is confiscatory,in,nature and interferes with contractual rights and obligations under the concluded contracts, inasmuch, 9S, it prohibits; the. Use of the.foreign currency deposits with. Pakistan :as a security, which, was already, ;accepted by. the. banks against the loans prior.to the issuance, of the. above Circuit without-acquiring the. above foreign currency deposits under, appropriate.provision'.of law, against the.payment. of compensation. However, the above Circular has been withdrawn byte State Bank of Pakistan as stated by the learned Attorney-General in the Court before us on 9-6- 1999 and, therefore, it does not hold the field. 20. Mr. Salman Abram Raja has also pointed out that by the above Circular No. 23 the State Bank was intended and designed to coerce the foreign currency account holders to convert the foreign currency deposit into rupees at the rate of Rs.46 per US Dollar notified under FE Circular No 12 dated 29-5-1998, which rate was below the market rate. His further submission was that since the foreign currency account holders whose foreign currency deposits were accepted as a security were directed to substitute the security or to liquidate the lability by 31-7- 1998, it amounted to coerce them to convert their foreign currency deposits into rupees or to liquidate the lability. According to him, the foreign currency account holders even otherwise could not have been offered above rate of Rs.46 per US Dollar for conversion into rupees, as the market rate on 31-7-1998, was Rs.54.25 buying rate and Rs.55.25 selling rate per US Dollar as reflected in the statement filed by the State Bank of Pakistan (at page 188 of paper book-I of Civil Appeal No. )! In. support of his above submission, he has relied upon the cases of Jitendra Kishore. Achharyya Chowdhury and 58 others v. The Province of East Pakistan and Secretary, Finance and Revenue (Revenue) Department, Government of East Pakistan PLD 1957 SC (PAK.) 9 and Azaleas Wage and others v. Chief Land Commissioner, Punjab, Lahore and others PLD 1990 SC 99. In the above first case this Court while construing the provisions of East Bengal State Acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1950 held that the above Act is essentially a confiscatory enactment because it takes man's property by paying him, say twice the annual net income of that-property and not the market value as the compensation. Whereas in the latter case Sharia Appellate Bench of the Court had dilated upon the Islamic concept of compulsory acquisition of private property. It would be pertinent to reproduce para.4 from the option of Justice Muhammad Taxi Usman (Member), which'reads as follows: WW. market- V/UE). “a v\. "CJ "o W /. ''?' _*res?'r V ;The legal position. seems to. be that no, person,can be deprived of,his property aero under any Acquisition. Law for public

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): would be pertinent to reproduce para.4 from the option of Justice Muhammad Taxi Usman (Member), which'reads as follows: WW. market- V/UE). “a v\. "CJ "o W /. ''?' _*res?'r V ;The legal position. seems to. be that no, person,can be deprived of,his property aero under any Acquisition. Law for public purposes without payment of compensation which. Should,bebased: on the market, rate and not at the rate fixed by the authority, which this acquired or which is instrumental in; acquiring the. Property involved. ; t\., :‘S'\' 21!: CFR. Muhammad Farooq, learned’ Attorney-General has also contended that ; ;since; the Emergency has, been imposed -under Article 232 of the Constitution, the impugned Circular acid the section. of the Act are protected HY'clause (1) of Article 233 of the Constitution which' provides that "Nothing contained in Articles 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 24 shall, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in force, restrict the power of the State as ‘'deemed in Article 7; to make y law BR; to take ‘any executive action which it would, but for the' provisions in the said. Articles- be coiripetenf to make or to take, but any law so, Male.still, to the. Extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect,’; and shall be. deemed to have been repealed; - at’ the time when' the' Proclamation 1s; revoked or. ; has ceased to be in force". --Vs-:;: V'.' - ' The above'contention is not well, founded as the Circular has. been issued by the’-State Bank of, Pakistan which,is.not covered by the. definition of State AS'GIVEN in Article 7 of this Constitution which, defies that ‘"the State" means'the Federal Government [Males-e-Shoora (Parliament)], a Provincial Government a Provincial’ Assembly, ' and. such’ local or other authorities in Pakistan as are'by law'empowered to impose any tax process"-. The, State Bank is the creature of a statute, namely, the State Bank BF Pakistan Act,"1956. It has no power. to, impose a tax or Cessna's envisaged by above Article of the Constitution. Furthermore,: simpliciter. the.fac tum that the Proclamation of Emergency holds the field would not’ justify passing of an executive order, contrary TP any Constitutional provision under the cover of clause. (1) of Article 233?- but such executive order or- action should have the backing, of law which should be enacted after the imposition of Emergency. In this regard, reference only be made TB the case'of Bennett Coleman COV Ltd!-acid others v. Union of India and:others (AIR 1973) SC'106), IH which Indian Supreme Court while considering virus'of.the import policy-for newspapers prints held that Article 358, (which corresponds to Article 233(1),"PFL'Pakistani Constitution), does not apply, to an executive action taken during the emergency if the same is a continuation of the prior executive action-or an emanation of the previous law; and. Which prior’executive action/or previous law would otherwise be violative of Article, 19 or be otherwise, unconstitutional. It.has been further, held that the executive. Action which.is constitutional;'-is.' not’ immune during” the proclamation of emergency unless the same is supported by some legislative

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): executive action-or an emanation of the previous law; and. Which prior’executive action/or previous law would otherwise be violative of Article, 19 or be otherwise, unconstitutional. It.has been further, held that the executive. Action which.is constitutional;'-is.' not’ immune during” the proclamation of emergency unless the same is supported by some legislative which is enacted after the imposition of emergency. The same view was taken by a Division Bench of the Lahore High Court in the case of Province of Punjab through its Home Secretary and 3 others V. Gular Hussain, Advocate and 8 others (PLD 1978 Lahore 1298), in which it was held that no executive authority could take any executive action without the support of valid law and any action taken in violation of the above rule could be struck down by the High Court under Article 190 of the Constitution as being without lawful authority. It was also held that Article 8(2) of the Constitution prohibited making of any legislation, in violation of Fundamental Rights except six Fundamental Rights mentioned in clause (1) of Article 233 during the emergency. It was further held that the guarantee under Article is quite separate and distinct from the Fundamental Rights and no inroads could have been permitted even during the emergency. It may be pointed out that after the imposition Of emergency in Pakistan no law has been enacted conferring additional power on the State Bank of Pakistan. The impugned Circular was not founded on section 2 of the Act but was issued pursuant to the power conferred on the State Bank under the Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962, namely, section 25 thereof In this view of the matter, the impugned portion of the Circular cannot be defended on the plea that. the Circular was issued after the proclamation of emergency. 22. It- may be observed that interference with the right of the account holders to' use the above foreign currency deposits even in Pakistan as a security constitutes taking over of the same, without payment of compensation and, therefore, the same is violative, inter alia, of Article of the. WW. Constitution. In this behalf, reference may be made to the following passage from the book Treatise on Constitutional Law Substance and Procedure, Second Edition by Ronald D. Rotunda:. ' "The fifth amendment provides that private property may not be ’taken' by the Federal Government without just compensation. The central issue in many eminent domain cases is whether the Governmental - interference amounts to a 'taking’. Although the concept of a taking may originally have: contemplated only physical appropriation, it is play today that non-acquisitive Governmental action may amount to a taking in a Constitutional sense. A 'taking’, therefore, may be found when Governmental activity results in significant physical damage to property that impairs its use. Although the State, possesses the power to regulate property without payment of compensation, if the regulation goes too far, a taking may also be found. Furthermore, a taking may occur as to a tangible-property interest. where the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): Governmental activity results in significant physical damage to property that impairs its use. Although the State, possesses the power to regulate property without payment of compensation, if the regulation goes too far, a taking may also be found. Furthermore, a taking may occur as to a tangible-property interest. where the owner had a reasonable expectation that such property, would not be used by the Government and such expectation was impaired." :' Reference’'may. also, be made to the. case of Petinusylyania "Coal Company plaintiff in Err; v. HJ. Mahon and Margaret Craig,Mahon (260 US 322 67 Law/Edition 393) where Mr. Justice Holmes observed as follows; ; "It is our opinion-that' the act. cannot’ be sustained as an exercise of the police-power, so far as'it :,affects;the: Ming'of coal under streets or cities in places where’the right to mine such coal has been reserved. As. said in a Pennsylvania case:.'. Eor practical, purposes, the right to coal consists in.the. right to mine t', Com. ex.REL. Keaton v. Clearview Coal Co,2561Pa. 328,-331. L.R.A. 1917E, :6.72; 100 ATL 820. What makes;.” the right to mine coal valuable is that it can be exercised with profit. To V make it commercially impracticable to mine certain coal has very nearly: the. same effect for Constitutional purposes as appropriating or destroying it. This [415] we think that we AI;c warranted in assuming that the statute does."’.», The above treatise and the. Judgment of the US Supreme: Court indicate that] taking over of property may. take place even though there is no. physical : taking overbuy the property is damaged or impaired who cleaner presents its use, or reduces/its usefulness to a level; which. May, become non-profitable to' an extent unbearable as a normal risk. of the SUBJECT-RMATTER involved,,,. 23. If may/also :b;e. Pertinent to opt-out that section~2 of the Act would have been, ultra vires if it. was to deprive the foreign currency account holders the domain over the foreign, currency. Deposits, or. if is had compelled the. account. holders to convert the : foreign - currency deposits in Pakistani Rupees against their volition IAT- a notified rate- acid because ;of that we have Clarified in/ our short order that section 2; of the Act is intra vires. Of the Constitution-subject to the declaration that the same does not confer any power on the Federation or on the State Bank of Pakistan to compel foreign currency account holders to convert their foreign exchange holdings into PAK Rupee at the officially, notified rate of exchange, PR to compel the said account holders TP liquidate their above accounts into PAK Rupee which foreign exchange holdings. Had been accepted by the respective banks as,security against. Any' [Part of other-facilities extended to them. r'/ /. We may also.post out that notwithstanding the imposition of the Emergency and. the j suspension of Articles 15, 16, 17, 18, 191 and 24 of the Constitution by -virtue of clause of Article 233-v Article 199 of the. Constitution remains available not,only for the enforcement of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): them. r'/ /. We may also.post out that notwithstanding the imposition of the Emergency and. the j suspension of Articles 15, 16, 17, 18, 191 and 24 of the Constitution by -virtue of clause of Article 233-v Article 199 of the. Constitution remains available not,only for the enforcement of the Fundamental ' Rights which remain unsuspended but also enforce the rights, ARF obligations as contained, inter alia. I'm Article of the- Constitution which provides as follows:, Right of individuals to be dealt with in accordance with law.1 etc.--(1) ). To enjoy the protection of law and to be treated ‘in accordance with law phi. is the alienable right of every citizen, wherever he may be, and of ever}' other person for the time. Being within Pakistan. (2) In particular- (a) no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of any person shall be taken except in accordance with law; ‘ (b) no person shall be prevented from or be hindered in doing that which is not prohibited by law; and, (c) no person shall be compelled to do that which the law does not require him to do. ‘ The perusal of the above quoted Article indicates that every citizen and every other person for the time being in Pakistan is guaranteed as his alienable right to enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in accordance with law wherever he may be and' in particular no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of any person can be taken except in accordance with law. The scope of the above Article has been very ably discussed by Aladdin, J. in his opinion in the case of Ch. Manzoor Elah v. Federation of Pakistan etc. (PLD 1975 SC 66), which was approved by this very Full Bench in the case of Vardar Farooq Ahmad Khan Safari and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others (supra), as under: (xiv) That the Fundamental Rights not suspended under Article 233 of the Constitution remain fully operative and everybody in Pakistan is under an obligation to respect it. The mere fact that an aggrieved person TS temporarily prevented from moving any Court for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights does not relieve an authority of its obligation to comply with it. [Aladdin Ahmed, J. (Ch. Manzoor Elah's case) (supra)]. (xv) That a High Court has the jurisdiction under'Article 199 of the Constitution to grant relief to a person arrested illegally with its jurisdiction, although he is for the time being detained outside its jurisdiction. [Aladdin Ahmed, J. (Ch. Manor Elah's case) (supra)]. (xvi)That Article 199 of the Constitution is available not only for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights but also to enforce the rights and obligations as contained in Articles and 5 of the Constitution. ' [Aladdin Ahmed, J. (Ch. Manor Elah's case) (supra)]. (N.B. above paras, (xii) to (xvi) relate to late 1962 Constitution.)" Besides the above Article 4, Article 23 (which is one of the Articles

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): but also to enforce the rights and obligations as contained in Articles and 5 of the Constitution. ' [Aladdin Ahmed, J. (Ch. Manor Elah's case) (supra)]. (N.B. above paras, (xii) to (xvi) relate to late 1962 Constitution.)" Besides the above Article 4, Article 23 (which is one of the Articles contained under Part II of the Constitution relating to Fundamental Rights) enjoys that every citizen shall have the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property in any part of Pakistan subject to the Constitution and any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the public-interest'. The above'Article 23 is still m the field as it is hot mentioned mm clause of Article 233 of the Constitution. However, we are unable to subscribe to the view that section 2 of the Act confers unbridled, naked, arbitrary and, unstructured powers, on the functionaries of the State Bank. Of Pakistan AHD therefore it is hit by the doctrine of excessive delegation, or. that it 1s ultra vires the Articles and 2A of the Constitution. No doubt, that no foreign currency account, holder could operate foreign currency account without the prior permission of the State Bank of Pakistan, but it is implied and inherent that such permission 1s.to.be granted! on the basis of reasonable classification which should be based on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes person ;or companies that are grouped together from those who have been left,out and that, the. Differentia must have: retained. nexus to the object sought to be achieved by such classification,asi held by, this Court in the-case of I.A. Sharman v. Government of :Pakistan through. Secretary, Finance."Division, Islamabad (1991 SCMR 1041).and the ease.;p Messes Gadroon Textile Mills and’v 8 LH. ‘others: v. WAPE)A and others.(199' scmr641). Jr” Any circular which1 may be issued by the State Bank; of Pakistan fog ranting permission to; the *foreign currency account holders to 'operate' the foreign currency accounts not founded on the above reasonable: classification will, not be'sustainable. In this regard, it may be pertinent to mention,tha Dr. Faroogq Hassan, Senior Advocate. Supreme Court has pointed out they foreigners. Of Pakistani origin r are discriminated from. Foreigners of foreign origin. In order- to eliminate the above, discrimination, in our above-cited show order we have held ;ATN(-tint';stem';and. foreigners maintaining foreign currency accounts as. on" 2875-1998 ' will, be entitled to. Utilise the( interest/profits payable TP them under the above arrangements between them an< the bank concerned in any manner including the right to remit the same abroad In this view of the matter,-the discrimination, if any, has been removed. 24, We'may also point, out that:,there, is. a -marked distinction’ between ; provision BF a statute which may be ex face discriminatory. And a. provision thereof which may be capable of BMG pressed, into service in discriminator} manner. The former, would be label to be struck ;down on. The ground o violation of Article 25 of the Constitution, but the latter provision cannot b< struck down on the ground that it is.capable.of being used in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): thereof which may be capable of BMG pressed, into service in discriminator} manner. The former, would be label to be struck ;down on. The ground o violation of Article 25 of the Constitution, but the latter provision cannot b< struck down on the ground that it is.capable.of being used in discriminator) manner. However, any discriminatory action which may be taken pursuant! to such provision can be struck down. In.this regard, reference may be made to the case of Mehran Ali and others.v. Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD 1998 JSC 1445), in which it was contended that since section 34 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997 (Act XXI of 1997) conferred on. the Government the power to amid the Schedule to the said Act so as to add any entry thereto or modify or ; omit any entry therein by a notification, the’same was ultra vires the. Constitution as it was capable of being misused by the Government. The above contention was repelled as under: "(iv) It may be observed that, the learned counsel for the petitioners urged with vehemence that the power given under section 34 of the Act to the Government to amend the Schedule to the Act so as to add any entry thereto or modify or omit any entry there by a notification is ultra vires the Constitution. It has been further urged by them that the above power has been abused inasmuch as many offenses have been included which have no nexus with the object of the Act or with the offenses covered by sections 6, 7 and 8 thereof: In this regard, it may be pertinent to mention that delegation of such power to the Government by the Legislature is not an unusual phenomenon. In order to implement the object of a statute or to work out certain detail, such power is normally delegated. In this regard, reference may. be made to the case of Zambian Textile Mills Ltd. v. Central Board of Revenue and others (PLD 1983 SC 358). In the above case, the Legislature had conferred : power on the Central Board of Revenue, to formulate guidelines to determine rate of production, capacity tax and even to levy tax-under section 3(4), (6), of the Central Excises and Salt. Act, 1944, as. amended by the Finance Act, 1966. The above provision was assailed, but this Court held that the Legislature was competent to employ, proper agency to accomplish its legislative purpose. Reference may also be made to the case of Muhammad Hussain Ghulam Muhammad and another v. The State of Bombay and another Ishwarbhai Becharbhai and WW. others. Interveners (AIR 1962 SC 97), in which also such delegation was upheld by the Indian Supreme Court.". The case in hand is squarely covered by the above judgment, as at the most it can be urged that section 2 of the Act is capable of being used Ina. Discriminatory manner, but it cannot be said that the same, is ex face discriminatory. In our short order

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): Court.". The case in hand is squarely covered by the above judgment, as at the most it can be urged that section 2 of the Act is capable of being used Ina. Discriminatory manner, but it cannot be said that the same, is ex face discriminatory. In our short order we have held the above section as intra vires subject to the declaration contamed their. 25. Dr. Faroog Hassan, learned Senior Advocate Supreme Court and Mr. Salman Abram Raja, Advocate have assailed the impugned section 2 on the ground that the same is a colorable legislation. In support of the above submission Mr. Salman Abram Raja has referred to the treatise on Constitutional Law of India, A Critical Commentary (Third Edition) by H.M. Serval, the case of Attorney-General of Alberta v. Attorney-General of Canada and others (AJR 1939 Privy Council 53) and the case of The State of Bihar v. Sir Kashgar Singh (AIR 1952 SC 252). In the above treatise the author has described colorable legislation, as under: "3.15. A Legislature lacking legislative, power or subject to a Constitutional, prohibition may frame its legislation so as to make it appear to be 1 / V -t within ' TTS 'legislative' power or to be free from the Constitutional - Such a law. is *colorable’ legislation,'meaning thereby that " >". : while pretending to be a Jaw in the exercise of undoubted power, it is in I'y-,"kHz v FTA'lagoon a prohibited FUFTK’"” <<, I. In the above first case the question ifordetermmnation before the Privy Council ’ was/ whether the taxation which /was for raising the revenue for provincial purposes was within the meaning ?of section 92(2). of the British North America :Act,1867 or whether it was in; substance a tax: on banks and savings BSNKS which-fell within section 91;(15)(16) respectively of.that. Act: It was held, that the law-is in no sense the one' relating to taxation! fofprdyincial purposes but was'V law designed to prevent: the function of banks;and:savings banks in the Provinces. Both of* which subjects‘-were /exclusively t, subjects! of} the Dominion ;Legislature :and thus the law was colorable for;the reason recorded their;. Whereas' in the: second case’ the whole Act1 relating to. acquisition of the estate cereals' legislation or as: a: fraud-on the Constitution. The Indian {Supreme: Court by 'a majority WW. *of 2:3 held that the 4(b) and 23(f) BF the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 were colorable legislation,ahd were void. Section.4(b) ‘provided - that ail -arrears - of -re. ; whether, they had merged ITO a ‘decree 6Y:HQ- !ere"to'yest- the'Geraint, ;IND.-fifty':)nascent'. Those.rents. were / to be ’ added to ;:the.compensate’oh’ ?payable; to 'the; landholders. Whereas section ' 23(f) 'prided for deduction; representing’; to -.12-1 /2/per' cent, of the gross.assets' as: " costs' of work for the benefits' of Rattans VIN ascertain’ the net assets’ :on which compensation was to be;based. The :Court held;' that the above: provision/was purely arbitrary arid-. had/no: relation.;to facts and. was merely designed to avoid payment of ‘compensation, underdone /.gifts of, laying

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): of the gross.assets' as: " costs' of work for the benefits' of Rattans VIN ascertain’ the net assets’ :on which compensation was to be;based. The :Court held;' that the above: provision/was purely arbitrary arid-. had/no: relation.;to facts and. was merely designed to avoid payment of ‘compensation, underdone /.gifts of, laying down-prmpiples of compensation./;;.’/"J. 26. From the above treatise’ and the case-law, ttdsievident =that a colorable legislation is that which is enacted! by a legislature which.lacks/ the legislative power/ or is subject to Constitutional prohibition, but it is framed in such a way that it may appear to; be within the "legislative power ;or to be free. from Constitutional prohibition or; Jillian' the object/ -Of*this;"law." 1s;: not. what is Contemplated; under'the. Cotihitio?>f{slight\pm ult whereof: it -1s'1 framed Ii. The case in hand," if JEV'UEFI'STIs 2 is hit-by the above doctrine of colorable’ legislation/ We have already" pointed out hereinabove that the foreign currency reserves of Pakistan on 28–51998 were meager and -particularly keeping in view/the impending’ restrictions in/the foreign currency; trains July/tie Word/Bank, International Financial Institutions and the foreign countries as a retaliation against Pakistan’s carrying out nuclear device tests; despite appeal's from the hybrid leaders not-to do so, the imposition of the above temporary. Restrictions subject to s‘,clartftion.I'm;'by us in Thai short order was'justified.-r. --.V.RT/-r'/,27/" We have asked Mn Salman AFAM Raja as- Wal as/Dr. Farooq Hassan to]j. Cite some case-law or show some treatise in order to demonstrate that in view of the assurance contained in subsection (4) of section 5 and section 10 of the Act XII of 1992 (Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992), the Parliament was not competent to enact section 2 BF the Act. Mr. Salman Abram Raja has candidly conceded that the Parliament is competent to pass any law in the absence of any constraint contained in the Constitution. He is unable to post out any violation of any Constitutional provision, However, Dr. Farooq WW. Hassan has contended that this Court on the basis of international law can hold that in view of solemn assurance of the legislature contained in above Sections 5(4) arid 10 of Act XII of 1992, the impugned section 2 is ultra vires the power of the Legislature. To reinforce the above submission, he submitted that the World Court has taken the above view inter alia in the South West Africa Case. According to him, such a legislation the Words of Lord McNair is "It is utterly shocking to mankind's conscience’. In Pakistan the Courts apply municipal law and not international Jaws in order to examine the virus of a provision'of a statute. However, if a municipal law and an international law are ' consistent with each other and there is no conflict or consistency, the Court to rem force its view- as to the interpretation of a Constitutional provision or of a provision of statute may press into service international law and/or conventions. The above approach has been adopted by this Court in the case of Vardar Farooq Ahmed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): is no conflict or consistency, the Court to rem force its view- as to the interpretation of a Constitutional provision or of a provision of statute may press into service international law and/or conventions. The above approach has been adopted by this Court in the case of Vardar Farooq Ahmed Khan Safari (supra). ’ 28. Then it was contended by Dr. Farooq Hassan that in fact impugned section 2 1s violative of Article 9 of the Constitution which enjoins that no person shall be deprived of life and liberty save in accordance with law. His submission was that denial of the foreign currency deposits and/or the profit therefrom is in fact violative of the above Article as the non-resident foreign currency account holders have deposited the above foreign currency in Pakistan in view of the assurance contained, inter alia, in Circular No. 12 of 1973 and the above provisions of Act XII of 1992 under the belief that they would be able to withdraw the deposits of foreign currency and/or interests/profits thereon without any let or hindrance to meet their liabilities in their native countries and I that because of the above restrictions, they cannot lead life as envisaged by above Article. He has invited our attention to para.6 of his above petition, which reads as follows:. "6. That the Members of the Association as well as the Association have vigorously pursued this matter MN the U.K. where many of the Account Holders of this category are placed. Some press reports and articles written by them are, appended. These press accounts reveal the abnormal harm done to the Members of the Association. Most of them had saved their foreign currency in their native country to pay for the education of their children, there marriages and to pay off their loans, a regular feature of life in Western nations in respect of their cars or, homes'. Non- payment of such obligations can lead to the discontinuation 31. of the, the foreclosure,of their homes or the:.prepossession oftheircars. NotPnlytheseare irreparable losses, it. Wyo. bring bad name to the country, as; having natives and expatriates who are ; /unable to ;pay the/loans or honor their financial commitments. f J; Already such drastic action is; in. place against some’ of them'and :Pakistan;shuffle VV-’: >;:«ERF. v-/ - 29. The above averments seem to be correct/plausible for the reason that’ Pakistanhadp / protection TP the then prospective foreign currency account holders In the above ' factual background, TT may be correct, that and/or the foreign nationals of Pakistani, orig may have deposited their entire savings in, Pakistan, with. the object, to earn more profit and also, to/ help their motherland. We regret to- note ’ that. The successive Governments and testate. Barik; of Pakistan ’ betrayed /the above trust reposed by. The foreign currency account Holders We would have no, hesitation in directing’ the; federation TP honor the above solemn assurance of the Legislature contained in _is'ubseictiori (4) of section Sand section' 0ofAct:XIIof1992, but;sincesuchajudgmenrw riot be the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): successive Governments and testate. Barik; of Pakistan ’ betrayed /the above trust reposed by. The foreign currency account Holders We would have no, hesitation in directing’ the; federation TP honor the above solemn assurance of the Legislature contained in _is'ubseictiori (4) of section Sand section' 0ofAct:XIIof1992, but;sincesuchajudgmenrw riot be the country,;we - have not ordered so. However, we havemadeevery effort; to extend maximum benefits to’ ikthepfesent situation/We may post out that/at present there’ are three options available to the foreign currency account holders, namely: /-.’,/. (i)-r //Under F. E; - Circular -No; 8 /issued by ; the State Bank of Pakistan on / 19-5- 1999, the State fiankhasaboiished multiple Exchange rate system :-It/////’V.'.and.- has:introduced the'iflbatirig interbank. rate the relevant para. of the above Circular reads as follows: 7” ' g; Introduction) OKA Unitary "Rate ;Svsteniv--It has. Been decided to. replace above system by. a market based ’unified exchange; rate S'system>with effect from May 19, 1999. For the purpose, Theo facial’; ! exchange rate has been abolished and the 'floating interbank' rate shall w.;’ f!; apply to- all foreign exchange receipts and payments both in public and h,«?, FJT private sectors I Thus /effective from the above date, the country has -V adopted a market based unitary exchange rate system." :. V-Very"-'The/above;: circular has/also ‘brought Ina:;member of; other improvements inasmuch ' as it abolished the system; of surrender of foreign exchange by the banking companies to the State Bank and thereby ensuring that /the foreign currency deposits of the account holders will riot be touched by the :State Bark of by Thai State through the State Bank. It has also provided, that the spread’ between the spot buying arid selling rate should not. Exceed Rs.6.50 per US S. TN this view of thevmatterf it is now open to a foreign currency, account holder to convert its foreign currency holdings into PAK Rupees at the floating (i) That the foreign currency account holders can purchase special US Dollar Bonds in the denomination of $100, $1,000, $10,000, $1,00,000 for a period of 3 years, 5 years and 7 years from the date of issue under the special US Dollar Bonds Rules, 1998, in which profit shall be payable on completion of every six months in US Dollars which would be remittable. (m) That the foreign currency account holders can ream their foreign currency account deposits and. may earn merest/profit thereon in ' foreign currency as per original arrangement between them and their respective banks, which they can utilize in Pakistan or can remit the same abroad as per our short order. We have provided the above relief- to the foreign currency account holders as there was no rationale in denial of the above benefit to them when the same was available to those foreign currency account holders, who have converted their deposits into the above Special US Dollar Bonds. 30. Besides the above options available to the foreign currency account holders, we have also directed in our short order reproduced hereinabove that in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1999 PLD 1026?
Answer: From case 1999 PLD 1026 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-23): benefit to them when the same was available to those foreign currency account holders, who have converted their deposits into the above Special US Dollar Bonds. 30. Besides the above options available to the foreign currency account holders, we have also directed in our short order reproduced hereinabove that in order to restore the confidence of the existing/prospective foreign currency account holders the Federation/State Bank, of Pakistan shall evolve a scheme within a reasonable period keeping in view the foreign exchange position of the country for gradual removal of restrictions on operation of foreign currency, accounts imposed by section 2 of the Act and that in any case in every annual budget a reasonable provision MN this regard shall be made. The above direction is issued on the premise that the above legislative assurance contained in section 5(4) of Act XII of 1992 was binding on the State and the State Bank of Pakistan. 31/ We may again point out that the directions contained in para. 28(4)(5) of Main Allah Nawab, J.'s opinion have not been concurred with by the other two learned Judges and, therefore, the same are not part of the judgment of the High Court. Furthermore, the above directions could not have been granted. It may be observed that the deposits of foreign currency account holders could not have been ordered to be treated as a fixed account for a period of three years without the consent of all the foreign currency account holders. Nor direction could have been issued that two classes of economy envisaged by Act XII of 1992 be eliminated. The latter Act is a device to attract foreign investments, which is in line with the modern concept of economic development. Additionally in Civil Appeals Nos.320 and 321 of 1999, which have been disposed of by us' on 9-6-1999 at Karachi, we have nullified the above direction contained in sub-para. (5) of para.28 of the above opinion of Main Allah Nawab, J. by holding as follows: "5. Ch. Muhammad Farooq, learned Attorney-General ports out that the above. declaration is contamed in the option recorded,by one of the learned Judges, namely, Main Allah. Nawab, J. and that the. Two other " learned. Judges have not concurred with theabove declaration! Be that, as it maybe; further submits that, the Government, has no intention; to. amend the above Act,XII' of.1992. In this View. of the matter /the above appeals are disposed of with the clarification, that the. above declaration is not part of the judgment and is not to be ' implemented." ; 32'. The'above Civil Appeal; Constitution Petitions and Civil Petitions for, Leave to Appeal are disposed BF in terms of the short order quoted hereinabove in para. 1, which is to be read as a part of this judgment. /. 'M.-B.A'./F-56/S.- accordingly*:

Question: What is case 1964 PLD 729 about?
Answer: Case 1964 PLD 729 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1964-06-02. The case involved ABDUR REHMAN AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST BOARD GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S.16 PRACTICE CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 98. The case was heard by AM VARUL HAQ AND A. R. SHEIKH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: In case 1964 PLD 729, the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S.16 PRACTICE CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 98. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1964-06-02.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1964 PLD 729 were: DR. NASIM HASSAN SHAH FOR PETITIONERS. MAULVI SIRAJ-UD-DIN PAUL FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: AM VARUL HAQ AND A. R. SHEIKH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: The parties in case 1964 PLD 729 were: ABDUR REHMAN AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST BOARD GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1964 PLD 729.
Answer: Judgment A. R. Sketch, J.-This order will dispose of Writ Petitions Nos. 297 and 397 of 1964, in which similar questions of law are evolved. 2. Abdul Rahman and Muhammad Skanda Zulqarnain, petitioners in Writ Petition No. 297 of 1964, approached this Court under Article 98 of the Constitution of the Republic of Pakistan, 1962, to quash the orders dated the 17th of December 1963 and the 11th of March 1964 of respondents Nos. and respectively, issued as against them. The facts leading to this writ petition are that the property bear mg No. S-36-R. 9, Railway Road, Lahore, which was used by marriage parties (Jane Gear) before the Partition of the Into- Pakistan subcontinent, was allotted by the Rehabilitation authorities to one Maul vi Ghulam Muhammad Tarentum for use as a school. The said Maul vi Ghulam Muhammad Tarentum died in 1959, when efforts were made by one Mr. Shied to get the premises allotted to him and to run the school therein. However, Mr. Shied failed in his attempt and the premises were allotted on the 22nd of May 1962, to Muhammad Skanda Bulgaria, petitioner No. 2, the son of the late Maul vi Ghulam Muhammad Tarentum. This petitioner later associated Abdul Rehman, petitioner No. 1, by means of a partnership deed entered into between the petitioners on the 18th of June 1962. The business was started in the name and style of “Abdul Rahman, Electric Radio Market” in the said premises. This partnership was approved of by Main Muhammad Shaft the then Chairman of the District Evacuee Trust Committee, and the petitioners were even permitted to carry out repairs to the property by letter No. DETC-63/XXIT/ /4965 dated the 20th of August 1963. In consequence, the petitioners are alleged to have repaired the property at a cost of Rs. 10,000 and electrified the premises. It is further averred in the petition that on some complaint, the District Evacuee Trust Committee (respondent No. 2) gave notice to the petitioners that they should not carry out the additions and repairs or the alleged alterations in the property. The notice was replied to, saying that only repairs had been carried out and there was no addition or alteration made in the nature of the property. No opportunity was given to the petitioners to explain their position and instead on the 17th of December 1963, the premises were sealed under orders of respondent No. and a notice was found affixed on the lock of the door, wherein it was stated that objections if any could be preferred within a period of fifteen days. The petitioners approached respondent No. 1, the Chairman of the Evacuee Property Trust Board, on the 23rd of December 1963, but to no effect. While the petitioners were awaiting the result of their application for resealing the property, petitioner No. 1, was served with a Memo, dated the 11th of March 1964, which recited that it has been ordered by the Chairman, Evacuee Property Trust Board (respondent No. 1), that petitioner No. be ejected from the property forthwith. He was asked to attend the office of respondent No. and vacate the property in question by removing his belongings from the premises with a period of three days. The Chairman was approached in the matter again but to no avail. The orders of the respondents are challenged on the following grounds (a) That the property in question is not trust property as it was merely a Jane Gear (premises for marriage parties) and as such could not be considered to be trust property as per definition of the term and that no other authority except the Chief Settlement Commissioner or the respondent Board could declare the property to be trust property within the meaning of the Scheme of the Act. No such declaration having been made, the property could not be deemed to be trust property. (b) That the respondents are not vested with any power to seal the property or summarily eject the tenants or occupants of the trust properties except in due process of law, and since no power has been exercised by the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 29 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, the impugned orders were without lawful authority. (c) That the action was male FIDE for the reason that the petitioners’ application for resealing had not been considered ; they had been condemned unheard and that the orders dated the 11th of March 1964, had been obtained as against the petitioners by the officials of the District Evacuee Trust Board by supplying false information to the authorities concerned. 3. In Writ Petition No. 397 of 1964 it has been averred that the petitioner TAJ Din is running a general merchants business in Shop No. SE-II-31 S-18, Natasha Bazaar, Mewl Hand Trust, Lahore, which premises had been initially allotted to his father Ghulam Hussain, a refugee from Amritsar, who sometimes expired in 1958. Petitioner No. 2-Nawazish Ali entered into an arrangement with Petitioner No. to run the business in partnership and this arrangement was regularized by means of a writing in 1962. It is further maintained that the petitioners have continued in possession and peaceful enjoyment of the Property and have been paying rent of the said premises regularly as and when demanded. With the setting up of the Evacuee Property Trust Board, a notice is said to have been served on petitioner No. on the 10th of February 1964 by the respondent asking him to appear before the Additional District Magistrate on the 13th of February 1964, with a view to going into the legality of his possession of the said premises. This notice was complied with but on the Sth of March 1964, another notice was served on petitioner No. to produce further evidence in support of his possession. This direction was again honored and proof of possession of the petitioners was placed before the relevant authority, but to their dismay on the 24th of March 1964, the premises in question were sealed by an Inspector of the respondent with the help of the police. The order of seal mg the premises and threatened ejectment of the petitioners was objected to MN this Court on the ground that the respondent is not armed with any authority under the law to eject its tenants or persons in possession of the premises by force, without having recourse to the law of the land. 4. We have heard, the learned counsel for the parties in both the writ petitions which have CERTAM common factors. The main question arising for adjudication in both these writ petitions is whether the Evacuee Property Trust Board, constituted under the Scheme promulgated by the Chief Settlement Commissioner with the approval of the Central Government under section 16-A of Act XXVIII of 1958, or the District Evacuee Trust Committees created under the said Scheme, has any legal sanction to order the summary ejectment of its tenants or persons in possession or occupation of evacuee trust properties. The learned counsel for the respondents has relied on section 16-A of Act XXVIII of 1958 and para. 18 of the Scheme promulgated by the Chief Settlement Commissioner under the said section with the authority of the Central Government, which paragraph reads as under ‘The general supervision of the property shall vest in the Board which shall do all things considered by it to be necessary, proper and expedient for the efficient maintenance, control, administration and disposal of such property, and for the application of the funds that may accrue therefrom to purposes hereafter provided in the Scheme.” The learned counsel contends that the respondents are empowered to'do all things considered necessary, proper and expedient for the efficient maintenance, control, administration and disposal of such property, and, therefore, they are well within their rights to remove persons from the premises who are not desirable or whom they do not want to continue to be in possession whether authorized or unauthorized. In other words, the argument is that under paragraph 18 the maintenance, control and administration includes the power to summarily eject the tenants or persons in possession of such premises without having recourse to due process of law. This argument, when pursued to its logic conclusion, leads to absurd propositions, and we decline to accept this interpretation of paragraph 18. The Evacuee Trust Board or the District Committees functioning under it have not been clothed with any power to take the law in their own hands and to evict its tenants in this summary manner by using force or throwing them out or sealing the premises so as to refuse them enjoyment and use of the premises. It has been maintained that the respondent Board has the Chief Settlement Commissioner as one of its members, which statutory functionary is empowered under section 29 of the Act to eject persons m possession of evacuee property, whether acquired or not by the Provincial Government under the notification issued on the 21st of August 1959, under section 3 of Act XXVIII of 1958. But this is exactly having not been done by the Chief Settlement Commissioner in these cases. If the Evacuee Trust Board or the Committees feel that certain premises should be got vacated, they can definitely have recourse to the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, who may be moved in the matter, and then action taken in accordance with law, but this does not mean that for the mere fact that the Chief Settlement Commissioner is a member of the Board, the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 29 can be exercised by the Board for summary ejectment of the persons in possession of Evacuee Trust Properties. The learned counsel for the respondents has relied on a Division Bench judgment by S. A. Mahmood and Abdul Hamid, JJ. in Writ Petition No. 517 of 1964, which order was passed in liming, wherein the learned Judges, after referring to para. 18 of the Scheme, have observed We have held in similar cases that the power to maintain, control and administer includes the power to eject a person in possession. The District Evacuee Trust Committee can manage the property under paragraph 22 of the Scheme according to the instructions as laid down by the Board or the Divisional Committee from time to time. The Board can manage the properties through Divisional Committees under paragraph 21 of the Scheme and may delegate any of its functions and powers under the Scheme for the management of such properties. On the other hand, we have been referred to a Single Bench Judgment of Mr. Justice S. A. Mahmood in Writ Petition No. 823 of 1961 decided on the 7th of June 1963, which the power to eject a person in possession by the Evacuee Trust Board or the District Evacuee Trust Committees has been considered in detail, and it has been held that paragraphs 18 and 22 of the Scheme do not empower the said authorities to eject persons in possession in a manner other than in due process of law, and we feel that the observations made by the Division Bench in Writ Petition No. 517 of 1964, of which Mr. Justice S. A. Mahmood was also a member, have to be interpreted in the light of the Smile Bench judgment by the Learned Judge in Writ Petition No. 823 of 1961. We say so with great respect, because although the writ petition No. 517 of 1964 was dismissed in liming by the Division Bench after having taken into account the peculiar facts of that case, it has not been laid down that power to eject person in possession can be used in disregard of the law of the land. We are, therefore, of the view that the conflict in the two judgments is more. apparent than real and, therefore, the view taken in the Single! Bench decision in Writ Petition No. 823 of 1961 is the correct! exposition of the law on the subject. cl 5. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that since the Chief Settlement Commissioner can be approached by the respondent Committee, he (the Chief Settlement Commissioner) can take action under section 29 of Act XXVIII of 1958 to eject the petitioners, the effect of the writ can be nullified in that manner by the subsequent unilateral action of the respondents, and in such circumstances it is not proper to issue a writ. In support of this proposition, the learned counsel relies on Sh. Rehmatullah v. The Deputy Settlement Com- missioner, Central ‘A’ Karachi, and others (1) but we find that the ratio decidendi of that case is not applicable to the cases before us. Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in that case were considering the case of a person who was an allottee of shop and had put in an ‘NCS’ form for transfer of this property. His application had been rejected on the ground that the property had been acquired for the State Bank of Pakistan. His appeal before the Additional Settlement Commissioner failed and his revision petition before the. Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner had also met the same fate. In the Supreme Court a writ of certiorari was asked for to quash the order of the Additional Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, coupled with a mandamus to the Settlement authorities to proceed on the petitioner’s ‘NCS’ form as required by law, and it was in this context that their Lordships of the Supreme Court held: “A non-claimant displaced person has no vested rights in any property included in the compensation pool merely through being in possession of such property, though he may buy virtue of section 9 set up a claim to transfer of such property to himself.” It was further held : “In another view of the matter, it is clear that by Presidential Ordinance No. of 1962, which added a second subsection to section 10 of the Displaced Persons Act, a marked change has been effected, namely, that whereas previously the authorities under the Displaced Persons Act were obliged to apply all property in the compensation pool for the payment of compensation to claimants, and for relief to others, as provided by the Schedule and the Scheme, as from the date of the amending Ordinance, the Central Government was given power to transfer any property out of the compensation pool in the public interest. It is immaterial on what date such property came MTO the compensation pool, and therefore, if the view be taken that this property having once entered the compensation pool, cannot be dealt with otherwise than under the D. P. Act, it is open to the Central Government today to make an order under section 10 (2) of the D. P. Act, transferring the property to the State Bank of Pakistan, for it is clear beyond doubt that such a transfer would be in the public merest The Court will not grant a writ to produce a certain effect when the law provides power to one of the parties affected by the writ, to nullify the Court’s writ unilaterally and the circumstances enabling such action are found to be present.” 6. It will be noticed that their Lordships of the Supreme Court while observing that the Court will not grant a writ to produce a certain effect when the law provides power to one of the parties affected by the writ, to nullify the Court’s writ unilaterally, further held that “and the circumstances enabling such action are found to be present’. We have, therefore, to see whether this condition mentioned in the concluding portion of the observation is available in the start case. It cannot be' presumed that if the respondents approach the Chief Settlement Commissioner, he will necessarily take action against the petitioners according to the dictates of the respondents because the Chief Settlement Commissioner as a creation of the statute has to function according to the provisions of the statute and no arbitrariness or perversity can be expected of him. Therefore, to say that circumstances enabling a unilateral action to nullify the Court’s writ are present is something which is in the realm of presumptuousness on the part of the respondents. 7. A striking example of issuance of writs by this Court, where it has been argued that the effect of the writs can be nullified by a later action of the respondent and, therefore, the writ should not be issued, will be found in cases of Government servants where writs are being issued by this Court when TT TS held that the constitutional protection guaranteed to the civil servants has been violated by the Government, Provincial or Central, although the said authorities are not precluded from taking action against the civil servant, after the issuance of the writ quashing the previous illegal order of dismissal or removal or that of reduction in rank, in accordance with law. The writs have not been refused simply for the reason that the effect of the writs can be nullified by a unilateral act of the employer because all that the Court says in such cases is that the action to be taken should be in accordance with law and not in any manner in violation of the law of the country. Further, the Court in those cases also takes into consideration the fact that it is not necessary that if the employee is afforded a reasonable opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him, the punishing authority will come to the same conclusion which had been arrived at by it without hearing the employee and, therefore, it cannot be said that circumstances are present which will enable the employer to nullify the effect of the writ by a unilateral act of proceeding against the employee in accordance with law. Since in the instant case it is not claimed that the petitioners are immune from all law, or they cannot be ejected even in due process of law and their only complaint is that their ejectment has been effected or is threatened in a manner not in accordance with due process of law, there cannot be any question of any circumstance being present which may enable the respondents to nullify the effect of the writ by any subsequent unilateral act. 8. We hold that the action of eviction of the petitioners should have been in accordance with law and not by taking the law in their own hands by the respondents. Illegal actions of the respondents are not to be perpetuated, and this Court will not land its support to any action taken without lawful authority. The result, therefore, is that the orders passed by respondents on the 17th of December 1963 and the 11th of March 1964, with respect to the petitioners in Writ Petition No. 297 of 1964 are without lawful authority and are quashed. Similarly, we hold that the order dated the 24th of March 1964, m Writ Petition No. 397 of 1964, is also without authority and the same is quashed. Both the writ petitions are accepted, but there will be no order as to costs. Petitions accepted. w.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 729 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-06-02): Judgment A. R. Sketch, J.-This order will dispose of Writ Petitions Nos. 297 and 397 of 1964, in which similar questions of law are evolved. 2. Abdul Rahman and Muhammad Skanda Zulqarnain, petitioners in Writ Petition No. 297 of 1964, approached this Court under Article 98 of the Constitution of the Republic of Pakistan, 1962, to quash the orders dated the 17th of December 1963 and the 11th of March 1964 of respondents Nos. and respectively, issued as against them. The facts leading to this writ petition are that the property bear mg No. S-36-R. 9, Railway Road, Lahore, which was used by marriage parties (Jane Gear) before the Partition of the Into- Pakistan subcontinent, was allotted by the Rehabilitation authorities to one Maul vi Ghulam Muhammad Tarentum for use as a school. The said Maul vi Ghulam Muhammad Tarentum died in 1959, when efforts were made by one Mr. Shied to get the premises allotted to him and to run the school therein. However, Mr. Shied failed in his attempt and the premises were allotted on the 22nd of May 1962, to Muhammad Skanda Bulgaria, petitioner No. 2, the son of the late Maul vi Ghulam Muhammad Tarentum. This petitioner later associated Abdul Rehman, petitioner No. 1, by means of a partnership deed entered into between the petitioners on the 18th of June 1962. The business was started in the name and style of “Abdul Rahman, Electric Radio Market” in the said premises. This partnership was approved of by Main Muhammad Shaft the then Chairman of the District Evacuee Trust Committee, and the petitioners were even permitted to carry out repairs to the property by letter No. DETC-63/XXIT/ /4965 dated the 20th of August 1963. In consequence, the petitioners are alleged to have repaired the property at a cost of Rs. 10,000 and electrified the premises. It is further averred in the petition that on some complaint, the District Evacuee Trust Committee (respondent No. 2) gave notice to the petitioners that they should not carry out the additions and repairs or the alleged alterations in the property. The notice was replied to, saying that only repairs had been carried out and there was no addition or alteration made in the nature of the property. No opportunity was given to the petitioners to explain their position and instead on the 17th of December 1963, the premises were sealed under orders of respondent No. and a notice was found affixed on the lock of the door, wherein it was stated that objections if any could be preferred within a period of fifteen days. The petitioners approached respondent No. 1, the Chairman of the Evacuee Property Trust Board, on the 23rd of December 1963, but to no effect. While the petitioners were awaiting the result of their application for resealing the property, petitioner No. 1, was served with a Memo, dated the 11th of March 1964, which recited that it has been ordered by the Chairman, Evacuee Property Trust Board (respondent No.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 729 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-06-02): December 1963, but to no effect. While the petitioners were awaiting the result of their application for resealing the property, petitioner No. 1, was served with a Memo, dated the 11th of March 1964, which recited that it has been ordered by the Chairman, Evacuee Property Trust Board (respondent No. 1), that petitioner No. be ejected from the property forthwith. He was asked to attend the office of respondent No. and vacate the property in question by removing his belongings from the premises with a period of three days. The Chairman was approached in the matter again but to no avail. The orders of the respondents are challenged on the following grounds (a) That the property in question is not trust property as it was merely a Jane Gear (premises for marriage parties) and as such could not be considered to be trust property as per definition of the term and that no other authority except the Chief Settlement Commissioner or the respondent Board could declare the property to be trust property within the meaning of the Scheme of the Act. No such declaration having been made, the property could not be deemed to be trust property. (b) That the respondents are not vested with any power to seal the property or summarily eject the tenants or occupants of the trust properties except in due process of law, and since no power has been exercised by the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 29 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, the impugned orders were without lawful authority. (c) That the action was male FIDE for the reason that the petitioners’ application for resealing had not been considered ; they had been condemned unheard and that the orders dated the 11th of March 1964, had been obtained as against the petitioners by the officials of the District Evacuee Trust Board by supplying false information to the authorities concerned. 3. In Writ Petition No. 397 of 1964 it has been averred that the petitioner TAJ Din is running a general merchants business in Shop No. SE-II-31 S-18, Natasha Bazaar, Mewl Hand Trust, Lahore, which premises had been initially allotted to his father Ghulam Hussain, a refugee from Amritsar, who sometimes expired in 1958. Petitioner No. 2-Nawazish Ali entered into an arrangement with Petitioner No. to run the business in partnership and this arrangement was regularized by means of a writing in 1962. It is further maintained that the petitioners have continued in possession and peaceful enjoyment of the Property and have been paying rent of the said premises regularly as and when demanded. With the setting up of the Evacuee Property Trust Board, a notice is said to have been served on petitioner No. on the 10th of February 1964 by the respondent asking him to appear before the Additional District Magistrate on the 13th of February 1964, with a view to going into the legality of his possession of the said premises. This notice was complied with but on the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 729 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-06-02): on petitioner No. on the 10th of February 1964 by the respondent asking him to appear before the Additional District Magistrate on the 13th of February 1964, with a view to going into the legality of his possession of the said premises. This notice was complied with but on the Sth of March 1964, another notice was served on petitioner No. to produce further evidence in support of his possession. This direction was again honored and proof of possession of the petitioners was placed before the relevant authority, but to their dismay on the 24th of March 1964, the premises in question were sealed by an Inspector of the respondent with the help of the police. The order of seal mg the premises and threatened ejectment of the petitioners was objected to MN this Court on the ground that the respondent is not armed with any authority under the law to eject its tenants or persons in possession of the premises by force, without having recourse to the law of the land. 4. We have heard, the learned counsel for the parties in both the writ petitions which have CERTAM common factors. The main question arising for adjudication in both these writ petitions is whether the Evacuee Property Trust Board, constituted under the Scheme promulgated by the Chief Settlement Commissioner with the approval of the Central Government under section 16-A of Act XXVIII of 1958, or the District Evacuee Trust Committees created under the said Scheme, has any legal sanction to order the summary ejectment of its tenants or persons in possession or occupation of evacuee trust properties. The learned counsel for the respondents has relied on section 16-A of Act XXVIII of 1958 and para. 18 of the Scheme promulgated by the Chief Settlement Commissioner under the said section with the authority of the Central Government, which paragraph reads as under ‘The general supervision of the property shall vest in the Board which shall do all things considered by it to be necessary, proper and expedient for the efficient maintenance, control, administration and disposal of such property, and for the application of the funds that may accrue therefrom to purposes hereafter provided in the Scheme.” The learned counsel contends that the respondents are empowered to'do all things considered necessary, proper and expedient for the efficient maintenance, control, administration and disposal of such property, and, therefore, they are well within their rights to remove persons from the premises who are not desirable or whom they do not want to continue to be in possession whether authorized or unauthorized. In other words, the argument is that under paragraph 18 the maintenance, control and administration includes the power to summarily eject the tenants or persons in possession of such premises without having recourse to due process of law. This argument, when pursued to its logic conclusion, leads to absurd propositions, and we decline to accept this interpretation of paragraph 18. The Evacuee Trust Board or the District Committees functioning under it have

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 729 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-06-02): tenants or persons in possession of such premises without having recourse to due process of law. This argument, when pursued to its logic conclusion, leads to absurd propositions, and we decline to accept this interpretation of paragraph 18. The Evacuee Trust Board or the District Committees functioning under it have not been clothed with any power to take the law in their own hands and to evict its tenants in this summary manner by using force or throwing them out or sealing the premises so as to refuse them enjoyment and use of the premises. It has been maintained that the respondent Board has the Chief Settlement Commissioner as one of its members, which statutory functionary is empowered under section 29 of the Act to eject persons m possession of evacuee property, whether acquired or not by the Provincial Government under the notification issued on the 21st of August 1959, under section 3 of Act XXVIII of 1958. But this is exactly having not been done by the Chief Settlement Commissioner in these cases. If the Evacuee Trust Board or the Committees feel that certain premises should be got vacated, they can definitely have recourse to the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, who may be moved in the matter, and then action taken in accordance with law, but this does not mean that for the mere fact that the Chief Settlement Commissioner is a member of the Board, the powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 29 can be exercised by the Board for summary ejectment of the persons in possession of Evacuee Trust Properties. The learned counsel for the respondents has relied on a Division Bench judgment by S. A. Mahmood and Abdul Hamid, JJ. in Writ Petition No. 517 of 1964, which order was passed in liming, wherein the learned Judges, after referring to para. 18 of the Scheme, have observed We have held in similar cases that the power to maintain, control and administer includes the power to eject a person in possession. The District Evacuee Trust Committee can manage the property under paragraph 22 of the Scheme according to the instructions as laid down by the Board or the Divisional Committee from time to time. The Board can manage the properties through Divisional Committees under paragraph 21 of the Scheme and may delegate any of its functions and powers under the Scheme for the management of such properties. On the other hand, we have been referred to a Single Bench Judgment of Mr. Justice S. A. Mahmood in Writ Petition No. 823 of 1961 decided on the 7th of June 1963, which the power to eject a person in possession by the Evacuee Trust Board or the District Evacuee Trust Committees has been considered in detail, and it has been held that paragraphs 18 and 22 of the Scheme do not empower the said authorities to eject persons in possession in a manner other than in due process of law, and we feel that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 729 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-06-02): Board or the District Evacuee Trust Committees has been considered in detail, and it has been held that paragraphs 18 and 22 of the Scheme do not empower the said authorities to eject persons in possession in a manner other than in due process of law, and we feel that the observations made by the Division Bench in Writ Petition No. 517 of 1964, of which Mr. Justice S. A. Mahmood was also a member, have to be interpreted in the light of the Smile Bench judgment by the Learned Judge in Writ Petition No. 823 of 1961. We say so with great respect, because although the writ petition No. 517 of 1964 was dismissed in liming by the Division Bench after having taken into account the peculiar facts of that case, it has not been laid down that power to eject person in possession can be used in disregard of the law of the land. We are, therefore, of the view that the conflict in the two judgments is more. apparent than real and, therefore, the view taken in the Single! Bench decision in Writ Petition No. 823 of 1961 is the correct! exposition of the law on the subject. cl 5. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that since the Chief Settlement Commissioner can be approached by the respondent Committee, he (the Chief Settlement Commissioner) can take action under section 29 of Act XXVIII of 1958 to eject the petitioners, the effect of the writ can be nullified in that manner by the subsequent unilateral action of the respondents, and in such circumstances it is not proper to issue a writ. In support of this proposition, the learned counsel relies on Sh. Rehmatullah v. The Deputy Settlement Com- missioner, Central ‘A’ Karachi, and others (1) but we find that the ratio decidendi of that case is not applicable to the cases before us. Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in that case were considering the case of a person who was an allottee of shop and had put in an ‘NCS’ form for transfer of this property. His application had been rejected on the ground that the property had been acquired for the State Bank of Pakistan. His appeal before the Additional Settlement Commissioner failed and his revision petition before the. Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner had also met the same fate. In the Supreme Court a writ of certiorari was asked for to quash the order of the Additional Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, coupled with a mandamus to the Settlement authorities to proceed on the petitioner’s ‘NCS’ form as required by law, and it was in this context that their Lordships of the Supreme Court held: “A non-claimant displaced person has no vested rights in any property included in the compensation pool merely through being in possession of such property, though he may buy virtue of section 9 set up a claim to transfer of such property to himself.” It was further held

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 729 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-06-02): Supreme Court held: “A non-claimant displaced person has no vested rights in any property included in the compensation pool merely through being in possession of such property, though he may buy virtue of section 9 set up a claim to transfer of such property to himself.” It was further held : “In another view of the matter, it is clear that by Presidential Ordinance No. of 1962, which added a second subsection to section 10 of the Displaced Persons Act, a marked change has been effected, namely, that whereas previously the authorities under the Displaced Persons Act were obliged to apply all property in the compensation pool for the payment of compensation to claimants, and for relief to others, as provided by the Schedule and the Scheme, as from the date of the amending Ordinance, the Central Government was given power to transfer any property out of the compensation pool in the public interest. It is immaterial on what date such property came MTO the compensation pool, and therefore, if the view be taken that this property having once entered the compensation pool, cannot be dealt with otherwise than under the D. P. Act, it is open to the Central Government today to make an order under section 10 (2) of the D. P. Act, transferring the property to the State Bank of Pakistan, for it is clear beyond doubt that such a transfer would be in the public merest The Court will not grant a writ to produce a certain effect when the law provides power to one of the parties affected by the writ, to nullify the Court’s writ unilaterally and the circumstances enabling such action are found to be present.” 6. It will be noticed that their Lordships of the Supreme Court while observing that the Court will not grant a writ to produce a certain effect when the law provides power to one of the parties affected by the writ, to nullify the Court’s writ unilaterally, further held that “and the circumstances enabling such action are found to be present’. We have, therefore, to see whether this condition mentioned in the concluding portion of the observation is available in the start case. It cannot be' presumed that if the respondents approach the Chief Settlement Commissioner, he will necessarily take action against the petitioners according to the dictates of the respondents because the Chief Settlement Commissioner as a creation of the statute has to function according to the provisions of the statute and no arbitrariness or perversity can be expected of him. Therefore, to say that circumstances enabling a unilateral action to nullify the Court’s writ are present is something which is in the realm of presumptuousness on the part of the respondents. 7. A striking example of issuance of writs by this Court, where it has been argued that the effect of the writs can be nullified by a later action of the respondent and, therefore, the writ should not be issued, will be found in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 729 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-06-02): on the part of the respondents. 7. A striking example of issuance of writs by this Court, where it has been argued that the effect of the writs can be nullified by a later action of the respondent and, therefore, the writ should not be issued, will be found in cases of Government servants where writs are being issued by this Court when TT TS held that the constitutional protection guaranteed to the civil servants has been violated by the Government, Provincial or Central, although the said authorities are not precluded from taking action against the civil servant, after the issuance of the writ quashing the previous illegal order of dismissal or removal or that of reduction in rank, in accordance with law. The writs have not been refused simply for the reason that the effect of the writs can be nullified by a unilateral act of the employer because all that the Court says in such cases is that the action to be taken should be in accordance with law and not in any manner in violation of the law of the country. Further, the Court in those cases also takes into consideration the fact that it is not necessary that if the employee is afforded a reasonable opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him, the punishing authority will come to the same conclusion which had been arrived at by it without hearing the employee and, therefore, it cannot be said that circumstances are present which will enable the employer to nullify the effect of the writ by a unilateral act of proceeding against the employee in accordance with law. Since in the instant case it is not claimed that the petitioners are immune from all law, or they cannot be ejected even in due process of law and their only complaint is that their ejectment has been effected or is threatened in a manner not in accordance with due process of law, there cannot be any question of any circumstance being present which may enable the respondents to nullify the effect of the writ by any subsequent unilateral act. 8. We hold that the action of eviction of the petitioners should have been in accordance with law and not by taking the law in their own hands by the respondents. Illegal actions of the respondents are not to be perpetuated, and this Court will not land its support to any action taken without lawful authority. The result, therefore, is that the orders passed by respondents on the 17th of December 1963 and the 11th of March 1964, with respect to the petitioners in Writ Petition No. 297 of 1964 are without lawful authority and are quashed. Similarly, we hold that the order dated the 24th of March 1964, m Writ Petition No. 397 of 1964, is also without authority and the same is quashed. Both the writ petitions are accepted, but there will be no order as to costs. Petitions

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 729?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 729 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-06-02): without lawful authority and are quashed. Similarly, we hold that the order dated the 24th of March 1964, m Writ Petition No. 397 of 1964, is also without authority and the same is quashed. Both the writ petitions are accepted, but there will be no order as to costs. Petitions accepted. w.

Question: What is case 1964 PLD 572 about?
Answer: Case 1964 PLD 572 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1964-05-15. The case involved 1) MIAN MUHAMMAD SAEED AND(2) MIAN MUHAMMAD AKBAR (APPELLANTS) VERSUS (1) THE PROVINCE OF WEST PAKISTAN (2) THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY LAHORE(3) THE DEPUTY REHABILITATION COM MISSIONERSHEIKHUPURA AND(4) MAHMOOD ALI RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_572.html 1/14 28/10/2025, 00:35 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_572.html EVIDENCE ACT (I OF 1872) - S. 115 PUNJAB ALIENATION OF LAND ACT (XIII OF 1900) - SS. AND 14 PUNJAB ALIENATION OF LAND ACT (XIII OF 1900) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1948) - SS. 12, 20 AND 34. The case was heard by S.A. RAHMAN, FAZLE-AKBAR AND HAMOODUR. RAHMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: In case 1964 PLD 572, the court applied the following statutes: https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_572.html 1/14 28/10/2025, 00:35 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_572.html EVIDENCE ACT (I OF 1872) - S. 115 PUNJAB ALIENATION OF LAND ACT (XIII OF 1900) - SS. AND 14 PUNJAB ALIENATION OF LAND ACT (XIII OF 1900) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1948) - SS. 12, 20 AND 34. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1964-05-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1964 PLD 572 were: A. K. BROHI SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT. (HAFEEZUR RAHMAN ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH HIM) INSTRUCTED BY SIDDIQ CO. ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANTS. 'ABDUR RASHID SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT (M. A. ZIDLAH ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH HIM) INSTRUCTED BY IJAZ ALI ATTORNEY FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 3.. The judges presiding were: S.A. RAHMAN, FAZLE-AKBAR AND HAMOODUR. RAHMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: The parties in case 1964 PLD 572 were: 1) MIAN MUHAMMAD SAEED AND(2) MIAN MUHAMMAD AKBAR (APPELLANTS) VERSUS (1) THE PROVINCE OF WEST PAKISTAN (2) THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY LAHORE(3) THE DEPUTY REHABILITATION COM MISSIONERSHEIKHUPURA AND(4) MAHMOOD ALI RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1964 PLD 572.
Answer: Judgment S. A. Rahman, J.-The land, which forms the subject-matter of this appeal by special leave, was originally purchased by Main Nigam Din, in village Sheikhupura Bead in 1893. He died in 1894. The land was then mutated in the names of his three sons, Mehta Din, Muhammad Din and Froze Din. In the year 1900, the Punjab Alienation of Land Act (Act XIII of 1900)-hereinafter referred to as the Act-was enacted. Muhammad Din died in or before 1913, and he was survived by a minor son, Muhammad Akbar and two widows, Sahara Begum and Air Begum. On the 4th of April 1913, an application was moved on behalf of Mehta Din, Froze Din and MST. Air Begum, widow of Muhammad Din, to the Deputy Commissioner of the district, praying that their caste should be corrected from Rajput Min has to Sheikh, in the revenue papers. The Deputy Commissioner allowed the prayer by order dated the 9th of May 1913. The land in suit was mortgaged on 19-8- 1913, with possession, by the owners in favor of certain Sikh residents of the district, for a consideration of Rs. 1,35,000. Among the mortgagors were included Sahara Begum, widow of Muhammad Din who acted on her own behalf as well as in her capacity as mother of her Moor son, Muhammad Akbar. In the years 1938, 1939 and 1940, the mortgagors sold their equity of redemption in the land to the mortgagees, the consideration for the sales being respectively Rs. 70,000, Rs. 70,000 and Rs. 89,500. The money due on the mortgage was adjusted in the sale prices. In the year 1941, Muhammad Salem son of Muhammad Akbar and Muhammad Queen- adding son of Mehta Din, minors, applied to the Deputy Commissioner, Sheikhupura, for correction of their caste to Rajput Min has, in the revenue papers. By that time apparently, Muhammad Akbar had become a major. Indeed, it appears that at the time of the execution of the sale-deed in 1938, to which Muhammad Akbar and his mother, Sahara Begum, were parties, Muhammad Akbar had already attained majority. The second sale-deed which was executed in 1939, showed M. Muhammad Saeed and his mother and three sisters as the vendors. Mehta Din was the vendor in the third sale. In these sale-deeds the vendors had described themselves as Sheikhs by caste. The application made in 1941 for change of caste to the Deputy Commissioner had a conquered history. The prayer was granted by an order of the Deputy Commissioner on 26-5-43. The vendees appealed to the Commissioner and he, by order dated 16-2- 44, set aside the Deputy Commissioner’s order on the ground that the petitioners before the Deputy Commissioner held no land m the district and were, therefore, incompetent to make an application. The petitioners moved the Financial Commissioner in revision, but it was held on 3-7-44, that no such revision lay. On the 16th of July 1946, after obtaining a gift of some land in the district, Muhammad Saeed and Muhammad Akbar, the appellants in the present appeal, petitioned for change of entry of the caste to Rajput Min has, by an application to the Deputy Commissioner, Sheikhupura. The petition was transferred to the Deputy Commissioner, Gujranwala, for disposal, and he accepted it on 12-2-51. By that time, the vendees had become evacuees. The appellants then attempted to recover their land which had been taken possession of by the Rehabilitation Authorities, on behalf of the Custodian. The appellants applied to the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 18. of Ordinance (XV of 1949), for a declaration that the land in suit had ceased to be evacuee property because of the fact that their family was a notified agricultural tribe in the district and consequently the alienation in favor of the Sikh vendees took effect under section 14 of the Act, as a usufructuary mortgage for a term not exceeding 20 years, that period having already expired. The Deputy Custodian passed an order in their favor on 5-3-55. This officer directed that the case be sent to the Deputy Commissioner to determine the conditions on which the land should be restored to the petitioners. The order was to be subject to the condition that the allotments of the property in question made in favor of refugees, in the meantime, would continue to be effective. It was followed by another order dated the 29th of November 1955, after receipt of the Deputy Commissioner’s report, to the effect that the evacuees’ usufructuary rights terminated in rabbi 1948, with respect to part of the property and in 1951, with respect to another part, that the petitioners were entitled to have possession of the land without any further condition, subject to the proviso that no genuine allottee in possession of any part of the property would be disturbed in his possession. The Province of West Pakistan and the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Sheikhupura, appealed against the order of the Deputy Custodian, and the Custodian of Evacuee Property by order dated the 27th July 1957, held that the declaration granted by the Deputy Custodian (General) by order dated the 29th November 1955, was illegal and improper and so was the order of the Deputy Custodian (General) dated the 5th March 1955, whereby the sales were converted into usufructuary mortgages. He, therefore, set aside those orders. The appellants then moved the High Court of West Pakistan in writ jurisdiction to have the orders of the Custodian quashed, but the High Court declined, to interfere, by order dated the 24th of April 1961. The High Court noted that the Custodian had repelled the plea which had found favor with his subordinates that the alienee had knowledge of the fact that the aliens were members of a notified agricultural tribe and had been wrongly described as non-agriculturists in the revenue papers. This finding, the learned Judges of the High Court observed, being one of fact, could not be interfered with in writ jurisdiction as it was based on material existing on the record. The Custodian’s view that the vendors were stopped from raised the plea ‘that they were members of a notified agricultural time in view of their own representation to the vendees, on the faith of which the latter entered into the sale transactions and paid full consideration on that basis, was upheld by a Division Bench of the High Court hearing a Letters Patent appeal from the order sofa learned Single Judge who had opined that there could be no estoppel against the provisions of a statute. It was remarked that the issue was one of fact, and it could not be allowed to be raised on behalf of the appellants who were petitioners in the High Court, as the second party to the sale-deeds had acted on their representation, to their prejudice. The order of the Deputy Commissioner dated the 9th of May 1913, by which the family’s caste was changed from Rajput Min has to Sheikh, was assailed before the High Court as one without jurisdiction on the plea that no provision existed at that time in the Act, enabling such an order to be passed. Reliance was placed in this connection on behalf of the appellants on the fact that subsections (2) and (3) of section of the Act, were not inserted there till the year 1938. The High Court repelled this argument by observing that the order could not be described as one without jurisdiction, considering that the preparation of a correct record-of-rights was the statutory obligation of the Deputy Commissioner. It was further found that the Custodian was not bound by the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Gujranwala, on the 12th February 1951, although the Rehabilitation authorities, who were agents of the Custodian, were parties to (the proceedings before him. After examine the provisions of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance (XV of 1949), the learned Judges came to the conclusion that the Custodian’s jurisdiction to declare what interest, if any, an evacuee had in any property, was exclusive and could not be detracted from, by an order passed by the Deputy Commissioner under the Act. The petition for a writ was consequently dismissed. The first question that calls for determination is whether the appellants were stopped from pleading that they were notified agriculturists of this district. As has been observed above, the High Court has found that there was no collusion between the vendors and vendees in this case to defeat the provisions of the Alienation of Land Act, 1900. If a false representation was made at the times of the sales, by the vendors, the vendees were not privy to it. This finding is justified by the state of the evidence on record and nothing has been urged on behalf of the appellants, which could persuade us to take a different view. It is not therefore, a case of the parties being in part delict in the matter of defeating a statute or committing a fraud on its provisions. The false representation, if any, was made by the vendors themselves without the vendees’ collusion and on the faith of that representation the vendors agreed to pay the full price as for a sale. They, therefore, acted to their prejudice as a result of the representation made by the vendors. The rule of estoppel embodied in section 115 of the Evidence Act would apparently be attracted to the case. This is in the following terms: B “115. When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and such person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing.” From the recital of facts contained in the copy of the order of the Commissioner dated the 16th of February 1944, it appears that till the preparation of the jacaranda of 1905-06, there was no entry about the caste or tribe of the vendors’ family in the revenue papers. For the first time in that year, the members of the family were entered as “Rajputs”. It was only on 3-5-13, that a field Banning reported that their caste had been verified as ‘Rajput Min has”. The proceedings that were started before the Deputy Commissioner, Gujranwala, for change of caste to Sheikh, are also referred to by the Commissioner in his order. It seems to have been represented on behalf of the vendors’ family that the wrong entry about their being “Rajput Min has”, had been made in the revenue papers, through the mistake of their servants. Nawab Islam Hayey Khan who was then A. D. M. Gujranwala and was married to MST. Froze Begum, the daughter of Nigam Din, one of the members of this family, was also consulted by the Deputy Commissioner in respect of the prayer for change of caste. It may be noted that at that time the area subsequently included in the district of Sheikhupura was part of Gujranwala district. The A. D. M. endorsed the application of the petitioners with the remark that their claim was correct. Then there was an inquiry through the Tonsilar who recommended the change asked for. Before the Tonsilar, apparently, several registered deeds had been produced by the petitioners in which their caste was entered as “Sheikh”. A further reference to Nawab Islam Hayey Khan elicited the reply that the caste of the family was in fact Sheikh. After this full inquiry, the Collector agreed to the change of caste. This was the position when the mortgages were first entered, and it was not altered till the sales took place in 1938 to 1940. In these circumstances, it is clear that the petitioners in try mg to undo the transactions of sale and to get back their property were in fact attempting to take advantage of their own fraud. This A conduct on their part would contravene the well-known principle embodied in the Legal Maxim “Nullity Commodus caper protest de injured SUA Peoria (Co. List. 148 (No man shall take advantage of his own wrong). It is, however, contended by Mr. Bro hi on behalf of the appellants that even though the conduct of his clients may be described as fraudulent, they were not debarred from raising the plea that the transactions in dispute contravened the provisions of the Act, and to that extent, the rule of estoppel could not be invoked against them, as it would defeat the policy of the Act. Estoppel, it is urged, could not be allowed to prevail against the provisions of a statute. Section 3 of the Act provides that no permanent alienation of land by a member of a notified agricultural tribe, to a person outside the same tribe or group of tubes to which the aliener belongs, shall take effect, as such, unless and until sanction is given thereto by a Deputy Commissioner. Such sanction may be given after the act of alienation is otherwise completed. There are certain exceptions to this provision which are not material for our purpose. The Deputy Commissioner is empowered under this section to grant or refuse sanction in his discretion. Section of the Act enables the Provincial Government by notification in the official Gazette to determine what bodies of persons in any district or group of districts are to be deemed to be agricultural tribes or group of agricultural tribes for the purposes of the Act. Subsections (2) and (3) of this section were added by section 4 of the Punjab Alienation of Land (Second Amendment) Act, 1938. By these two subsections, it was enacted that if any question or doubt should arise whether a person is or is not a member of a notified agricultural tribe, the Deputy Commissioner shall, after such inquiry as may be prescribed, determine whether that person is to be deemed to be a member of the said agricultural tribe for the purpose of the Act. In passing such an order it is declared that the Deputy Commissioner shall not be bound by any decree of a civil Court and may review any order previously passed under these provisions. A proviso saves the effect of decree passed in a suit instituted before the 15th of June 1938. Section 14 of the Act, inter alia, provides that a permanent alienation which is not to take effect as such, until the sanction of a Deputy Commissioner is given thereto, shall, until such sanction is given or if such sanction has been refused, take effect as a usufructuary mortgage in form (a) permitted by section 6 of the Act for such term not exceeding twenty years and on such conditions as the Deputy Commissioner considers to be reasonable. On the basis of these provisions, the argument is advanced that the Legislature had in its wisdom evinced a clear intention to protect members of agricultural tribes from the results of their own improvident actions in alienating properties. Such a policy of the law, therefore, it is suggested, must have precedence over any rule of estoppel. The learned Custodian had relied on two decisions to repel this contention, reported as S. Arid Singh v. Rahman Din (minor) and others (1) and Diana Chatham v. Son Kory The High Court held that they could not interfere with the finding of the Custodian in writ jurisdiction as it was a finding recorded with jurisdiction and further the conclusion reached by him had the merit of being just. In this respect it could not be said that there was error patent on the face of the record, committed by the Custodian. In NAND Singh v. Rahman Din, the facts were that one Her Muhammad describing himself as belonging to the Bell Bhakti tribe, mortgaged his land and two houses along with other property, to two non-Muslims for a sum of Rs. 2,666. After the death of Her Muhammad, the mortgagees NAND Singh and Johan Lai, a son of Ganesh Was, the other mortgagee, brought a suit for the recovery of Rs. 5,000, by sale of the mortgaged land and houses, against the minor sons of the mortgagor. The suit was resisted, inter alia, on the plea that the mortgagor was a Bhakti Rajput and therefore a member of an agricultural tribe in the Rawalpindi district, that the mortgage BMG in contravention of the Act, could not be enforced and that no decree for the sale of the land covered by it, could be passed. On behalf of the mortgagee-plaintiffs the position was taken that the mortgagor was not a Bhakti Rajput but a Bhakti Bell which was not one of the notified agricultural tribes of the district. After some evidence had been led by the parties on the several issues framed, the guardian ad light of the minor defendants compromised with the plaintiffs, after obtain necessary sanction from the Court. According to the terms of this compromise, part of the mortgaged property was released from its burden and a decree for the sum claimed, by sale of the remaining mortgaged property, was passed in the plaintiffs favor. When execution was sought of this decree, Fatal Din, the guardian ad light of Reheat Din judgment-debtor, inter alia, raised the objection Adam that the judgment-debtor BMG a member of an agricultural tribe, the sale of his land was prohibited by section 14 of the Act. It was held that in view of the compromise decree, the plea as to the judgment-debtor being a member of an agricultural tribe, was barred by the rule of res judicata and that in any case, the judgment-debtor was stopped from raising that plea. The learned Single Judge who decided the case, observed that it was quite true that there could be no estoppel against a statute, but he was of the opinion that this well-recognized rule d did not imply that there could be no estoppel even against a plea of fact which had to be established before the statute could be evoked. The principle that there can be no estoppel against a statute was considered to apply in those cases where the aliener was admitted to be a member of an agricultural tribe or the facts were clear on that post. In Danu Kathak v. Son Keri, a Special Bench of the Patna High Court consisting of the Chief Justice and two other Judges, held that the plaintiffs having represented themselves as tenure holders, when granting a lease to the defendant, were stopped from pleading that they were rattans. The misrepresentation about their status not being to the knowledge of the defendant, it was found that there was no question of estoppel against the statute, namely, section 46 of the Chita Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908, which provided that a rattan could not, by a demise, grant any permanent rights in land. As the defendant had denied that the plaintiffs were rattans, an issue of fact was raised which could not be permitted to be raised in view of the plaintiffs’ representation to the contrary on which the defendant had acted. The entry in the record-of nights described them as rattans was not accepted as conclusive. It was remarked that no question of the operation of the relevant statute could arise till this issue of fact was first decided. The learned Judges added that there would have been no estoppel if there had been any collusion between the plaintiffs and the defendant and if it had been established that the former had deliberately misrepresented themselves to be tenure-holders to the knowledge of the latter to defeat the provisions of the Chita Nagpur Tenancy Act. These two rulings clearly support the view that found favor with the learned’ Custodian. Mr. Bro hi on behalf of the appellants invited our attention to the case of Motor Bible v. Dharmas Those In that case the Privy Council was dealing with the case of a minor who l executed a mortgage representing himself to be a major, though it seems that an interested party had conveyed the information to the mortgagee that the mortgagor was still an infant. Their Lordships of the Privy. Council held that section 115 of the Indian Evidence Act did not apply to a case where the statement relied upon was made to a person who knew the real facts and was not misled by the untrue statement. There could be no estoppel where the truth of the matter was known to both parties. The case cited is, therefore, distinguishable on the facts from the start case in which a finding has been duly given that the vendees were not in part delict with the vendors. The next case cited by Mr. Bro hi is Gadigeppa Philippa Met v. Balangowda Bhimangoda In this case the learned Judges went further than the Privy Council, in laying down that where an infant represents fraudulently or otherwise that he is of age and thereby induces another to enter into a contract with him, then in an action founded on the contract, the infant is note stopped from setting up infancy. It was observed that no person can, by the application of the law of estoppel or by any rule of procedure, acquire or have assigned to him a status or legal capacity which the substantive law denies to him, and it makes no difference whether the misrepresentation on which the estoppel is sought to be founded, 1s made fraudulently or innocently. The learned Judges in the course of the discussion referred to the Privy Council judgment in Sadiq Ali Khan v. JAI Kishore (1) m which, although it was found that the fact of minority of some of the mortgagors was concealed by their father who was their guardian, from the mortgagee, it was ruled that the fact of majority being established at the date of the execution by the mortgagors of the deed founded on, was sufficient for the decision of the case, such a deed executed by minors being admittedly a nullity according to Indian law and incapable of founding a plea of estoppel. The principle was, therefore, affirmed that an estoppel could not overrule a plain provision of the law. Learned counsel for the appellants also relied on certain observations made by a learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court in Nawab of Murshidabad v. Bills Roy Cloud/entry In that case, the construction of the Murshidabad Act XV of 1891 which placed the Nawab Broader of Murshidabad under a disability in the matter of alienation of his property, fell for consideration. The transaction in question there, contravened this provision, and it was decided that the principle of estoppel could not be invoked to defeat the clear provisions of the statute that were based on public policy. There obviously the disability to which the Nawab Broader was subject, was explicitly and indisputably borne out by a legislative enactment and the true position could and should have been known to the alienee. The case, therefore, does not lend much assistance to the contention raised on behalf of the appellants. Another Privy Council decision pressed in aid by Mr. Bro hi PS Maritime Electric Co. Ltd. v. General Dairies Ltd. That a case in which the plaintiff company under-billed the 1'.77endant for the electric current supplied, by a mistake. Later, on the mistake being discovered, they made a further demand and succeeded in obtaining a decree. The question was whether they were stopped from demanding the excess amount by their conduct. In this context, the Privy Council observed that the electric company was under a statutory duty to charge the full amount for the electricity consumed, and the consumer was under an equal obligation to pay that amount, under a statute. The plea of estoppel was not allowed to defeat the statutory obligation which was of an unconditional character. Here again, no issue of fact called for decision before the provisions of the Act could be applied to the case and the decision therefore is not very much to the post. Our law, it seems, displays a special tenderness for the interests of Mors and relieves them from the effects of their own-] illegal acts even though the transaction may have been induced by their own fraudulent misrepresentation on the post D (1) AIR 1928 PC 152 (2) AIR 1929 Cal. 433 (3) AIR 1937 PC 114 of age. This does not, however, appear to be a universal rule and in some jurisdictions the rule is established that fraud will! vitiate the plea of infancy, MN certain types of cases. See for instance, Law of Estoppel by Henry Herman, Vol. II, p. 1255 et set wherein an infant’s liability for a tort is affirmed. Reference may also be made to Estoppel by Arthur Campers, Book I, p. 56 et set. Wherein Bigelow on Estoppel is quoted to the effect that “it appears to be the better doctrine that both infants (of years of discretion) and married women may bee stopped.” Snell’s Principles of Equity, edited by R. E. McGarry (1947 Edition for India) p. 463 also cites cases in which, in equity, estoppel was successfully pleaded against infants in certain cases. The cases relating to minors must be regarded as falling in a special category and the rule laid down in them should not, E without compelling necessity, be extended to other cases. I am disposed to hold that in the case of adults, the plea of estoppel would be available to bar investigation of a question of fact about which a representation had been made so as to induce the other party to change his position to his prejudice and the c principle of there being no estoppel against a statute, should only be invoked in such cases, if on the face of it, the contract is shown to be tainted with illegality. The effect of the provisions of Ordinance (XV of 1949) (referred to in the equal as the Ordinance) on the finding given by the Deputy Commissioner under section of the Act, also calls for consideration. It is contended by Mr. Bro hi on behalf of the appellants that such a finding given by the Deputy Commissioner would be binding on the Custodian as there was nothing in the Ordinance, repugnant to the exercise of the exclusive jurisdiction of the Deputy Commissioner in this behalf Section 12 of the Ordinance enacts that property which has vested in or of which possession has been taken by the Custodian, shall be exempt from all legal process including seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale, by any officer of a Court or any other authority and no my junction or other order of whatever kind, in respect of such property, shall be granted or made “by any Court or any other authority.” The words “or any other authority’ occurring in this provision were inserted theremin by Act (VI of 1951), but this amendment was to be deemed always to have been made and to have had effect accordingly. If therefore, the Deputy Commissioner’s order involved a direction that the property in dispute in this case, which had undoubtedly vested in the Custodian on the vendees becoming evacuees, should be restored to the vendors, it would be within the mischief of this section. The provisions of the Ordinance are to override all other existing laws, as declared by section thereof: The Ordinance, moreover, was a later central enactment whereas the Act was a provincial measure and in case of repugnance between the two, the Ordinance must receive precedence. Section 34 of the Ordinance gives exclusive jurisdiction to the Custodian, to adjudicate upon a question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings, whether, inter alia, any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or interest if any, an evacuee has in such property. A finding given on such a question by any Court or any other authority would be without jurisdiction by virtue of subsection (1) of this section. Subsection (2) of this section imposes an obligation on a civil or revenue Court or any other authority before whom such a question arises, to make a reference, for its decision, to the Custodian. The words “or any other authority’ in subsections (1) and (2) of this section were inserted only in 1951, by two amending Acts. The amendment of subsection (1) became effective from 21-4-51, that is, after the Deputy Commissioner had given his decision under section of the Act, but prior to the Commissioner’s order in appeal. The amendment of subsection (2) was of a still later date, in 1951. It is urged that the Deputy Commissioner’s order was not hit by subsection (1) of section 34, as a declaration about the caste or tribe of the appellants was not one of the questions referred to within this subsection, and also because the words “other authority” did not exist there mat the time the Deputy Commissioner passed his order. With regard to the second objection it is enough to say that the order was clearly subject to appeal under the Act and could not be said to be a final order, so as to be effective program vigor, if it was challenged in appeal. Before the stage of finalization m appeal arrived, the Legislature had intervened and barred all authorities except the Custodian from adjudication of a question falling within the purview of subsection (1) of section 34 of the Ordinance. But it is forcibly J. argued that subsection (1) of section 34 of the Ordinance did not cover such a question at all. " The contention does not appear to be sound. A declaration. of a person as belonging to a notified agricultural tribe under section of the Act, is to be understood clearly in the context of -property rights m agricultural land to be possessed or retained, by the person conceded. In the present case, specifically, the only object of approaching the Deputy Commissioner for such -a decision was to get back the property in suit, under the. provisions of section 14 of the Act. It is, therefore, idle to suggest that the declaration of caste or tribe in the present case could be looked at, apart from the question of the nature of the property in suit. In my option, subsection (1) of section 34 of the Ordinance would come into play and prevent the Deputy Commissioner, or the Commissioner under the Act, to pronounce on this question, so as to affect the nature of the property in suit. Both sections 12 and 34 of the Ordinance would stand in the way of such an adjudication by the authority finally charged with that function in the Act. It is true that the amendment of section 34 having taken place after the Deputy Commissioner’s decision, he could not have made a reference to the Custodian on this question under subsection (2) thereof But it is clear nevertheless that such a decision which had not been finalized under the Act, could not be allowed to prevail against the provisions of the Ordinance. The Commissioner’s order, therefore, would be fructuous in these circumstances. Another line of approach by Mr. Bro hi was that the Custodian should be held bound by the decision of the Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner this case, in so far as he was a patty to the proceedings before these officers, through the agency of the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. Under section 20 of the Ordinance, the Custodian is undoubtedly clothed with authority to take such measures as he might consider necessary or expedient, for the purpose of administering, preserving and managing any evacuee property which has vested in him. Subsection (2) of this section declares that without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in subsection (1) the Custodian may, inter alia, institute, defend or continue any legal proceeding in any civil or revenue Court, on behalf of the evacuee. This provision, in terms, does not cover the Deputy Commissioner or the Commissioner, functioning under the Act, and it is extremely doubtful, how far the Rehabilitation authority, which is the agent of the Custodian only for the purpose of administering and managing the property, or appearing on his behalf in respect of litigation in Courts, can bind the Custodian as party, by appearing in proceedings under the Acct, without express authorization by the Custodian. The upshot of the discussion, therefore, is that the Custodian is not bound by the finding of the Deputy Commissioner on the question of the caste or tribe of the appellants as this amounts to a decision that the property in suit which was evacuee property, had ceased to occupy that character. The Custodian has also expressed the option that by virtue of Notification No. 657-R of 3rd April 1950, issued under section of the Act, the vendees, who were holding land in this district, had become qualified to have permanent alienation of land in their favor, as they were declared to belong to the same agricultural tribe or group of tribes as other landholders in this district and therefore the principle of section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act could be invoked on behalf of the vendees to ask that the Court should treat that as done which ought to have been done and to feed the grant by estoppel. To this the reply is given by Mr. Bro hi that the notification could not be made retrospective and could only be effective for transactions that might take place after its date. There is force MN this contention of Mr. Bro hi But this notification may connote a change in the policy -behind the Act and to that extent may even support the view of the Custodian on the question of estoppel, in these changed circumstances. The impugned transaction was not even in its inception, totally barred by statute, even if the aliener was a member of a notified tribe and the salience was not. It could be validated by sanction of the Collector, accorded even ex post facto. At the present time, free exchange of properties is per missile between holders of land in the district, and it is a matter for consideration whether the appellants should not be held bound by their own deliberate declaration, in the context of the changed policy of the Act. H In the face of the authorities discussed above, the Custodial’n’s view on the point of estoppel could not be assailed as being erroneous on the face of the record so as to call for correction in certiorari and in view of the special provisions of the Ordinance, his own jurisdiction to decide the question of nature of the property is exclusive. For the full exercise of this exclusive jurisdiction, he must be conceded also the exclusive right to decide all essential questions like the tribe or caste of the appellants. I have, therefore, reached the conclusion that the High Court’s order calls for no interference. I would dismiss the appeal but in view of the difficult nature of the questions involved, would make no order as to costs in this Court. Fable-Akbar, J.-I have had the advantage of reading the judgment proposed to be delivered by my learned brother Rahman, J. I agree with his reasoning and conclusions and have nothing to add. Hamoodur-Rahman, J.-I agree. A. H. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): Judgment S. A. Rahman, J.-The land, which forms the subject-matter of this appeal by special leave, was originally purchased by Main Nigam Din, in village Sheikhupura Bead in 1893. He died in 1894. The land was then mutated in the names of his three sons, Mehta Din, Muhammad Din and Froze Din. In the year 1900, the Punjab Alienation of Land Act (Act XIII of 1900)-hereinafter referred to as the Act-was enacted. Muhammad Din died in or before 1913, and he was survived by a minor son, Muhammad Akbar and two widows, Sahara Begum and Air Begum. On the 4th of April 1913, an application was moved on behalf of Mehta Din, Froze Din and MST. Air Begum, widow of Muhammad Din, to the Deputy Commissioner of the district, praying that their caste should be corrected from Rajput Min has to Sheikh, in the revenue papers. The Deputy Commissioner allowed the prayer by order dated the 9th of May 1913. The land in suit was mortgaged on 19-8- 1913, with possession, by the owners in favor of certain Sikh residents of the district, for a consideration of Rs. 1,35,000. Among the mortgagors were included Sahara Begum, widow of Muhammad Din who acted on her own behalf as well as in her capacity as mother of her Moor son, Muhammad Akbar. In the years 1938, 1939 and 1940, the mortgagors sold their equity of redemption in the land to the mortgagees, the consideration for the sales being respectively Rs. 70,000, Rs. 70,000 and Rs. 89,500. The money due on the mortgage was adjusted in the sale prices. In the year 1941, Muhammad Salem son of Muhammad Akbar and Muhammad Queen- adding son of Mehta Din, minors, applied to the Deputy Commissioner, Sheikhupura, for correction of their caste to Rajput Min has, in the revenue papers. By that time apparently, Muhammad Akbar had become a major. Indeed, it appears that at the time of the execution of the sale-deed in 1938, to which Muhammad Akbar and his mother, Sahara Begum, were parties, Muhammad Akbar had already attained majority. The second sale-deed which was executed in 1939, showed M. Muhammad Saeed and his mother and three sisters as the vendors. Mehta Din was the vendor in the third sale. In these sale-deeds the vendors had described themselves as Sheikhs by caste. The application made in 1941 for change of caste to the Deputy Commissioner had a conquered history. The prayer was granted by an order of the Deputy Commissioner on 26-5-43. The vendees appealed to the Commissioner and he, by order dated 16-2- 44, set aside the Deputy Commissioner’s order on the ground that the petitioners before the Deputy Commissioner held no land m the district and were, therefore, incompetent to make an application. The petitioners moved the Financial Commissioner in revision, but it was held on 3-7-44, that no such revision lay. On the 16th of July 1946, after obtaining a gift of some land in the district, Muhammad Saeed and Muhammad

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): m the district and were, therefore, incompetent to make an application. The petitioners moved the Financial Commissioner in revision, but it was held on 3-7-44, that no such revision lay. On the 16th of July 1946, after obtaining a gift of some land in the district, Muhammad Saeed and Muhammad Akbar, the appellants in the present appeal, petitioned for change of entry of the caste to Rajput Min has, by an application to the Deputy Commissioner, Sheikhupura. The petition was transferred to the Deputy Commissioner, Gujranwala, for disposal, and he accepted it on 12-2-51. By that time, the vendees had become evacuees. The appellants then attempted to recover their land which had been taken possession of by the Rehabilitation Authorities, on behalf of the Custodian. The appellants applied to the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 18. of Ordinance (XV of 1949), for a declaration that the land in suit had ceased to be evacuee property because of the fact that their family was a notified agricultural tribe in the district and consequently the alienation in favor of the Sikh vendees took effect under section 14 of the Act, as a usufructuary mortgage for a term not exceeding 20 years, that period having already expired. The Deputy Custodian passed an order in their favor on 5-3-55. This officer directed that the case be sent to the Deputy Commissioner to determine the conditions on which the land should be restored to the petitioners. The order was to be subject to the condition that the allotments of the property in question made in favor of refugees, in the meantime, would continue to be effective. It was followed by another order dated the 29th of November 1955, after receipt of the Deputy Commissioner’s report, to the effect that the evacuees’ usufructuary rights terminated in rabbi 1948, with respect to part of the property and in 1951, with respect to another part, that the petitioners were entitled to have possession of the land without any further condition, subject to the proviso that no genuine allottee in possession of any part of the property would be disturbed in his possession. The Province of West Pakistan and the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Sheikhupura, appealed against the order of the Deputy Custodian, and the Custodian of Evacuee Property by order dated the 27th July 1957, held that the declaration granted by the Deputy Custodian (General) by order dated the 29th November 1955, was illegal and improper and so was the order of the Deputy Custodian (General) dated the 5th March 1955, whereby the sales were converted into usufructuary mortgages. He, therefore, set aside those orders. The appellants then moved the High Court of West Pakistan in writ jurisdiction to have the orders of the Custodian quashed, but the High Court declined, to interfere, by order dated the 24th of April 1961. The High Court noted that the Custodian had repelled the plea which had found favor with his subordinates that the alienee had knowledge of the fact

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): jurisdiction to have the orders of the Custodian quashed, but the High Court declined, to interfere, by order dated the 24th of April 1961. The High Court noted that the Custodian had repelled the plea which had found favor with his subordinates that the alienee had knowledge of the fact that the aliens were members of a notified agricultural tribe and had been wrongly described as non-agriculturists in the revenue papers. This finding, the learned Judges of the High Court observed, being one of fact, could not be interfered with in writ jurisdiction as it was based on material existing on the record. The Custodian’s view that the vendors were stopped from raised the plea ‘that they were members of a notified agricultural time in view of their own representation to the vendees, on the faith of which the latter entered into the sale transactions and paid full consideration on that basis, was upheld by a Division Bench of the High Court hearing a Letters Patent appeal from the order sofa learned Single Judge who had opined that there could be no estoppel against the provisions of a statute. It was remarked that the issue was one of fact, and it could not be allowed to be raised on behalf of the appellants who were petitioners in the High Court, as the second party to the sale-deeds had acted on their representation, to their prejudice. The order of the Deputy Commissioner dated the 9th of May 1913, by which the family’s caste was changed from Rajput Min has to Sheikh, was assailed before the High Court as one without jurisdiction on the plea that no provision existed at that time in the Act, enabling such an order to be passed. Reliance was placed in this connection on behalf of the appellants on the fact that subsections (2) and (3) of section of the Act, were not inserted there till the year 1938. The High Court repelled this argument by observing that the order could not be described as one without jurisdiction, considering that the preparation of a correct record-of-rights was the statutory obligation of the Deputy Commissioner. It was further found that the Custodian was not bound by the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Gujranwala, on the 12th February 1951, although the Rehabilitation authorities, who were agents of the Custodian, were parties to (the proceedings before him. After examine the provisions of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance (XV of 1949), the learned Judges came to the conclusion that the Custodian’s jurisdiction to declare what interest, if any, an evacuee had in any property, was exclusive and could not be detracted from, by an order passed by the Deputy Commissioner under the Act. The petition for a writ was consequently dismissed. The first question that calls for determination is whether the appellants were stopped from pleading that they were notified agriculturists of this district. As has been observed above, the High Court has found that there was no

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): Deputy Commissioner under the Act. The petition for a writ was consequently dismissed. The first question that calls for determination is whether the appellants were stopped from pleading that they were notified agriculturists of this district. As has been observed above, the High Court has found that there was no collusion between the vendors and vendees in this case to defeat the provisions of the Alienation of Land Act, 1900. If a false representation was made at the times of the sales, by the vendors, the vendees were not privy to it. This finding is justified by the state of the evidence on record and nothing has been urged on behalf of the appellants, which could persuade us to take a different view. It is not therefore, a case of the parties being in part delict in the matter of defeating a statute or committing a fraud on its provisions. The false representation, if any, was made by the vendors themselves without the vendees’ collusion and on the faith of that representation the vendors agreed to pay the full price as for a sale. They, therefore, acted to their prejudice as a result of the representation made by the vendors. The rule of estoppel embodied in section 115 of the Evidence Act would apparently be attracted to the case. This is in the following terms: B “115. When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and such person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing.” From the recital of facts contained in the copy of the order of the Commissioner dated the 16th of February 1944, it appears that till the preparation of the jacaranda of 1905-06, there was no entry about the caste or tribe of the vendors’ family in the revenue papers. For the first time in that year, the members of the family were entered as “Rajputs”. It was only on 3-5-13, that a field Banning reported that their caste had been verified as ‘Rajput Min has”. The proceedings that were started before the Deputy Commissioner, Gujranwala, for change of caste to Sheikh, are also referred to by the Commissioner in his order. It seems to have been represented on behalf of the vendors’ family that the wrong entry about their being “Rajput Min has”, had been made in the revenue papers, through the mistake of their servants. Nawab Islam Hayey Khan who was then A. D. M. Gujranwala and was married to MST. Froze Begum, the daughter of Nigam Din, one of the members of this family, was also consulted by the Deputy Commissioner in respect of the prayer for change of caste. It may be noted that at that time the area subsequently included in the district of Sheikhupura was part of Gujranwala district. The A.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): of Nigam Din, one of the members of this family, was also consulted by the Deputy Commissioner in respect of the prayer for change of caste. It may be noted that at that time the area subsequently included in the district of Sheikhupura was part of Gujranwala district. The A. D. M. endorsed the application of the petitioners with the remark that their claim was correct. Then there was an inquiry through the Tonsilar who recommended the change asked for. Before the Tonsilar, apparently, several registered deeds had been produced by the petitioners in which their caste was entered as “Sheikh”. A further reference to Nawab Islam Hayey Khan elicited the reply that the caste of the family was in fact Sheikh. After this full inquiry, the Collector agreed to the change of caste. This was the position when the mortgages were first entered, and it was not altered till the sales took place in 1938 to 1940. In these circumstances, it is clear that the petitioners in try mg to undo the transactions of sale and to get back their property were in fact attempting to take advantage of their own fraud. This A conduct on their part would contravene the well-known principle embodied in the Legal Maxim “Nullity Commodus caper protest de injured SUA Peoria (Co. List. 148 (No man shall take advantage of his own wrong). It is, however, contended by Mr. Bro hi on behalf of the appellants that even though the conduct of his clients may be described as fraudulent, they were not debarred from raising the plea that the transactions in dispute contravened the provisions of the Act, and to that extent, the rule of estoppel could not be invoked against them, as it would defeat the policy of the Act. Estoppel, it is urged, could not be allowed to prevail against the provisions of a statute. Section 3 of the Act provides that no permanent alienation of land by a member of a notified agricultural tribe, to a person outside the same tribe or group of tubes to which the aliener belongs, shall take effect, as such, unless and until sanction is given thereto by a Deputy Commissioner. Such sanction may be given after the act of alienation is otherwise completed. There are certain exceptions to this provision which are not material for our purpose. The Deputy Commissioner is empowered under this section to grant or refuse sanction in his discretion. Section of the Act enables the Provincial Government by notification in the official Gazette to determine what bodies of persons in any district or group of districts are to be deemed to be agricultural tribes or group of agricultural tribes for the purposes of the Act. Subsections (2) and (3) of this section were added by section 4 of the Punjab Alienation of Land (Second Amendment) Act, 1938. By these two subsections, it was enacted that if any question or doubt should arise whether a person is or is not a member

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): purposes of the Act. Subsections (2) and (3) of this section were added by section 4 of the Punjab Alienation of Land (Second Amendment) Act, 1938. By these two subsections, it was enacted that if any question or doubt should arise whether a person is or is not a member of a notified agricultural tribe, the Deputy Commissioner shall, after such inquiry as may be prescribed, determine whether that person is to be deemed to be a member of the said agricultural tribe for the purpose of the Act. In passing such an order it is declared that the Deputy Commissioner shall not be bound by any decree of a civil Court and may review any order previously passed under these provisions. A proviso saves the effect of decree passed in a suit instituted before the 15th of June 1938. Section 14 of the Act, inter alia, provides that a permanent alienation which is not to take effect as such, until the sanction of a Deputy Commissioner is given thereto, shall, until such sanction is given or if such sanction has been refused, take effect as a usufructuary mortgage in form (a) permitted by section 6 of the Act for such term not exceeding twenty years and on such conditions as the Deputy Commissioner considers to be reasonable. On the basis of these provisions, the argument is advanced that the Legislature had in its wisdom evinced a clear intention to protect members of agricultural tribes from the results of their own improvident actions in alienating properties. Such a policy of the law, therefore, it is suggested, must have precedence over any rule of estoppel. The learned Custodian had relied on two decisions to repel this contention, reported as S. Arid Singh v. Rahman Din (minor) and others (1) and Diana Chatham v. Son Kory The High Court held that they could not interfere with the finding of the Custodian in writ jurisdiction as it was a finding recorded with jurisdiction and further the conclusion reached by him had the merit of being just. In this respect it could not be said that there was error patent on the face of the record, committed by the Custodian. In NAND Singh v. Rahman Din, the facts were that one Her Muhammad describing himself as belonging to the Bell Bhakti tribe, mortgaged his land and two houses along with other property, to two non-Muslims for a sum of Rs. 2,666. After the death of Her Muhammad, the mortgagees NAND Singh and Johan Lai, a son of Ganesh Was, the other mortgagee, brought a suit for the recovery of Rs. 5,000, by sale of the mortgaged land and houses, against the minor sons of the mortgagor. The suit was resisted, inter alia, on the plea that the mortgagor was a Bhakti Rajput and therefore a member of an agricultural tribe in the Rawalpindi district, that the mortgage BMG in contravention of the Act, could not be enforced and that no decree for the sale

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): the mortgagor. The suit was resisted, inter alia, on the plea that the mortgagor was a Bhakti Rajput and therefore a member of an agricultural tribe in the Rawalpindi district, that the mortgage BMG in contravention of the Act, could not be enforced and that no decree for the sale of the land covered by it, could be passed. On behalf of the mortgagee-plaintiffs the position was taken that the mortgagor was not a Bhakti Rajput but a Bhakti Bell which was not one of the notified agricultural tribes of the district. After some evidence had been led by the parties on the several issues framed, the guardian ad light of the minor defendants compromised with the plaintiffs, after obtain necessary sanction from the Court. According to the terms of this compromise, part of the mortgaged property was released from its burden and a decree for the sum claimed, by sale of the remaining mortgaged property, was passed in the plaintiffs favor. When execution was sought of this decree, Fatal Din, the guardian ad light of Reheat Din judgment-debtor, inter alia, raised the objection Adam that the judgment-debtor BMG a member of an agricultural tribe, the sale of his land was prohibited by section 14 of the Act. It was held that in view of the compromise decree, the plea as to the judgment-debtor being a member of an agricultural tribe, was barred by the rule of res judicata and that in any case, the judgment-debtor was stopped from raising that plea. The learned Single Judge who decided the case, observed that it was quite true that there could be no estoppel against a statute, but he was of the opinion that this well-recognized rule d did not imply that there could be no estoppel even against a plea of fact which had to be established before the statute could be evoked. The principle that there can be no estoppel against a statute was considered to apply in those cases where the aliener was admitted to be a member of an agricultural tribe or the facts were clear on that post. In Danu Kathak v. Son Keri, a Special Bench of the Patna High Court consisting of the Chief Justice and two other Judges, held that the plaintiffs having represented themselves as tenure holders, when granting a lease to the defendant, were stopped from pleading that they were rattans. The misrepresentation about their status not being to the knowledge of the defendant, it was found that there was no question of estoppel against the statute, namely, section 46 of the Chita Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908, which provided that a rattan could not, by a demise, grant any permanent rights in land. As the defendant had denied that the plaintiffs were rattans, an issue of fact was raised which could not be permitted to be raised in view of the plaintiffs’ representation to the contrary on which the defendant had acted. The entry in the record-of nights described them as rattans

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): land. As the defendant had denied that the plaintiffs were rattans, an issue of fact was raised which could not be permitted to be raised in view of the plaintiffs’ representation to the contrary on which the defendant had acted. The entry in the record-of nights described them as rattans was not accepted as conclusive. It was remarked that no question of the operation of the relevant statute could arise till this issue of fact was first decided. The learned Judges added that there would have been no estoppel if there had been any collusion between the plaintiffs and the defendant and if it had been established that the former had deliberately misrepresented themselves to be tenure-holders to the knowledge of the latter to defeat the provisions of the Chita Nagpur Tenancy Act. These two rulings clearly support the view that found favor with the learned’ Custodian. Mr. Bro hi on behalf of the appellants invited our attention to the case of Motor Bible v. Dharmas Those In that case the Privy Council was dealing with the case of a minor who l executed a mortgage representing himself to be a major, though it seems that an interested party had conveyed the information to the mortgagee that the mortgagor was still an infant. Their Lordships of the Privy. Council held that section 115 of the Indian Evidence Act did not apply to a case where the statement relied upon was made to a person who knew the real facts and was not misled by the untrue statement. There could be no estoppel where the truth of the matter was known to both parties. The case cited is, therefore, distinguishable on the facts from the start case in which a finding has been duly given that the vendees were not in part delict with the vendors. The next case cited by Mr. Bro hi is Gadigeppa Philippa Met v. Balangowda Bhimangoda In this case the learned Judges went further than the Privy Council, in laying down that where an infant represents fraudulently or otherwise that he is of age and thereby induces another to enter into a contract with him, then in an action founded on the contract, the infant is note stopped from setting up infancy. It was observed that no person can, by the application of the law of estoppel or by any rule of procedure, acquire or have assigned to him a status or legal capacity which the substantive law denies to him, and it makes no difference whether the misrepresentation on which the estoppel is sought to be founded, 1s made fraudulently or innocently. The learned Judges in the course of the discussion referred to the Privy Council judgment in Sadiq Ali Khan v. JAI Kishore (1) m which, although it was found that the fact of minority of some of the mortgagors was concealed by their father who was their guardian, from the mortgagee, it was ruled that the fact of majority being established at the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): Council judgment in Sadiq Ali Khan v. JAI Kishore (1) m which, although it was found that the fact of minority of some of the mortgagors was concealed by their father who was their guardian, from the mortgagee, it was ruled that the fact of majority being established at the date of the execution by the mortgagors of the deed founded on, was sufficient for the decision of the case, such a deed executed by minors being admittedly a nullity according to Indian law and incapable of founding a plea of estoppel. The principle was, therefore, affirmed that an estoppel could not overrule a plain provision of the law. Learned counsel for the appellants also relied on certain observations made by a learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court in Nawab of Murshidabad v. Bills Roy Cloud/entry In that case, the construction of the Murshidabad Act XV of 1891 which placed the Nawab Broader of Murshidabad under a disability in the matter of alienation of his property, fell for consideration. The transaction in question there, contravened this provision, and it was decided that the principle of estoppel could not be invoked to defeat the clear provisions of the statute that were based on public policy. There obviously the disability to which the Nawab Broader was subject, was explicitly and indisputably borne out by a legislative enactment and the true position could and should have been known to the alienee. The case, therefore, does not lend much assistance to the contention raised on behalf of the appellants. Another Privy Council decision pressed in aid by Mr. Bro hi PS Maritime Electric Co. Ltd. v. General Dairies Ltd. That a case in which the plaintiff company under-billed the 1'.77endant for the electric current supplied, by a mistake. Later, on the mistake being discovered, they made a further demand and succeeded in obtaining a decree. The question was whether they were stopped from demanding the excess amount by their conduct. In this context, the Privy Council observed that the electric company was under a statutory duty to charge the full amount for the electricity consumed, and the consumer was under an equal obligation to pay that amount, under a statute. The plea of estoppel was not allowed to defeat the statutory obligation which was of an unconditional character. Here again, no issue of fact called for decision before the provisions of the Act could be applied to the case and the decision therefore is not very much to the post. Our law, it seems, displays a special tenderness for the interests of Mors and relieves them from the effects of their own-] illegal acts even though the transaction may have been induced by their own fraudulent misrepresentation on the post D (1) AIR 1928 PC 152 (2) AIR 1929 Cal. 433 (3) AIR 1937 PC 114 of age. This does not, however, appear to be a universal rule and in some jurisdictions the rule is established that fraud will! vitiate the plea

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): by their own fraudulent misrepresentation on the post D (1) AIR 1928 PC 152 (2) AIR 1929 Cal. 433 (3) AIR 1937 PC 114 of age. This does not, however, appear to be a universal rule and in some jurisdictions the rule is established that fraud will! vitiate the plea of infancy, MN certain types of cases. See for instance, Law of Estoppel by Henry Herman, Vol. II, p. 1255 et set wherein an infant’s liability for a tort is affirmed. Reference may also be made to Estoppel by Arthur Campers, Book I, p. 56 et set. Wherein Bigelow on Estoppel is quoted to the effect that “it appears to be the better doctrine that both infants (of years of discretion) and married women may bee stopped.” Snell’s Principles of Equity, edited by R. E. McGarry (1947 Edition for India) p. 463 also cites cases in which, in equity, estoppel was successfully pleaded against infants in certain cases. The cases relating to minors must be regarded as falling in a special category and the rule laid down in them should not, E without compelling necessity, be extended to other cases. I am disposed to hold that in the case of adults, the plea of estoppel would be available to bar investigation of a question of fact about which a representation had been made so as to induce the other party to change his position to his prejudice and the c principle of there being no estoppel against a statute, should only be invoked in such cases, if on the face of it, the contract is shown to be tainted with illegality. The effect of the provisions of Ordinance (XV of 1949) (referred to in the equal as the Ordinance) on the finding given by the Deputy Commissioner under section of the Act, also calls for consideration. It is contended by Mr. Bro hi on behalf of the appellants that such a finding given by the Deputy Commissioner would be binding on the Custodian as there was nothing in the Ordinance, repugnant to the exercise of the exclusive jurisdiction of the Deputy Commissioner in this behalf Section 12 of the Ordinance enacts that property which has vested in or of which possession has been taken by the Custodian, shall be exempt from all legal process including seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale, by any officer of a Court or any other authority and no my junction or other order of whatever kind, in respect of such property, shall be granted or made “by any Court or any other authority.” The words “or any other authority’ occurring in this provision were inserted theremin by Act (VI of 1951), but this amendment was to be deemed always to have been made and to have had effect accordingly. If therefore, the Deputy Commissioner’s order involved a direction that the property in dispute in this case, which had undoubtedly vested in the Custodian on the vendees becoming evacuees, should be restored to the vendors, it

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): to be deemed always to have been made and to have had effect accordingly. If therefore, the Deputy Commissioner’s order involved a direction that the property in dispute in this case, which had undoubtedly vested in the Custodian on the vendees becoming evacuees, should be restored to the vendors, it would be within the mischief of this section. The provisions of the Ordinance are to override all other existing laws, as declared by section thereof: The Ordinance, moreover, was a later central enactment whereas the Act was a provincial measure and in case of repugnance between the two, the Ordinance must receive precedence. Section 34 of the Ordinance gives exclusive jurisdiction to the Custodian, to adjudicate upon a question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings, whether, inter alia, any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or interest if any, an evacuee has in such property. A finding given on such a question by any Court or any other authority would be without jurisdiction by virtue of subsection (1) of this section. Subsection (2) of this section imposes an obligation on a civil or revenue Court or any other authority before whom such a question arises, to make a reference, for its decision, to the Custodian. The words “or any other authority’ in subsections (1) and (2) of this section were inserted only in 1951, by two amending Acts. The amendment of subsection (1) became effective from 21-4-51, that is, after the Deputy Commissioner had given his decision under section of the Act, but prior to the Commissioner’s order in appeal. The amendment of subsection (2) was of a still later date, in 1951. It is urged that the Deputy Commissioner’s order was not hit by subsection (1) of section 34, as a declaration about the caste or tribe of the appellants was not one of the questions referred to within this subsection, and also because the words “other authority” did not exist there mat the time the Deputy Commissioner passed his order. With regard to the second objection it is enough to say that the order was clearly subject to appeal under the Act and could not be said to be a final order, so as to be effective program vigor, if it was challenged in appeal. Before the stage of finalization m appeal arrived, the Legislature had intervened and barred all authorities except the Custodian from adjudication of a question falling within the purview of subsection (1) of section 34 of the Ordinance. But it is forcibly J. argued that subsection (1) of section 34 of the Ordinance did not cover such a question at all. " The contention does not appear to be sound. A declaration. of a person as belonging to a notified agricultural tribe under section of the Act, is to be understood clearly in the context of -property rights m agricultural land to be possessed or retained, by the person conceded. In the present case, specifically, the only

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): to be sound. A declaration. of a person as belonging to a notified agricultural tribe under section of the Act, is to be understood clearly in the context of -property rights m agricultural land to be possessed or retained, by the person conceded. In the present case, specifically, the only object of approaching the Deputy Commissioner for such -a decision was to get back the property in suit, under the. provisions of section 14 of the Act. It is, therefore, idle to suggest that the declaration of caste or tribe in the present case could be looked at, apart from the question of the nature of the property in suit. In my option, subsection (1) of section 34 of the Ordinance would come into play and prevent the Deputy Commissioner, or the Commissioner under the Act, to pronounce on this question, so as to affect the nature of the property in suit. Both sections 12 and 34 of the Ordinance would stand in the way of such an adjudication by the authority finally charged with that function in the Act. It is true that the amendment of section 34 having taken place after the Deputy Commissioner’s decision, he could not have made a reference to the Custodian on this question under subsection (2) thereof But it is clear nevertheless that such a decision which had not been finalized under the Act, could not be allowed to prevail against the provisions of the Ordinance. The Commissioner’s order, therefore, would be fructuous in these circumstances. Another line of approach by Mr. Bro hi was that the Custodian should be held bound by the decision of the Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner this case, in so far as he was a patty to the proceedings before these officers, through the agency of the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. Under section 20 of the Ordinance, the Custodian is undoubtedly clothed with authority to take such measures as he might consider necessary or expedient, for the purpose of administering, preserving and managing any evacuee property which has vested in him. Subsection (2) of this section declares that without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in subsection (1) the Custodian may, inter alia, institute, defend or continue any legal proceeding in any civil or revenue Court, on behalf of the evacuee. This provision, in terms, does not cover the Deputy Commissioner or the Commissioner, functioning under the Act, and it is extremely doubtful, how far the Rehabilitation authority, which is the agent of the Custodian only for the purpose of administering and managing the property, or appearing on his behalf in respect of litigation in Courts, can bind the Custodian as party, by appearing in proceedings under the Acct, without express authorization by the Custodian. The upshot of the discussion, therefore, is that the Custodian is not bound by the finding of the Deputy Commissioner on the question of the caste or tribe of the appellants as this amounts to a decision that the property in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): under the Acct, without express authorization by the Custodian. The upshot of the discussion, therefore, is that the Custodian is not bound by the finding of the Deputy Commissioner on the question of the caste or tribe of the appellants as this amounts to a decision that the property in suit which was evacuee property, had ceased to occupy that character. The Custodian has also expressed the option that by virtue of Notification No. 657-R of 3rd April 1950, issued under section of the Act, the vendees, who were holding land in this district, had become qualified to have permanent alienation of land in their favor, as they were declared to belong to the same agricultural tribe or group of tribes as other landholders in this district and therefore the principle of section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act could be invoked on behalf of the vendees to ask that the Court should treat that as done which ought to have been done and to feed the grant by estoppel. To this the reply is given by Mr. Bro hi that the notification could not be made retrospective and could only be effective for transactions that might take place after its date. There is force MN this contention of Mr. Bro hi But this notification may connote a change in the policy -behind the Act and to that extent may even support the view of the Custodian on the question of estoppel, in these changed circumstances. The impugned transaction was not even in its inception, totally barred by statute, even if the aliener was a member of a notified tribe and the salience was not. It could be validated by sanction of the Collector, accorded even ex post facto. At the present time, free exchange of properties is per missile between holders of land in the district, and it is a matter for consideration whether the appellants should not be held bound by their own deliberate declaration, in the context of the changed policy of the Act. H In the face of the authorities discussed above, the Custodial’n’s view on the point of estoppel could not be assailed as being erroneous on the face of the record so as to call for correction in certiorari and in view of the special provisions of the Ordinance, his own jurisdiction to decide the question of nature of the property is exclusive. For the full exercise of this exclusive jurisdiction, he must be conceded also the exclusive right to decide all essential questions like the tribe or caste of the appellants. I have, therefore, reached the conclusion that the High Court’s order calls for no interference. I would dismiss the appeal but in view of the difficult nature of the questions involved, would make no order as to costs in this Court. Fable-Akbar, J.-I have had the advantage of reading the judgment proposed to be delivered by my learned brother Rahman, J. I agree with his reasoning and conclusions and have nothing

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 572?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 572 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-05-15): in view of the difficult nature of the questions involved, would make no order as to costs in this Court. Fable-Akbar, J.-I have had the advantage of reading the judgment proposed to be delivered by my learned brother Rahman, J. I agree with his reasoning and conclusions and have nothing to add. Hamoodur-Rahman, J.-I agree. A. H. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 1964 PLD 236 about?
Answer: Case 1964 PLD 236 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1964-02-06. The case involved ATA ULLAH MALIK (APPELLANT) VERSUS (1) THE CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY WESTPAKISTAN AND KARACHI(2) SARDAR BATTAN SINGH HARNAM SINGH(3) S ISHWAR SINGH HARNAM SINGH(4) S AMAR SINGH ISHWAR SINGH(5) RASHID MERWARI IRANI AND(6) KHUDA DAD ARDSHER IRANI RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1956 - ARTICLE 160 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 25 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_236.html 1/29 28/10/2025, 00:35 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_236.html PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XLL OF 1957) - S. 43 PRACTICE PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20 REGISTRATION ACT (XVI OF 1908) - SS. 47 AND 61 LIMITATION ACT (EX OF 1908) - S. ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY RULES, 1950 - R. 17-A AFFIDAVIT PRACTICE. The case was heard by A. R. CORNELIUS, C.J.S A. RAHMAN, FAZLE-AKBAR,B. Z KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: In case 1964 PLD 236, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1956 - ARTICLE 160 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 25 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_236.html 1/29 28/10/2025, 00:35 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_236.html PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XLL OF 1957) - S. 43 PRACTICE PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20 REGISTRATION ACT (XVI OF 1908) - SS. 47 AND 61 LIMITATION ACT (EX OF 1908) - S. ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY RULES, 1950 - R. 17-A AFFIDAVIT PRACTICE. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1964-02-06.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1964 PLD 236 were: MAHMUD ALI SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY M. SIDDIQ SENIOR ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANT. SAYEED A. SHEIKH ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY SHAFIQ AHMAD ATTORNEY FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.. The judges presiding were: A. R. CORNELIUS, C.J.S A. RAHMAN, FAZLE-AKBAR,B. Z KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: The parties in case 1964 PLD 236 were: ATA ULLAH MALIK (APPELLANT) VERSUS (1) THE CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY WESTPAKISTAN AND KARACHI(2) SARDAR BATTAN SINGH HARNAM SINGH(3) S ISHWAR SINGH HARNAM SINGH(4) S AMAR SINGH ISHWAR SINGH(5) RASHID MERWARI IRANI AND(6) KHUDA DAD ARDSHER IRANI RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1964 PLD 236.
Answer: Judgment Cornelius, C. J.-The order against which special leave to appeal has been granted was made by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Federal Capital and West Pakistan under an exclusive jurisdiction conferred upon him by the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act XII of 1957. It was made on the 19th November 1960, when the Constitution of 1956, was in force, and an appeal lay to this Court from gwasfjudicial Tribunals, by special leave. This was under Article 160. It is desirable that at the outset of this judgment I should state the view held by this Court with reference to Article 160 of the late Constitution, and I cannot do better than to reproduce here the weighty observations made by the late Chief Justice of Pakistan Mr. Justice Muhammad Muir in Muhammad Saeed v. Election Petitions Tribunal viz. “T may state at the very outset that the supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 160 is a restricted jurisdiction and an appeal to invoke it will not succeed where a special Tribunal, like the Election Tribunal, has functioned within the spirit and the intention of the statute that created it and while so functioning has made a real and honest endeavor to judge facts on the merits of the evidence and to apply the law to them. A finding of fact thus arrived at, however, erroneous, will not be scrutinized or reviewed by this Court, and even if an error of law be committed by the Tribunal that will not be considered to be a sufficient ground for interference unless the law so misunderstood or misapplied raises some general question of fundamental importance to the proper functioning of the Tribunal or the decision of the case.” There is no question at all that the Custodian of Evacuee Property is not constituted as a Court. The functions which he performs in respect of appeals and revisions generally follow the procedure, and principles applicable to judicial proceedings. But in one most important aspect, they fall short of being fully judicial, namely, that the Custodian is required to decide questions raised as to the ownership of, and other rights in and in respect of evacuee properties which are all vested in the Custodian, by operation of law. The Custodian is made a judge in his own cause in respect of such proceedings, and this position is not affected by the consideration that the vesting is in the Custodian B not as a person but as a corporation sole, in whom the evacuee property is vested to be applied to specified uses, in particular, the rehabilitation of the vast flood of refugees. The Custodian in his official capacity has a real interest in the properties so vested m him to preserve against claims by persons other than refugees. Experience shows that in the vast majority of cases, that interest has not been lightly parted with. Consequently, the Custodian does not satisfy one essential requirement of a Judge in respect of the proceedings which come before him affecting evacuee property vested in him, and those proceedings could at best be claimed to be merely dwarf- judicial. The principal functions of the Custodian are of course administrative, and it 1s unquestionable that the quasi-judicial powers vested in him are intended to be used and are in fact used to regulate and facilitate the administrative side of his task, which is to provide for the equitable user of evacuee property by just distribution among the refugees according to their needs, and by proper application to the re-establishment of the economy of (1) P L D 1957 S C (PAK.) 91 Pakistan. It is true that by the statute and the rules and schemes thereunder, the function of distribution of evacuee properties as indicated above was not free of regulation, but in almost all aspects of administration of his functions, the Custodian was yet allowed a wide discretion. An important function entrusted to the Custodian was that of applying restrictions to the transfer of property by evacuees. These are now dealt with under section 20 of Act XII of 1957. The present proceeding arose out of an application under section 16 of the earlier law, namely Ordinance (XV of 1949), but in relevant respects the law was not changed when the Act of 1957 was passed to replace the Ordinance of 1949. Section 20 of the Act provides that no transfer of property made on or after the IST March 1947, by an evacuee should be effective to confer any right unless the transfer was confirmed by the Custodian. For this purpose, an application was to be made within the prescribed time and this could be made by a party to the transaction, or by any person claiming under such a party. The Custodian was to hold a summary inquiry in the prescribed manner and was required to reject the application If certain conditions were not satisfied, Le. if the transfer was in contravention of a law, or if it was not covered by a no objection certificate from the Income-tax Authorities. He had discretion to reject the application if he formed the opinion that the transaction was not entered into in good faith or if it was form adequate consideration. But a further and larger discretion in this respect was also vested in him by the provision that if he thought that the transaction should not be confirmed for “any other reason” he was at liberty to reject the application. Even when he decided to allow the application he was empowered by the section to impose such terms and conditions as he thought fit. The law clearly inclines against easy divestment, and in favor of retention of such properties for application to the uses for which the statute was, in the main, enacted. By the order under appeal the Custodian dismissed an application by the present appellant ATA Allah Malik for revision of an order of the Additional Custodian dated the 10th September 1958, whereby an earlier contrary order of the Deputy Custodian having been set aside, a sale by certain evacuees in favor of two Paris residents of Karachi, named Rashid Merwin Irani and Haddad Aretha Irani (hereinafter referred to as “the Iranis’’) was confirmed unconditionally. In order to appreciate how far the case falls within the restricted power which this Court exercises, to interfere with orders of a special Tribunal exercising exclusive jurisdiction, it is necessary that the progress of the case before the authorities of the Custodian’s Department should be briefly stated. That is necessary also for a proper examination © f the justice of the whole case, before coming to the consideration of the possible scope of interference with the Custodian’s order. The property in the case consists of an area of about 300 sq. yards of land situated in the business quarter of Karachi. It was told by an evacuee Bataan Singh on the 15th May 1947, to two persons Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh who themselves became evacuees later. This sale was registered on the 11th August 1947. The land formed part of larger area of 837 sq. yards which the aforesaid Bataan Singh had bought from the Karachi Estate Board on the 19th December 1946, the deed being registered on the 14th March 1947. The evacuees Ishtar Sigh and Amar Singh on the 13th September 1947, sold the land which they had bought from Bataan Singh to the Iranis. The deed was presented for registration on the same day, but was actually registered on the 27th July 1948. An application for confirmation was made to the Custodian by the Iranis on the 23rd May 1950. They applied only for confirmation of the sale to them by Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh and recited that Rs. 2,000 had been paid as earnest money on the 11th September 1947, and at the execution of the document a further sum of Rs. 15,000 was paid and in addition the vendees had undertaken to discharge Rs. 10,000 due to the Karachi Estate Board, by installments. At that time no momenta clearance certificate was required for the purposes of registration and none had therefore been produced. No application had been made for such a clearance certificate and confirmation was accordingly asked for. On the 14th October 1950, Mr. Akbar Hossein the then Custodian of Evacuee Property confirmed the sale. His order shows that he had considered the question of consideration, and THT the required income-tax clearance certificate had been produced. It appears that the property had in the meantime been allotted to ATA Allah Malik, the present appellant. He applied to the Custodian on the 5th July 1951, for review of the order of the 14th October 1950, relying firstly on non-confirmation of the earlier sale by Bataan Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh and secondly upon non-production of an income-tax clearance certificate in respect of Bataan Singh. It was said, m indirect terms, that whether consideration had been paid required to be examined. On the 29th February 1952, the then Custodian Mr. Ayaz Ali accepted ATA Allah Malik’s petition and set aside the confirmation of the sale on the grounds firstly, that the sale to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh by Bataan Singh had not been confirmed and secondly that Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh therefore had no rights to pass to the Iranis. A fresh application for confirmation was made by the Iranis on the 7th April 1952, and this led to lengthy proceedings, in which ATA Allah Malic took part. He objected that the application was barred by limitation and this objection was considered, and the delay was condoned by order dated 16th May 1953, after which the proceedings went on until on the 19th May 1955, having granted a great number of adjournments for production of the income-tax clearance certificate (in respect of the earlier sale) the Deputy Custodian, while being doubtful whether the vendees would care to clear the very high momenta dues which had accumulated, dismissed the application for failure of production of the said certificate, but left TT open to the applicants “to move for revival of this application within fifteen days from the date of obtaining the income-tax clearance certificate.” ATA Allah Malik moved the Custodian by way of appeal to have this last condition expunged, and on the 9th November 1955, the then Custodian Mr. Manner Adam holding that such agreements of transfer of an evacuee property “should be finalized,” and that it was doubtful whether the Iranis could “be expected to pay the heavy lability of income-tax in addition to the sale consideration already paid,” decided that there was no point in keeping the case open, and therefore deleted the words to that effect in the Deputy Custodian’s order. The record of the proceedings shows that on the 12th May 1958, an application made by the Iranis for revival of the proceedings was allowed, and three days later, arguments were heard after a statement of Haddad Aretha Irani had been recorded. An order was made on the 30th July 1958, rejecting the application. A grievance is made of the failure of the Deputy Custodian to send notice of this proceeding to ATA Allah Malik. The order shows that the Deputy Custodian was rely mg on the notice issued on the 16th April 1952, so that it is clear that ATA Allah Malik was not a party to the proceedings on the 12th and 15th May 1958. In this connection, it is important to note the grounds on which the rejection was based, as they are relevant to the contentions previously and subsequently raised by ATA Allah Malik. The grounds were as follows. It was held that condonation of the delay in the making of the application of April 1952, had been obtained by “fraud and misrepresentation.” Secondly the Deputy Custodian found that the [rams had no locus standi to apply for confirmation of the sale by Bataan Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh. Thirdly in the absence of confirmation of the sale of Bataan Singh to Ishtar SMG and Amar Singh, the latter had no night in the property which they could transfer to the Iranis. On the point of consideration, the Deputy Custodian held that the price paid for the property was “much below the market value.” In this connection, he mentioned that the price could be estimated by the “municipal assessment formula” which was forty times the rent of the building plus the value of the land, or on the Central P. W. D.’s formula of assessment which is based on the cost of construction plus the value of the land, the P. W. D. construction rates ranging between Rs. to Rs. 13 per sq. ft. Alternatively, the Rehabilitation Ministry had been applying the formula of forty times the annual rent for assessment of properties left behind by the refugees in India. Without attempting to evaluate the property on any one of these three bases the Deputy Custodian came to the conclusion that the consideration was inadequate. The Iranis appealed against this order to the Custodian, and the appeal was heard by the Additional Custodian (Mr. Riazuddin Ahmad) who allowed it on the 10th September 1958, on full consideration of all the facts and evidence. He decided that to exclude the application on the ground of limitation would be unduly hard because it was obvious that omission by the Iranis to apply for confirmation of the sale-deed of Bataan Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh was due to advertence or the wrong advice of counsel, and further, there was nothing to prove misrepresentation or fraud. The decision by the Deputy Custodian that the Iranis had no locus standi to apply for confirmation of the sale by Bataan Singh was held to be bad because the Iranis were claiming under the previous vendees Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh, and were thus entitled under section 16 of the Ordinance of 1949 to make the application. The question of consideration was gone into in detail. It was found that on a rental basis the value worked out at Rs. 24,000, and that in fact the appellants having already paid Rs. 17,000 to the vendors and Rs. 14,892-4-0 to the Karachi Estate Board had in fact paid something like Rs. 32,000 which was more than their vendors had paid to Bataan Singh. As to the Municipal formula, it was held that there was no proof what it was, nor was there any proof of the P. W. D. rates assumed by the Deputy Custodian. Holding that it was not proved that the consideration was inadequate, the Additional Custodian allowed the appeal and confirmed the sale-deeds by Bataan Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh and by the two latter to the Iranis “with effect from the date of their execution.” ATA Allah Malik next moved the Custodian by way of revision dated 11th December 1959, in this petition mention was specifically made of the deletion by the Custodian on the 9th November 1959, of the permission granted by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th May 1955, to the [ranis “to move for the revival of this application within fifteen days from the date of obtaining the income-tax clearance certificate. The application after reciting certain earlier steps taken by ATA Allah Malik, mentioned that three sale-deeds had been executed in respect of this land (including the earlier sale to Bataan Singh) and made some vague allegations to the effect that the income-tax and other Government dues amounted to more than the value of the property itself, and it was very doubtful whether the Iranis had cleared these dues. It was suggested also though vaguely, that the valuation had been artificially reduced by getting the rent reduced in the Corporation record, and further that the transaction in favor of the Iranis “seems to be bogus and inoperative in law.” Stress was again laid on the non-mention before the Deputy Custodian and the Additional Custodian of the proceedings of the 19th May 1955 and 19th November 1955, before the Deputy Custodian and the Custodian (Mr. Manner Adam) respectively. The Custodian thereupon made certain inquiries in regard to the income-tax matter, from the Income-tax Officer, and there have been placed on the record three letters from the Income-tax Officer, one in reply to the Custodian which is dated 17th May 1960, and two to Haddad Aretha Irani dated 27th July and 15th August 1960. These letters did not contain any reference to the final issue of a income-tax clearance certificate, but the order under appeal itself shows that such a certificate “was reg ranted to the respondents on the 25th October 1960.” This was one of the questions raised before the Custodian at the hearing of the revision. Another was whether the delay in applying for confirmation should have been condoned, and the Custodian decided that the delay had been satisfactorily explained J?because the original application had been moved Io the year 1949 and in fact the sale had been first confirmed in the year 1950. The last question raised before him was as to the consideration paid for the house and the Custodian accepted the view formed by the Additional Custodian namely that the Iranis had paid nearly Rs. 32,000 and this price was not inadequate. It should be sufficiently clear from the above recital of facts that there is no question but that the Custodian and his Subordinate Officers have functioned within the spirit and intention of the Evacuee Property Law. There can be no doubt that each of them made a real and honest endeavor to judge the necessary facts on the merits of the evidence and to apply the law to them. Mr. Mahmud Ali has not attempted to show that the findings arrived at by the Additional Custodian and the Custodian regarding the valuation of the property are in any way erroneous. A finding of “fraud and misrepresentation” regarding condonation of the delay by the Deputy Custodian on the 16th May 1963, had been recorded by his successor in his order of the 30th July 1958, but both the Additional Custodian and the Custodian after consideration of the facts, found that this finding was baseless and set it aside, and there 1s no question but that their conclusion was honestly reached. Before us, Mr. Mahmud Ali attempted to argue that the issue of the income-tax clearance certificate had been obtained in some irregular fashion, but as to this it is enough to point out that, following upon ATA Allah Malik’s application of the 11th December 1959, the Custodian himself directed that information should be sought from the Income-tax Officer whose letters referred to above clearly shows that he had in mind the consideration now put forward e.g. that the total amount of the dues exceeded the value of the property, and despite this, subsequently on the 25th October 1960, the Income-tax Officer did issue the necessary certificate. A point of law was raised before us namely that the order of Mr. Manner Adam dated 9th November 1955, was a definitive and determinative order in relation to the application for confirmation, so that it was not possible for that application to be revived thereafter, as was done in May 1958. The argument raises the question as to the nature of the contest, if any, when an application is made under section 20 for confirmation of the sale in respect of property which but for such confirmation would be evacuee property. The power has been given in this respect to the Custodian, in whom the property is vested. The question whether the title in the property which is vested in the Custodian should be confirmed in favor of a transferee by the Custodian himself would appear to lie exclusively between the Custodian and the party seeking the confirmation. As has been observed already, the sense of the law which the Custodian is appointed to adm mister TS distinctly favorably to the retention by the Custodian of the property vested in him, and against anything resembling easy divestment. The Custodian is armed with large powers to protect the rights so vested in him. Any further rights created in respect of these properties by any other authority, e.g. by act of allotment of a rehabilitation authority, are fully within the scope of the Custodian’s protective power. And it is to be noted that at the time when the question of confirmation was taken up, no Proceedings had yet taken place under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 which could have the effect of divesting the Custodian of his title. The appellate order of the Additional Custodian allowing the transfer was made in September, 1958, and it was not until August 1959, that evacuee properties generally were vested in the Government by notification, and so became available for transfer to claimant refugees and others. A Provisional Transfer Order was issued in favor of ATA Allah Malik, but it was later cancelled, in consequence of the confirmation order. It would seem then that there is no force in the argument that the revival order is vitiated by failure to notify ATA Allah Malik before it was made. He had no vested right in the property. Such right as he possessed as an allottee was derived from, and was held under the title which was vested in the Custodian, and which it was the duty of the Custodian, under the law, to protect within the meaning of section 20 aforesaid. The mere fact that at the instance of ATA Allah Malik an allottee under the Custodian, an express permission given by the Deputy Custodian to the Iranis to apply for revival of the proceedings within fifteen days of obtaining an income-tax clearance certificate was deleted, would clearly be without effect upon the capacity of the Custodian’s Department to allow revival of those proceedings, for the main and, in fact, the only true parties to the proceedings were the Custodian himself} and the transferee seeking confirmation of his transfer. The dismissal of the application for lack of a formality required, namely the income-tax clearance certificate cannot be thought by any stretching of legal concepts to have given rise to any vested rights in ATA Allah Malik or any other else to prevent the revival of those proceedings. There had been no decision on the merits, and even m the case of criminal proceedings it is well-settled law that such a non-definitive order as a discharge of the accused person, m a criminal prosecution if made otherwise than on the merits, does not have the effect of term mating the proceeding so that it cannot be revived later. (See the judgment of this Court in the case of Abdul Hossain Sana v. Subanal Agartala Something was made MN arguments of the allegation that the order of Mr. Manner Adam dated 9th November 1955, had been concealed from the Deputy Custodian in the revival proceedings. The Deputy Custodian, of course, decided in favor of nondivestment of title. As has been pointed out, specific mention was made of the order and the earlier order of the Deputy Custodian in the revision application to Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, as Custodian, but his order which was made after harem counsel for both parties, makes no mention of them giving the impression that it was thought fit not to raise the contention before him. However that may be, it is clear that the final order of the Custodian was made after these facts had been placed before him. Even assuming that there is failure to consider and (1) P LD 1962 S C 242 decide this objection, it is without fundamental effect in relation to the decision of the case, for, as has been seen above, proceedings in confirmation under section 20 of the Act, 1957, are not determined with finality by such an order as was made by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th May 1955, assuming that it contained no express provision for revival the proceedings. For these reasons I would dismiss this appeal with costs. 8. A. Rahman, J.-I have had the advantage of seems the judgment proposed to be delivered in this case by my learned brother, Haikus, J. am inclined to agree with him generally and to concur in the conclusions he has reached on the facts of this case. The learned Custodian’s order under appeal, shows no awareness of the issues raised on behalf of ATA Allah Malik by his revision petition and omits all reference to the order of his predecessor which shut out the possibility of revival of proceedings before the Custodian. I wish to post out that the only way in which the learned Custodian could have allowed the proceedings to be treated as revival proceedings was to review his predecessor’s order dated 9-11-55 so as to remove the bar against that course. He might be persuaded to resort to this procedure even now and in that case the question of a fresh application for confirmation being barred by time would not arise. The matter rests in his discretion. But at the same time, since ATA Allah Malik had from the very beginning been contesting the consideration for and the genuineness of the transaction, and he was a party very much interested in the property in question, he had to be given an opportunity to establish his objections by evidence, before the Custodian could pass a final order in the case. I would therefore agree that the appeal be allowed, and the case sent back to the Custodian for fresh disposal in accordance with law I would make no order as to costs in this Court, in the circumstances of this case. Fable-Akbar, J.-I have had the advantage of reading and fully considering the judgments of my Lord the Chief Justice and of my learned brother Haikus, J. For the reasons which have been clearly and fully set forth in the judgment of the Chief Justice and which it is unnecessary for me to repeat, I am also of opinion that this appeal should be dismissed. I would however, like to add some observations of my own. It is impossible to read the Custodian’s order without seeing that he has honestly considered all the relevant circumstances bearing on whether the sale should be confirmed or not. This being so, it is not for this Court to say while exercising its limited jurisdiction in such matters that there was something he had considered which he ought not to have considered, and something he had not considered which he ought to have considered and so his order was bad. This would be equivalent to saying that his order could be reviewed by this Court. I think we would be exceeding our jurisdiction if we attempt to review a judgment the jurisdiction to form which the Legislature has 99nfined to the Custodian and the Custodian alone. N It is true that notice under rule 12(5).had not been served on the appellant; but the fact remains that in the revision taken by him the whole circumstances of the case were placed before the Custodian and he after fully considering them affirmed the order of the Additional Custodian confirming the sale. It cannot therefore, be said that he has not acted in a judicial manner. In the Act the Custodian’s power has been expressed in words of the widest amplitude. Whether an application is competent, whether it is in proper form, and whether it has been preferred within the prescribed time, are all matters for decision of the Custodian. Even if he decides these questions wrongly, this Court I think, cannot interfere with his order. The questions thus agitated in this appeal do not seem to be questions which bear upon the jurisdiction of the Custodian or his authority to entertain them. In these circumstances TT cannot be said that he acted without jurisdiction, or in excess of it, or m violation of the principles of natural justice. I would therefore, dismiss this appeal but make no order as to costs. B. Z. Haikus, J.-This is an appeal by special leave against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property dated the 19th November 1960, dismissing a revision petition against the appellate order of the Additional Custodian confirming two transactions of sale of evacuee property. It is necessary to state the facts in some detail. By a sale deed which was executed on the 19th December 1946, R. M. Gandhi sold plot No. 298, A. M. Quarters, Karachi, to Bataan Singh for a sum of Rs. 49,703-10-0. Out of this consideration Rs. 28,771-5- 0 were retained by the Vendée for payment to the Karachi Estate Board from whom R. M. Gandhi had purchased this plot. The total area of the plot was 832'5 square yards. Bataan Singh raised some construction on this plot and on the 11th August 1947, sold 297 square yards out of the total area to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh for a sum of Rs. 31,540 out of which Rs. 17,000 were paid in cash and the balance of Rs. 14,540 was left with Ishtar Singh and Amassing for payment in eleven equal installments to the Karachi Estate Board. This sum of Rs. 14,540 represented the proportionate amount payable to the Karachi Estate Board in respect of 297 square yards. The deed in favor of Amar Singh and Ishtar Singh was presented for registration on the 11th August 1947, but was registered on 16th June 1948. Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh In turn sold the property purchased from Bataan Singh to Rashid Merwin Irani and Haddad Archer Irani by a sale-deed dated the 13th September 1947, which was registered on 27th July 1948. The consideration for this sale was Rs. 27,000, out of which Rs. 2,000 were stated to have been paid as earnest money, Rs. 15,000 were stated to have been paid in cash on the day the deed was executed, and Rs. 10,000 were to be paid to the Karachi Estate Board in respect of the balance of the installments. It was stated in the deed that the vendees were to pay to the Karachi Estate Board either the sum of Rs. 10,000 or such sum as may be found to be payable as the proportionate share of the price which remained payable in respect of the whole plot. Ishtar Singh and Harm Singh were both evacuees. Rashid Merwin Irani and Haddad Archer Irani who are respondents 5 and 6 in this appeal and are hereafter referred to as such filed an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property on the 23rd May 1950, under section 16 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, praying for confirmation of the sale in their favor. On the 14th of October 1950, Mr. Akbar Hussain, the then Custodian of Evacuee Property, confirmed the sale. In September 1947, Abdullah Mark who is the appellant in this appeal had been allotted the plot which had been sold by Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh to respondents 5 and 6. On the Sth of July 1951, he applied to Mr. Akbar Hussain, Custodian of Evacuee Property, for a review of his order confirming the sale in favor of respondents 5 and 6 on the ground that the sale in favor of Ishtar SMG and Amar Singh itself required confirmation. This application for review came up for decision before Mr. Ayaz Ali, the successor-in-office of Mr. Akbar Hussain on 29th February 1951. Mr. Ayaz Ali set aside the order of Mr. Akbar Hussain on the ground that there being no confirmation of the sale by Bataan Singh who was himself an evacuee there could be no confirmation of the sale in favor of respondents 5 and 6. On the 7th April 1952, respondents 5 and 6 put in another application for confirmation of both the sale-deeds before the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi In this application the only persons who were made respondents were Ishtar Singh, Amar Singh and Bataan Singh evacuees. Neither the appellant, on whose application the previous order of confirmation had been set aside, nor the Rehabilitation Authorities were made parties. It was stated in this application that the order passed by Mr. Akbar Hussain on 14th October 1950, had on review been set aside by the Custodian, but there was no mention of the person who had filed the review application. The evacuee respondents were served by a notice in the Daily Annam Karachi. The appellant though he had not been made a party was imp leaded on his own application. At some stage, it does not appear how, the proceedings were transferred from the Additional Custodian to the Deputy Custodian. There were a large number of hearings and ultimately on the 19th May 1955, the Deputy Custodian after having granted a number of adjournments for the production of the income-tax clearance certificates rejected the application for non-production of such certificates. He observed in the order that the income-tax abilities of the vendors were above Rs. 30,000 and the total consideration for the sale BMG only Rs. 27,000 it was doubtful whether the income-tax would be paid for getting the sales confirmed. While rejecting the application, however, the Deputy Custodian permitted respondents 5 and 6 to move for the revival of the application for confirmation within fifteen days from the date of obtain the income-tax clearance certificate. It may be stated here that the application for confirmation was barred by time and an application for condonation of delay bad also been filed by respondents 5 sad 6 under section 5 of the LUnjJtgtion AET, OF the 16th May 1953, the Deputy Custodian had condoned the delay. Against the order passed by the Deputy Custodian rejecting application for confirmation it was the appellant who filed an appeal before the Custodian. The appellant contended in this appeal that the permission given to respondents 5 and 6 to move for the revival of the application within fifteen days of obtain the momenta clearance certificate was improper. Notice of this appeal was served on respondents 5 and 6, but nobody appeared on their behalf; By an order dated the 9th November 1955, the Custodian deleted the last sentence in the order of the Deputy Custodian by which an application for revival had been permitted. This sentence ran “It will be, however, open to the applicants to move for the revival of this application within 15 days from the date of obtaining the Income Clearance Certificate.” The Custodian observed in his order that the position with regard to evacuee properties which were subject to agreements of transfer had to be finalized. On the 7th May 1958, that is, about three years after the dismissal of the second application for confirmation respondents 5 and 6 applied to the Deputy Custodian for resumption of the proceedings. They attached to this application a certificate dated the 30th April 1958, granted by the Income-tax Authorities which stated that there was no objection to the confirmation of the transfer mentioned in the certificate. In the particulars of the transfer stated MN this certificate the only person mentioned as the vendor was Bataan Singh while respondents 5 and 6 were mentioned as transferees. The certificate obviously related only to the lability of Bataan SMG and was not an income-tax clearance certificate in respect of Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh whom it did not mention at all. This application as already stated was for resumption of proceedings, and it was presumably filed on the strength of the permission granted to respondents 5 ' and 6 to file an application for revival within fifteen days of obtaining the income-tax clearance certificate. The application made no mention of the appellate order of the Custodian by which he had deleted the last sentence of the order of the Deputy Custodian, thereby setting aside that portion of the order of the Deputy Custodian by which permission for revival had been granted. The number of the original application Le. F. (22)/52 was mentioned in the heading of the application, and it was prayed that the same application may be revived. As the application was for revival the names of the respondents were only shown as “Ishtar SMG, Harm Singh and others.” In the original application as has already been stated, only the vendors had been made parties. On the very day on which this application was presented the following order was passed by the Deputy Custodian : “The application or case is allowed to be reviewed as per order of previous D. C. Judicial.”. The words “as per order of previous D. C. Judicial’ show that though called a “review” a revival was being allowed on account of the order passed by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th May 1955. No notice of this application for revival was served on any party. By an order dated 30th July 1958, the Deputy Custodian dismissed the application on the merits. The order of the Deputy Custodian shows that he was dealing with the Original Application No. F. (22)/52. He stated in the beginning of his order that notices had been served on the parties concerned through “Annam’ on 16th April 1952. This reference related to the original application and the persons on whom notices were so served were only the vendors. The Deputy Custodian was of the opinion that in the first place with respect to the transaction between Bataan Singh and Amar Singh respondents 5 and 6 had no right to apply for confirmation and secondly the consideration for the transfer in favor of the respondents 5 and 6 was “much below the market rates.” For an assessment of the market value the Deputy Custodian had inspected the spot. Against the order of the Deputy Custodian respondents 5 and 6 filed an appeal before the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property. In this appeal to the only persons who were made parties were the vendors the. Ishtar Singh, Amar Singh and Bataan Singh who were all evacuees and as a result no notice was served either on the appellant or on the Rehabilitation Authorities. The Additional Custodian held that respondents 5 and 6 had locus standi to file an application for confirmation. He did not deal with the question of actual payment or the confides of the consideration, but assuming that the consideration mentioned in the deed had in fact been paid, he dealt with the question of adequacy of consideration and said : “there is a presumption that the vendor was sensible enough to obtain adequate consideration for the property sold by him and the burden of proving that the consideration is inadequate lay on the party who alleges it to be inadequate.” It is not entirely out of place to observe here that no notice having been served of the application or the appeal on any party except the vendors the Additional Custodian, if he was aware of the persons on whom notice of the proceedings had been served could only have been contemplating an objection by the vendor that the consideration was inadequate and a burden on the vendor to show that it was inadequate. The Additional Custodian found that on the record inadequacy of consideration was not established and on the basis of this finding, by an order dated 10th September 1958, he accepted the appeal and confirmed the transaction of sale. It is a matter of some surprise that neither the Deputy Custodian nor the Additional Custodian exam med the Income-tax Clearance Certificate which had been produced by respondents 5 and 6 which related to Bataan Singh alone and which referred only to a direct transfer by Bataan Singh in favor of respondents 5 and 6. Section 16 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (now section 20 of the Act) debars the Custodian from confirming a transfer not covered by a proper certificate. It was the duty of the Deputy Custodian and the Additional Custodian to satisfy themselves as to the existence of a proper certificate. It is surprising to that the Additional Custodian neither made the Rehabilitation Authority a party nor dealt with the question of payment and bona fides of consideration. On the 11th December 1959, the present appellant submitted an application m revision before the Custodian against the order of the Additional Custodian dated the 10th September 1958. He stated in this application that as an allottee of the property in dispute he had applied for an order of transfer of the property in his favor and that during the proceedings for transfer he had come to know that respondents 5 and 6 had got the sale-deeds of 11th August 1947 and 13th September 1947, confirmed. (The order of transfer in favor of the appellant had been passed on the 16th October 1959, but the P. T. O. appears to have been issued subsequently). He attacked the order of confirmation as having been “obtained by concealment of facts, mis-statement, deception and fraudulently.” He pointed out that while the Deputy Custodian in his order of 19th May 1955, had granted respondents 5 and 6 permission to file an application for revival, the Custodian of Evacuee Property on appeal had deleted this part of the order of the Deputy Custodian and the application for revival was incompetent. He alleged that he as well as the Settlement Department had been kept in ignorance of the proceedings for revival and that respondents 5 and 6 had not given him any notice for rent in spite of the fact that he was in occupation of the property in dispute. He made a vehement attack on the bona fides of respondents 5 and 6 as well as on the genuineness of the transaction which they had got confirmed. He prayed that the order of the Additional Custodian be set aside and that he be also compensated for the loss he had suffered on account of the fraud of respondents 5 and 6. It was also stated in the application that there was no proper income-tax certificate which was essential for the confirmation of the sales. During the pendency of the application for revision before the Custodian the Income-tax Officer, N. C. A. Circle Karachi, informed the Custodian by a letter dated 10th March 1960, that the clearance certificate granted to respondents 5 and 6 on the 30th April 1959, with respect to the property of Vardar Bataan Singh had been cancelled and that a sum of Rs. 34,000 was still due from this person on account of income-tax. It has already been observed that the income-tax clearance certificate filed with the application for confirmation related only to Bataan SMG and with respect to Ishtar SMG and Amar Singh no certificate had been produced. The Custodian allowed time to respondents 5 and 6 to secure a fresh certificate. There were some adjournments and ultimately on the 25th October 1960, respondents 5 and 6 secured a certificate from the Income-tax Officer which stated that there was no objection to the confirmation of a sale by three persons Le. Bataan Singh, Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh in favor of respondents 5 and 6 for a sum of Rs. 27,000. It would be proper to observe here that the first momenta certificate had been granted to respondents 5 and 6 on the 28th of June 1950, with respect to Amar Singh and Ishtar Singh. This certificate was cancelled on the 24th November 1954, on the allegation that it had been “wrongly issued” and that there were income-tax liabilities outstanding against TBS evacuee vendor who in this case was Ishtar Singh. The second income-tax certificate of ' 30th April 1958, which related to Bataan Singh only was cancelled v on 10th March 1960. The certificate obtained by respondents 5 and 6 on 25th October 1960, states that there is no objection to a transfer by Bataan Singh, Amar Singh and Ishtar Singh. After the issue of the certificate of 25th October 1960, the Income-tax J Officer, N. C. A. Circle, Karachi, again wrote to the Deputy Superintendent, Enforcement Police, Karachi, on 24- 3-1962, saying “a sum of Rs. 15,112 is also outstanding against the Sikh evacuees Ishtar Singh, Harm Singh, etc. this was left by an oversight. Now the total lability is Rs. 34,000”. The Custodian in the order which he passed on the revision application of the appellant dealt with three matters 1e.- (0 the momenta clearance certificate ; (1) the imitation regarding the original application ; and ( ) the consideration with respect to the transaction in dispute. So far as the momenta certificate is concerned, the Custodian just referred to the certificate of 25th October 1960, and said that the objection had disappeared. The delay in filing the original application had according to the Custodian been satisfactorily explained because an order of confirmation had first been obtained which had later been set aside. So far as the proof of consideration is concerned respondents 5 and 6 produced before the Custodian on the 19th November 1960, the very day on which he passed the order, an affidavit of one Mr. Dhanjishaw Coast Aga in which it was stated that Rs. 2,000 were paid as earnest money by the vendees to the vendors in his office and a sum of Rs. 15,000 was paid in his presence in the office of the SubRegistrar. This affidavit of Mr. Aga was accepted by the Custodian as sufficient proof of the passing of consideration. The Custodian also observed in the order, though he did not refer to any material on the record in support of it, that instead of a sum of Rs. 10,000 as stipulated in the sale-deed respondents 5 and 6 had paid a sum of Rs. 14,892-4-0 to the Karachi Estate Board. So far as the adequacy of consideration is concerned the Custodian simply said that for reasons given in the order of the Additional Custodian he held the consideration to be adequate. ' In this appeal learned counsel for the appellant challenges the order of the Custodian on the following grounds (i) That the application for revival or for resumption of proceedings was not competent because in the first place the Deputy Custodian had no jurisdiction to pass such an order and in the second place the Custodian had by his order dated 9-11-1955, set aside that portion of the order of the Deputy Custodian which permitted withdrawal The application for revival was merely based on the order of the Deputy Custodian which had been set aside, and it had been entertained by the successor of the Deputy Custodian because he assumed that the order of his predecessor had not been set aside. The whole basis, therefore, of the application for revival was nonexistence. (ii) That the application was fraudulent. It suppressed the fact that the order permitting withdrawal had been set aside. It also deliberately did not show as a party the appellant, who had got the first order of confirmation set aside by review, who was allottee of the property and in possession of it, and who was a party of the previous proceeding in which the revival had in the first instance been ordered. Respondents 5 and 6 also did not imp lead the Rehabilitation Authorities. (i) That neither the appellant nor the Rehabilitation Authorities had notice of the proceedings and, therefore, quite apart from the question of fraud the whole proceedings before the Deputy Custodian were without jurisdiction and null and void. (iv) When it was suggested to learned counsel for the appellant that the application for revival may be treated as a fresh application, he contended- (a) that the fresh application was barred by section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance ; (b) that the fresh application would be time-barred and there was no extension of time by the Deputy Custodian, the Additional Custodian or the Custodian in accordance with section 5 of the Limitation Act; (c) that the rules framed under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance necessitated that he as well as the Rehabilitation Authority be made parties to an application for confirmation of sale and that notice of application be served on them and on account of failure to comply with statutory rules and a principle of natural justice, the proceedings would be without jurisdiction ; (v) that the Custodian had acted without jurisdiction in receiving in evidence an affidavit sworn in 1952, for the first time on the day when he passed the order without giving the appellant an opportunity of contesting the affidavit; (vi) that there is no proper legal proof on the record either of the passing of consideration or its adequacy and the Custodian has not dealt with it in a manner which would satisfy the requirements of law ; (VU) that the first transaction, 1e. the sale in favor of Bataan Singh by R. M. Gandhi also required confirmation ; and (VM) that there was ho proper income-tax clearance certificate before the Custodian. Mr. Bro hi who appears for respondents 5 and 6 does not contest that in view of the order of the Custodian dated the 9th November 1955, an application for revival was not competent. He contends, however, that the application for revival can be treated as a fresh application, and he does not accept that there was any fraud in presenting the application for revival. According to him respondents 5 and 6 had no knowledge of the order passed by the Custodian on 9th November 1955. He even urged that no notice of the appeal in which the order dated 9-11-1955, was passed was properly served on respondents 5 and 6, but we did not allow him to contest the service of notice as the post had not been taken either before the Custodian or in the concise statement filed on behalf of respondents 5 and 6. With respect to the contention of learned counsel for the appellant that if the application for revival was treated as a fresh application it should be dismissed as time-barred because there was no application for extension of time, Mr. Bro hi’s reply is that the Custodian should be deemed to have extended time for the filing of a fresh application by his order dismissing the revision petition. As regards the plea of learned counsel for the appellant that the proceedings were null and void for want of service of notice on the appellant and the Rehabilitation Authorities, the answer of Mr. Bro hi is that it was open to the appellant to have applied to the Custodian for an opportunity to lead evidence when he filed his application in revision and as he failed to do so he had no right to agitate this post before the Supreme Court. The sale by R. M. Gandhi in favor of Bataan Singh does not according to Mr. Bro hi require confirmation by the Custodian because the sale was of 19th December 1946. Mr. Bro hi also does not accept that a second application for confirmation would not be competent. Mr. Speed A. Sheikh has appeared for the Custodian. He has made no substantial addition to the pleas put forward by Mr. Bro hi. The Custodian has filed a concise statement and that statement too does not disclose any further plea. I would in the first place deal with the contentions as to the need of confirmation for the sale by R. M. Gandhi and the utter incompetence of the second application for confirmation because if either of these contentions has force this appeal must succeed and the order of the Custodian should be set aside. The Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance is effective so far as transfers by evacuees are concerned from 1-3-1947. Even if a person became an evacuee after that date any transfer by him made on or after the 1st of March 1947, would have no effect in law till it was confirmed by the Custodian. On this point there is no contest between the parties. The contest is due to the fact that according to Mr. Mahmud Ali the transfer took place on the 14th March 1947, when the sale-deed was copied into the relevant book in the office of the Sub-Registrar while according to Mr. Bro hi the transfer took place on 19-12-1946, and is therefore outside the mischief of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. The sale-deed had been presented for registration on the very day on which it was executed Le. the 19th December 1946. The Sub-Registrar made the usual endorsement on the back of the deed on the same day saying that the executant had admitted execution and that a sum of Rs. 16,932-5-0 had been paid to the vendor in his presence. However, the sale-deed was copied MTO the relevant book on 14-3-1947, and it is on this day that the endorsement as to its having been “registered”’, was made by the _ Sub- Registrar. In accordance with section 60 of the Registration Act such an endorsement can only be made after the document has been copied into a book. The contention of Mr. Mahmud Ali that registration took place on 14-3-1947, is based on/section 61 of the Registration Act which it would be convenient to reproduce here: “61.- (1) The endorsements and certificates referred to and mentioned in sections 59 and 60 shall thereupon be copied into the margin of the Registration-book, and the copy of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in section 21 shall be filed in book No. 1. (2) The registration of the document shall thereupon be deemed complete, and the document shall then be returned to the person who presented the same for registration, or to such other person (if any) as he has nom mated in writing in that behalf on the receipt mentioned in section 52. It is true that in accordance with this section registration of a document is to be deemed completed when the endorsements and certificate mentioned in sections 59 and 60 have been copied MTO the margin of the Register-book. So far as the document itself is concerned, it is to be copied into a book before the certificate of registration under section 60 is endorsed on the document. But the duty of a person who wants to get a document registered is finished when he presents the document for registration. The endorsements and entries in the books are the duties of Registration Department, and it does not seem reasonable that a person should be prejudiced by the fact that the entries were not made expeditiously. In accordance with section 52 “every document admitted to registration shall without delay be copied in the book appropriated therefor according to the order of its admission.” In a case where the question is whether a person had notice of a registered document relating to a particular property it would be reasonable to hold that as long as that person is not NBA position to know whether there exists an entry in the books relating to that property he should not be deemed to-have notice of registration. But considerations are not the same when the question is as to the competence of person to make a transfer. It is not necessary, however, to labor this post further or to decide it finally because of section 47 of the Registration Act which is in the following words : “47. A registered document shall operate from the time from which it commenced to operate if no registration thereof had been required and not from the time of registration.” This section is a complete answer to the contention that title passed at the time of registration. When an unregistered deed is executed, a deed which requires registration, transfer of title remains in abeyance till the deed is registered, but as soon as it is registered the transfer operates in the words of section 47 not from the date of the registration but from the date on which TT would, if no registration was needed, have taken effect. So even If the sale-deed in dispute was registered on 14-3-1947, the transfer took place on the 11th December 1946, and the transaction did pot require confirmation by the Custodian. For the contention that a second application for confirmation was not legally competent at all Mr. Mahmud Ali relied upon section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act. It is provided in section 43 that any order passed by a Custodian (which expression includes an Assistant, Deputy or Additional Custodian) shall subject to the provisions relating to appeal, review and revision be final. Learned counsel contended that as the order dismissing the application implied a refusal to confirm this refusal was final, and a new application was incompetent. Learned counsel referred to that part of section 16 wherein it is provided that if COMETA clearance certificate is not produced the application shall be dismissed. I find no force in this contention. Whenever there is a condition to be complied with by a party before a proceeding becomes competent the dismissal of that proceeding for failure to comply with the condition precedent does not debar the submission of a fresh competent proceeding. Examples of such conditions precedent will be found in the failure to pay Court-fees or to deposit one-fifth of the preemption money in a preemption suit or to procure sanction of a liquidation Court for filing a suit against an insolvent. The word “‘final’ in section 43 would only mean that a point which has been decided in a proceeding cannot be reagitated. If the Applin*.10on was dismissed on the merits, the merits could not be agitated again, but if the application was dismissed because of w NT of a income-tax clearance certificate the only post that was decided was that a valid clearance certificate did not exist. That post cannot be agitated again except by way of appeal, review or revision, but the filing of a fresh application which is supported by a clearance certificate is not incompetent. H Having cleared the ground by a disposal of these two matters I proceed to deal with the other ports raised. I will deal first with whether, if we were to accede to the request of Mr. Bro hi and treat the application for revival as a fresh application, this appeal could be dismissed. Even if the application for revival were treated as a fresh application there will still be two reasons why the order under appeal could not stand. The first is that the fresh application would be time-barred and there is no application for condonation of delay under section 5 of the Limitation Act at all. In accordance with rule 17-A of the rules framed under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, section 5 of the Limitation Act is applicable to proceedings before the Custodian. Mr. Bro hi has contended that the Custodian should be deemed to have decided the question of limitation when he dismissed the revision application of the appellant. It is impossible to accept such contention. The Custodian was not even conscious of the fact that the application for revival was incompetent, and he certainly never applied his mind to whether time should be extended after treat in git as a fresh application. Under section 5 of the Limitation Act there has to be a finding of sufficient cause. In pre-Partition India sufficient cause had been defined as circumstances beyond the control of the party and I do not know of any case wherein this definition of sufficient cause bad been rejected. However, at least in determining sufficient cause while deal mg with the same expression in Order IX, rule 8, C. P. C. and Order IX, rule 3, C. P. C. the Courts had been lenient and had been condoning some negligence e. negligence to the extent to which it is regarded as human though they never condoned gross negligence. At the same time the Courts had always been strict in demanding proof of sufficient cause for everyday which had expired after the ordinary period of limitation. In the present case the question as to whether time should be extended if the application for revival was treated as a fresh application was not at all an easy one to decide. The first application which was dismissed on the ground of want of clearance certificate was itself time-barred and the Deputy Custodian had to pass an order condoning delay. If a time-barred application be dismissed for want of a certificate and a fresh application be filed what is the principle on which the question of condonation of delay should be decided ? It would be difficult to hold that the failure to obtain a clearance certificate is by itself sufficient cause. It is true that the ability to pay COMETA is of the vendor, but the fact that the vendor does not pay is not by itself a ground for extension of limitation. The vendor was an evacuee who left the country long ago. He is not interested in paying the income-tax and if extension were granted on this ground a second application for confirmation could always be filed after getting a certificate. The Vendée has to pay the COMETA if he wants to get the sale deed confirmed and can his failure to pay be regarded as sufficient cause ? I have no intention of answering this question so as to affect its decision by the Custodian. I have only posted out the difficulties of the situation and the utter impossibility MN the circumstances of imputing any implied decision to the Custodian on the question of sufficient cause. The second reason why the order of the Custodian could not stand is the want of service of notice of the proceedings on parties who ought to have been served. Rule 12 (5) of the rules framed under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance which relates to proceedings for confirmation of transfers runs: “12 (5) The Custodian shall cause a notice to be served on the respondent, and the Rehabilitation Authority of the area in which the property is situated, and on any other person likely to be interested in or affected by the result of the application, and may also cause a public notice to be published in a newspaper at the expense of the applicant.” The rule makes notice obligatory not only in respect of the Rehabilitation Authority, but in respect of any person interested MN or likely to be affected by the result of the application. The appellant was surely a party interested in and affected by the result of the proceedings. He was an allottee of the property in dispute and in possession of it, and he would under the Displaced Persons Act be entitled to its transfer. It is pertinent to observe here that so far as the order of the Additional Custodian is concerned it was, apart from all other considerations illegal on the ground that there was as yet no proper certificate from the Income-tax authorities so that really we have to consider the position of the appellant at the time when the case came to the Custodian. Before the case came to the Custodian he had secured an order for transfer of the house in his favor on the 16th October 1959. But even when the case was with the Deputy 01 the Additional Custodian he was an allottee with possession. In fact by virtue of the enactment of the Displaced Persons Compensation Act which came into force on 26-3-1958 he had a vested right with respect to the transfer of the property in dispute. Learned counsel for the appellant contends that the proceedings being in the absence of necessary parties without even an attempt to serve them were null and void and without jurisdiction. The only reply of Mr. Bro hi to this objection is that when the appellant approached the Custodian in revision he should himself have applied for an opportunity to lead evidence and if he did not do so he cannot now attack the validity of the proceedings on the ground that he had no opportunity of being heard. There is little force in the reply of Mr. Bro hi and if we consider all the circumstances the argument put forward does not appear to be a possible one. The proceedings before the Deputy Custodian which were being attacked were proceedings for revival of the original application. The plea of the appellant was that the revival was in the first place fraudulent and m the second place wholly incompetent on account of the previous order of the Custodian. It was quite sufficient for the appellant to have simply attacked the proceedings for revival as being of no legal effect for either of these two reasons and to pray that they be quashed. It was not for him to assume that the application for revival will be converted into a fresh application (and as I will presently show there were reasons which may have led to an ultimate refusal on the part of the Custodian to treat the application for revival as a fresh proceeding). But let me even assume that there was no application for revival, but only a fresh application and let me assume further (to none of these assumptions are respondents 5 and 6 entitled) that the application was, within limitation, but the appellant had, though entitled to notice, not been served. Would there be under the circumstances any obligation on the appellant to ask for an opportunity to lead evidence ? The proceedings before the Deputy Custodian if they were not totally void for failure to imp lead necessary parties 1e. the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the appellant would constitute an illegal exercise of jurisdiction and the appellant when he approached the Custodian need only have said that the proceedings were illegal and should be set aside. There is no law which obliges' a party against whom an order has been passed without imp leading him and without serving him with notice when he was entitled to be served, to put forward before an appellate or revisional Court a plea that he should be allowed an opportunity of leading evidence. He is entitled simply to say, in the absence of any provision of law to the contrary, that the proceedings being illegal should be set aside. Of course the Custodian could himself offer an opportunity to the appellant to lead evidence (after first converting the revival proceedings into a fresh application) in order to cure the defect in the proceedings, but it may be posted out that a simple opportunity to lead evidence would not have been sufficient. There would have to be at the Sam« time an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the other party. The whole onus in this case lay on respondents 5 and 6. They would not only have to lead evidence, but one of them who had knowledge of the facts would in accordance with accepted principles relating to production of evidence in civil proceedings have to put himself in the witness-box and subjects himself to cross- examination unless he was not afraid of an adverse inference which might be drawn against him. Rights which parties have in procedure are not to be lightly treated nor can the parties be punished for failure to put forward pleas at stages of a proceeding which they are not by law bound to put forward. It appears to me that in this case not only has there been a failure to comply with a statutory provision as to notice, but there is a gross violation of the principle that orders affecting parties are not to be based without a proper opportunity of contest. It would be proper here to consider the propriety of the order passed by the Custodian. As has already been stated there was a strong attack by the appellant on the proceedings for revival for two reasons, that 1s, fraud and incompetence of the application for revival on account of the order of the Custodian forbidding revival. Yet in the order of the Custodian by which he dismissed the revision application of the appellant there is not one word either about fraud or about the order of 9-11-1955. Not only that, the Custodian, assuming that the revival proceedings were wholly competent dealt, though in a summary way, with the question of limitation for the original application, and made a statement that the delay had already been condoned by the K Deputy Custodian. Coming to the question of consideration so far as the payment of consideration is concerned the Custodian admitted in evidence, apparently, to the surprise of the appellant, on the very day on which he passed the order, an affidavit sworn by Mr. Aga, an Advocate, without affording the appellant any opportunity of meeting this evidence. It may be observed that every person against whom an affidavit is produced is entitled in the absence of special circumstances to have the deponent put m the witness-box and to cross-examine him. So far as adequacy of consideration is concerned the Custodian contented himself with saying that he agreed with the Additional Custodian as to his reasons for accepting the adequacy of consideration. have already stated that according to the Additional Custodian the onus of proving inadequacy was on the party asserting. There was no party before the Deputy Custodian or the Additional Custodian to assert this for only the evacuee vendors had been made parties. I will now consider whether we should give a direction that the application for revival be treated as a fresh application. Primarily Courts have no objection to treat proceedings of one kind as proceedings of another kind of that becomes necessary for doing justice between the parties and would have had no objection to allow the application for revival to be treated as a fresh application were it not for the fact that a plea of fraud has been raised and if this plea be correct I would not be inclined to accede to the request of learned counsel for the respondents. The appellant contends that respondents 5 and 6 with full knowledge of the order passed by the Custodian on the 9th November 1955, suppressed that order and submitted an application in accordance with the permission granted by the Deputy Custodian which permission had been set aside in appeal and they at the same time deliberately did not make either the appellant or the Rehabilitation Authority a party in order that the truth may not be revealed. Learned counsel for the appellant ports out that even after obtain the order of the Additional Custodian for confirmation on 10th September 1958, respondents 5 and 6 kept the matter a secret and made no effort to assert their rights as vendees against the appellant who was in possession. It is during the proceedings for transfer of the house that the appellant came to know of the confirmation. He had received an order of transfer on 16th October 1959. The question of fraud has not been tried, but it is surely a matter which under the circumstances calls for a decision. Conversion of one proceeding into another is an act of leniency on the part of the Court the object of which TS the advancement of justice and such leniency may not be shown in a case where the proceeding sought to be converted is a proceeding conceived in fraud. So instead of deciding the question of conversion of the application for revival into a fresh application ourselves, I tank we should leave the matter to be decided by the Custodian. I would, therefore, accept this appeal, set aside the order of the Custodian and remand the case to the Custodian who will either himself or through a subordinate otherwise competent to deal with the matter first decide the question of conversion and if the application for revival be treated as a fresh application further proceedings will be taken as in any original application -for confirmation and questions of limitation and merits will be determined. All proceedings shall be taken after notice to the Rehabilitation Authority and the appellant. Costs of this appeal should be costs in the cause. Seymour Rahman, J.-I have had the advantage of reading in advance the judgments proposed to be announced by my Lord the Chief Justice and my learned brother Haikus, J. This appeal by special leave (granted on the 15th of December 1961) is from an order of Mr. Maud Ahmad, Custodian of Evacuee Property, Federal Capital of West Pakistan. By this order the Custodian had refused to interfere in revision with the order of the Additional Custodian passed in appeal confirming certain sales in favor of some of the respondents here. Such an appeal directly from the order of the Custodian was, no doubt, then tamable under Article 160 of the late Constitution. But this Court has consistently held that in exercising this supervisory jurisdiction given under Article 160 of the late Constitution in an appeal from an order of a Tribunal other than a Court some restrictions have, of necessity, to be imposed. Thus this jurisdiction should not be allowed to be invoked successfully in a case where the Tribunal had “functioned within the spirit and the intention of the statute that created it and while so functioning had made a real and honest endeavor to judge facts on the evidence and to apply the law to them.” (Vide Muhammad Saeed v. Election Petitions Tribunal, West Pakistan) Keeping this principle in view I have carefully examined the facts of the present case and the orders of the Custodian Authorities, and have come to the conclusion that the appellant has not been able to establish that the Custodian had acted without jurisdiction or had made “no honest effort to arrive at a correct conclusion. The Custodian when passing the impugned order was dealing in revision with an appellate order of an Additional Custodian wherein the facts were fully set out. He was also aware of the fact that the petitioner before him was alleging that the confirmation had been obtained by concealing an earlier order of Mr. Manner Adam, a predecessor Custodian, who had revoked the permission earlier granted to revive the application for confirmation on receipt of the Income-tax Certificate. The revision of the order was also sought on the ground that it had been made ex parte without any notice even to the present appellant. I am in agreement with my Lord the Chief Justice that neither the first ground took away the jurisdiction of the Custodian Authorities to entertain the second application for confirmation nor the second rendered the impugned order so defective that it must be set aside. The reasons which have led me to this conclusion are substantially the same as those given in the judgment of my Lord the Chief Justice, which I respectfully adopt and do not propose to repeat. I, therefore, also agree that this appeal must be dismissed with costs. M Order of The Court In accordance with the view of the majority, we dismiss this appeal, but make no order as to costs. Ap peal dismissed WWW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): Judgment Cornelius, C. J.-The order against which special leave to appeal has been granted was made by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Federal Capital and West Pakistan under an exclusive jurisdiction conferred upon him by the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act XII of 1957. It was made on the 19th November 1960, when the Constitution of 1956, was in force, and an appeal lay to this Court from gwasfjudicial Tribunals, by special leave. This was under Article 160. It is desirable that at the outset of this judgment I should state the view held by this Court with reference to Article 160 of the late Constitution, and I cannot do better than to reproduce here the weighty observations made by the late Chief Justice of Pakistan Mr. Justice Muhammad Muir in Muhammad Saeed v. Election Petitions Tribunal viz. “T may state at the very outset that the supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 160 is a restricted jurisdiction and an appeal to invoke it will not succeed where a special Tribunal, like the Election Tribunal, has functioned within the spirit and the intention of the statute that created it and while so functioning has made a real and honest endeavor to judge facts on the merits of the evidence and to apply the law to them. A finding of fact thus arrived at, however, erroneous, will not be scrutinized or reviewed by this Court, and even if an error of law be committed by the Tribunal that will not be considered to be a sufficient ground for interference unless the law so misunderstood or misapplied raises some general question of fundamental importance to the proper functioning of the Tribunal or the decision of the case.” There is no question at all that the Custodian of Evacuee Property is not constituted as a Court. The functions which he performs in respect of appeals and revisions generally follow the procedure, and principles applicable to judicial proceedings. But in one most important aspect, they fall short of being fully judicial, namely, that the Custodian is required to decide questions raised as to the ownership of, and other rights in and in respect of evacuee properties which are all vested in the Custodian, by operation of law. The Custodian is made a judge in his own cause in respect of such proceedings, and this position is not affected by the consideration that the vesting is in the Custodian B not as a person but as a corporation sole, in whom the evacuee property is vested to be applied to specified uses, in particular, the rehabilitation of the vast flood of refugees. The Custodian in his official capacity has a real interest in the properties so vested m him to preserve against claims by persons other than refugees. Experience shows that in the vast majority of cases, that interest has not been lightly parted with. Consequently, the Custodian does not satisfy one essential requirement of a Judge in respect of the proceedings

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): in the properties so vested m him to preserve against claims by persons other than refugees. Experience shows that in the vast majority of cases, that interest has not been lightly parted with. Consequently, the Custodian does not satisfy one essential requirement of a Judge in respect of the proceedings which come before him affecting evacuee property vested in him, and those proceedings could at best be claimed to be merely dwarf- judicial. The principal functions of the Custodian are of course administrative, and it 1s unquestionable that the quasi-judicial powers vested in him are intended to be used and are in fact used to regulate and facilitate the administrative side of his task, which is to provide for the equitable user of evacuee property by just distribution among the refugees according to their needs, and by proper application to the re-establishment of the economy of (1) P L D 1957 S C (PAK.) 91 Pakistan. It is true that by the statute and the rules and schemes thereunder, the function of distribution of evacuee properties as indicated above was not free of regulation, but in almost all aspects of administration of his functions, the Custodian was yet allowed a wide discretion. An important function entrusted to the Custodian was that of applying restrictions to the transfer of property by evacuees. These are now dealt with under section 20 of Act XII of 1957. The present proceeding arose out of an application under section 16 of the earlier law, namely Ordinance (XV of 1949), but in relevant respects the law was not changed when the Act of 1957 was passed to replace the Ordinance of 1949. Section 20 of the Act provides that no transfer of property made on or after the IST March 1947, by an evacuee should be effective to confer any right unless the transfer was confirmed by the Custodian. For this purpose, an application was to be made within the prescribed time and this could be made by a party to the transaction, or by any person claiming under such a party. The Custodian was to hold a summary inquiry in the prescribed manner and was required to reject the application If certain conditions were not satisfied, Le. if the transfer was in contravention of a law, or if it was not covered by a no objection certificate from the Income-tax Authorities. He had discretion to reject the application if he formed the opinion that the transaction was not entered into in good faith or if it was form adequate consideration. But a further and larger discretion in this respect was also vested in him by the provision that if he thought that the transaction should not be confirmed for “any other reason” he was at liberty to reject the application. Even when he decided to allow the application he was empowered by the section to impose such terms and conditions as he thought fit. The law clearly inclines against easy divestment, and in favor of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): not be confirmed for “any other reason” he was at liberty to reject the application. Even when he decided to allow the application he was empowered by the section to impose such terms and conditions as he thought fit. The law clearly inclines against easy divestment, and in favor of retention of such properties for application to the uses for which the statute was, in the main, enacted. By the order under appeal the Custodian dismissed an application by the present appellant ATA Allah Malik for revision of an order of the Additional Custodian dated the 10th September 1958, whereby an earlier contrary order of the Deputy Custodian having been set aside, a sale by certain evacuees in favor of two Paris residents of Karachi, named Rashid Merwin Irani and Haddad Aretha Irani (hereinafter referred to as “the Iranis’’) was confirmed unconditionally. In order to appreciate how far the case falls within the restricted power which this Court exercises, to interfere with orders of a special Tribunal exercising exclusive jurisdiction, it is necessary that the progress of the case before the authorities of the Custodian’s Department should be briefly stated. That is necessary also for a proper examination © f the justice of the whole case, before coming to the consideration of the possible scope of interference with the Custodian’s order. The property in the case consists of an area of about 300 sq. yards of land situated in the business quarter of Karachi. It was told by an evacuee Bataan Singh on the 15th May 1947, to two persons Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh who themselves became evacuees later. This sale was registered on the 11th August 1947. The land formed part of larger area of 837 sq. yards which the aforesaid Bataan Singh had bought from the Karachi Estate Board on the 19th December 1946, the deed being registered on the 14th March 1947. The evacuees Ishtar Sigh and Amar Singh on the 13th September 1947, sold the land which they had bought from Bataan Singh to the Iranis. The deed was presented for registration on the same day, but was actually registered on the 27th July 1948. An application for confirmation was made to the Custodian by the Iranis on the 23rd May 1950. They applied only for confirmation of the sale to them by Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh and recited that Rs. 2,000 had been paid as earnest money on the 11th September 1947, and at the execution of the document a further sum of Rs. 15,000 was paid and in addition the vendees had undertaken to discharge Rs. 10,000 due to the Karachi Estate Board, by installments. At that time no momenta clearance certificate was required for the purposes of registration and none had therefore been produced. No application had been made for such a clearance certificate and confirmation was accordingly asked for. On the 14th October 1950, Mr. Akbar Hossein the then Custodian of Evacuee Property confirmed the sale. His order shows that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): was required for the purposes of registration and none had therefore been produced. No application had been made for such a clearance certificate and confirmation was accordingly asked for. On the 14th October 1950, Mr. Akbar Hossein the then Custodian of Evacuee Property confirmed the sale. His order shows that he had considered the question of consideration, and THT the required income-tax clearance certificate had been produced. It appears that the property had in the meantime been allotted to ATA Allah Malik, the present appellant. He applied to the Custodian on the 5th July 1951, for review of the order of the 14th October 1950, relying firstly on non-confirmation of the earlier sale by Bataan Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh and secondly upon non-production of an income-tax clearance certificate in respect of Bataan Singh. It was said, m indirect terms, that whether consideration had been paid required to be examined. On the 29th February 1952, the then Custodian Mr. Ayaz Ali accepted ATA Allah Malik’s petition and set aside the confirmation of the sale on the grounds firstly, that the sale to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh by Bataan Singh had not been confirmed and secondly that Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh therefore had no rights to pass to the Iranis. A fresh application for confirmation was made by the Iranis on the 7th April 1952, and this led to lengthy proceedings, in which ATA Allah Malic took part. He objected that the application was barred by limitation and this objection was considered, and the delay was condoned by order dated 16th May 1953, after which the proceedings went on until on the 19th May 1955, having granted a great number of adjournments for production of the income-tax clearance certificate (in respect of the earlier sale) the Deputy Custodian, while being doubtful whether the vendees would care to clear the very high momenta dues which had accumulated, dismissed the application for failure of production of the said certificate, but left TT open to the applicants “to move for revival of this application within fifteen days from the date of obtaining the income-tax clearance certificate.” ATA Allah Malik moved the Custodian by way of appeal to have this last condition expunged, and on the 9th November 1955, the then Custodian Mr. Manner Adam holding that such agreements of transfer of an evacuee property “should be finalized,” and that it was doubtful whether the Iranis could “be expected to pay the heavy lability of income-tax in addition to the sale consideration already paid,” decided that there was no point in keeping the case open, and therefore deleted the words to that effect in the Deputy Custodian’s order. The record of the proceedings shows that on the 12th May 1958, an application made by the Iranis for revival of the proceedings was allowed, and three days later, arguments were heard after a statement of Haddad Aretha Irani had been recorded. An order was made on the 30th July 1958, rejecting the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): the proceedings shows that on the 12th May 1958, an application made by the Iranis for revival of the proceedings was allowed, and three days later, arguments were heard after a statement of Haddad Aretha Irani had been recorded. An order was made on the 30th July 1958, rejecting the application. A grievance is made of the failure of the Deputy Custodian to send notice of this proceeding to ATA Allah Malik. The order shows that the Deputy Custodian was rely mg on the notice issued on the 16th April 1952, so that it is clear that ATA Allah Malik was not a party to the proceedings on the 12th and 15th May 1958. In this connection, it is important to note the grounds on which the rejection was based, as they are relevant to the contentions previously and subsequently raised by ATA Allah Malik. The grounds were as follows. It was held that condonation of the delay in the making of the application of April 1952, had been obtained by “fraud and misrepresentation.” Secondly the Deputy Custodian found that the [rams had no locus standi to apply for confirmation of the sale by Bataan Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh. Thirdly in the absence of confirmation of the sale of Bataan Singh to Ishtar SMG and Amar Singh, the latter had no night in the property which they could transfer to the Iranis. On the point of consideration, the Deputy Custodian held that the price paid for the property was “much below the market value.” In this connection, he mentioned that the price could be estimated by the “municipal assessment formula” which was forty times the rent of the building plus the value of the land, or on the Central P. W. D.’s formula of assessment which is based on the cost of construction plus the value of the land, the P. W. D. construction rates ranging between Rs. to Rs. 13 per sq. ft. Alternatively, the Rehabilitation Ministry had been applying the formula of forty times the annual rent for assessment of properties left behind by the refugees in India. Without attempting to evaluate the property on any one of these three bases the Deputy Custodian came to the conclusion that the consideration was inadequate. The Iranis appealed against this order to the Custodian, and the appeal was heard by the Additional Custodian (Mr. Riazuddin Ahmad) who allowed it on the 10th September 1958, on full consideration of all the facts and evidence. He decided that to exclude the application on the ground of limitation would be unduly hard because it was obvious that omission by the Iranis to apply for confirmation of the sale-deed of Bataan Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh was due to advertence or the wrong advice of counsel, and further, there was nothing to prove misrepresentation or fraud. The decision by the Deputy Custodian that the Iranis had no locus standi to apply for confirmation of the sale by Bataan Singh

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh was due to advertence or the wrong advice of counsel, and further, there was nothing to prove misrepresentation or fraud. The decision by the Deputy Custodian that the Iranis had no locus standi to apply for confirmation of the sale by Bataan Singh was held to be bad because the Iranis were claiming under the previous vendees Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh, and were thus entitled under section 16 of the Ordinance of 1949 to make the application. The question of consideration was gone into in detail. It was found that on a rental basis the value worked out at Rs. 24,000, and that in fact the appellants having already paid Rs. 17,000 to the vendors and Rs. 14,892-4-0 to the Karachi Estate Board had in fact paid something like Rs. 32,000 which was more than their vendors had paid to Bataan Singh. As to the Municipal formula, it was held that there was no proof what it was, nor was there any proof of the P. W. D. rates assumed by the Deputy Custodian. Holding that it was not proved that the consideration was inadequate, the Additional Custodian allowed the appeal and confirmed the sale-deeds by Bataan Singh to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh and by the two latter to the Iranis “with effect from the date of their execution.” ATA Allah Malik next moved the Custodian by way of revision dated 11th December 1959, in this petition mention was specifically made of the deletion by the Custodian on the 9th November 1959, of the permission granted by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th May 1955, to the [ranis “to move for the revival of this application within fifteen days from the date of obtaining the income-tax clearance certificate. The application after reciting certain earlier steps taken by ATA Allah Malik, mentioned that three sale-deeds had been executed in respect of this land (including the earlier sale to Bataan Singh) and made some vague allegations to the effect that the income-tax and other Government dues amounted to more than the value of the property itself, and it was very doubtful whether the Iranis had cleared these dues. It was suggested also though vaguely, that the valuation had been artificially reduced by getting the rent reduced in the Corporation record, and further that the transaction in favor of the Iranis “seems to be bogus and inoperative in law.” Stress was again laid on the non-mention before the Deputy Custodian and the Additional Custodian of the proceedings of the 19th May 1955 and 19th November 1955, before the Deputy Custodian and the Custodian (Mr. Manner Adam) respectively. The Custodian thereupon made certain inquiries in regard to the income-tax matter, from the Income-tax Officer, and there have been placed on the record three letters from the Income-tax Officer, one in reply to the Custodian which is dated 17th May 1960, and two to Haddad Aretha Irani dated 27th July and 15th August 1960. These letters

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): regard to the income-tax matter, from the Income-tax Officer, and there have been placed on the record three letters from the Income-tax Officer, one in reply to the Custodian which is dated 17th May 1960, and two to Haddad Aretha Irani dated 27th July and 15th August 1960. These letters did not contain any reference to the final issue of a income-tax clearance certificate, but the order under appeal itself shows that such a certificate “was reg ranted to the respondents on the 25th October 1960.” This was one of the questions raised before the Custodian at the hearing of the revision. Another was whether the delay in applying for confirmation should have been condoned, and the Custodian decided that the delay had been satisfactorily explained J?because the original application had been moved Io the year 1949 and in fact the sale had been first confirmed in the year 1950. The last question raised before him was as to the consideration paid for the house and the Custodian accepted the view formed by the Additional Custodian namely that the Iranis had paid nearly Rs. 32,000 and this price was not inadequate. It should be sufficiently clear from the above recital of facts that there is no question but that the Custodian and his Subordinate Officers have functioned within the spirit and intention of the Evacuee Property Law. There can be no doubt that each of them made a real and honest endeavor to judge the necessary facts on the merits of the evidence and to apply the law to them. Mr. Mahmud Ali has not attempted to show that the findings arrived at by the Additional Custodian and the Custodian regarding the valuation of the property are in any way erroneous. A finding of “fraud and misrepresentation” regarding condonation of the delay by the Deputy Custodian on the 16th May 1963, had been recorded by his successor in his order of the 30th July 1958, but both the Additional Custodian and the Custodian after consideration of the facts, found that this finding was baseless and set it aside, and there 1s no question but that their conclusion was honestly reached. Before us, Mr. Mahmud Ali attempted to argue that the issue of the income-tax clearance certificate had been obtained in some irregular fashion, but as to this it is enough to point out that, following upon ATA Allah Malik’s application of the 11th December 1959, the Custodian himself directed that information should be sought from the Income-tax Officer whose letters referred to above clearly shows that he had in mind the consideration now put forward e.g. that the total amount of the dues exceeded the value of the property, and despite this, subsequently on the 25th October 1960, the Income-tax Officer did issue the necessary certificate. A point of law was raised before us namely that the order of Mr. Manner Adam dated 9th November 1955, was a definitive and determinative order in relation to the application for confirmation, so

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): despite this, subsequently on the 25th October 1960, the Income-tax Officer did issue the necessary certificate. A point of law was raised before us namely that the order of Mr. Manner Adam dated 9th November 1955, was a definitive and determinative order in relation to the application for confirmation, so that it was not possible for that application to be revived thereafter, as was done in May 1958. The argument raises the question as to the nature of the contest, if any, when an application is made under section 20 for confirmation of the sale in respect of property which but for such confirmation would be evacuee property. The power has been given in this respect to the Custodian, in whom the property is vested. The question whether the title in the property which is vested in the Custodian should be confirmed in favor of a transferee by the Custodian himself would appear to lie exclusively between the Custodian and the party seeking the confirmation. As has been observed already, the sense of the law which the Custodian is appointed to adm mister TS distinctly favorably to the retention by the Custodian of the property vested in him, and against anything resembling easy divestment. The Custodian is armed with large powers to protect the rights so vested in him. Any further rights created in respect of these properties by any other authority, e.g. by act of allotment of a rehabilitation authority, are fully within the scope of the Custodian’s protective power. And it is to be noted that at the time when the question of confirmation was taken up, no Proceedings had yet taken place under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 which could have the effect of divesting the Custodian of his title. The appellate order of the Additional Custodian allowing the transfer was made in September, 1958, and it was not until August 1959, that evacuee properties generally were vested in the Government by notification, and so became available for transfer to claimant refugees and others. A Provisional Transfer Order was issued in favor of ATA Allah Malik, but it was later cancelled, in consequence of the confirmation order. It would seem then that there is no force in the argument that the revival order is vitiated by failure to notify ATA Allah Malik before it was made. He had no vested right in the property. Such right as he possessed as an allottee was derived from, and was held under the title which was vested in the Custodian, and which it was the duty of the Custodian, under the law, to protect within the meaning of section 20 aforesaid. The mere fact that at the instance of ATA Allah Malik an allottee under the Custodian, an express permission given by the Deputy Custodian to the Iranis to apply for revival of the proceedings within fifteen days of obtaining an income-tax clearance certificate was deleted, would clearly be without effect upon the capacity of the Custodian’s

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): instance of ATA Allah Malik an allottee under the Custodian, an express permission given by the Deputy Custodian to the Iranis to apply for revival of the proceedings within fifteen days of obtaining an income-tax clearance certificate was deleted, would clearly be without effect upon the capacity of the Custodian’s Department to allow revival of those proceedings, for the main and, in fact, the only true parties to the proceedings were the Custodian himself} and the transferee seeking confirmation of his transfer. The dismissal of the application for lack of a formality required, namely the income-tax clearance certificate cannot be thought by any stretching of legal concepts to have given rise to any vested rights in ATA Allah Malik or any other else to prevent the revival of those proceedings. There had been no decision on the merits, and even m the case of criminal proceedings it is well-settled law that such a non-definitive order as a discharge of the accused person, m a criminal prosecution if made otherwise than on the merits, does not have the effect of term mating the proceeding so that it cannot be revived later. (See the judgment of this Court in the case of Abdul Hossain Sana v. Subanal Agartala Something was made MN arguments of the allegation that the order of Mr. Manner Adam dated 9th November 1955, had been concealed from the Deputy Custodian in the revival proceedings. The Deputy Custodian, of course, decided in favor of nondivestment of title. As has been pointed out, specific mention was made of the order and the earlier order of the Deputy Custodian in the revision application to Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad, as Custodian, but his order which was made after harem counsel for both parties, makes no mention of them giving the impression that it was thought fit not to raise the contention before him. However that may be, it is clear that the final order of the Custodian was made after these facts had been placed before him. Even assuming that there is failure to consider and (1) P LD 1962 S C 242 decide this objection, it is without fundamental effect in relation to the decision of the case, for, as has been seen above, proceedings in confirmation under section 20 of the Act, 1957, are not determined with finality by such an order as was made by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th May 1955, assuming that it contained no express provision for revival the proceedings. For these reasons I would dismiss this appeal with costs. 8. A. Rahman, J.-I have had the advantage of seems the judgment proposed to be delivered in this case by my learned brother, Haikus, J. am inclined to agree with him generally and to concur in the conclusions he has reached on the facts of this case. The learned Custodian’s order under appeal, shows no awareness of the issues raised on behalf of ATA Allah Malik by his revision petition and omits all reference to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): am inclined to agree with him generally and to concur in the conclusions he has reached on the facts of this case. The learned Custodian’s order under appeal, shows no awareness of the issues raised on behalf of ATA Allah Malik by his revision petition and omits all reference to the order of his predecessor which shut out the possibility of revival of proceedings before the Custodian. I wish to post out that the only way in which the learned Custodian could have allowed the proceedings to be treated as revival proceedings was to review his predecessor’s order dated 9-11-55 so as to remove the bar against that course. He might be persuaded to resort to this procedure even now and in that case the question of a fresh application for confirmation being barred by time would not arise. The matter rests in his discretion. But at the same time, since ATA Allah Malik had from the very beginning been contesting the consideration for and the genuineness of the transaction, and he was a party very much interested in the property in question, he had to be given an opportunity to establish his objections by evidence, before the Custodian could pass a final order in the case. I would therefore agree that the appeal be allowed, and the case sent back to the Custodian for fresh disposal in accordance with law I would make no order as to costs in this Court, in the circumstances of this case. Fable-Akbar, J.-I have had the advantage of reading and fully considering the judgments of my Lord the Chief Justice and of my learned brother Haikus, J. For the reasons which have been clearly and fully set forth in the judgment of the Chief Justice and which it is unnecessary for me to repeat, I am also of opinion that this appeal should be dismissed. I would however, like to add some observations of my own. It is impossible to read the Custodian’s order without seeing that he has honestly considered all the relevant circumstances bearing on whether the sale should be confirmed or not. This being so, it is not for this Court to say while exercising its limited jurisdiction in such matters that there was something he had considered which he ought not to have considered, and something he had not considered which he ought to have considered and so his order was bad. This would be equivalent to saying that his order could be reviewed by this Court. I think we would be exceeding our jurisdiction if we attempt to review a judgment the jurisdiction to form which the Legislature has 99nfined to the Custodian and the Custodian alone. N It is true that notice under rule 12(5).had not been served on the appellant; but the fact remains that in the revision taken by him the whole circumstances of the case were placed before the Custodian and he after fully considering them affirmed the order of the Additional Custodian confirming

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): It is true that notice under rule 12(5).had not been served on the appellant; but the fact remains that in the revision taken by him the whole circumstances of the case were placed before the Custodian and he after fully considering them affirmed the order of the Additional Custodian confirming the sale. It cannot therefore, be said that he has not acted in a judicial manner. In the Act the Custodian’s power has been expressed in words of the widest amplitude. Whether an application is competent, whether it is in proper form, and whether it has been preferred within the prescribed time, are all matters for decision of the Custodian. Even if he decides these questions wrongly, this Court I think, cannot interfere with his order. The questions thus agitated in this appeal do not seem to be questions which bear upon the jurisdiction of the Custodian or his authority to entertain them. In these circumstances TT cannot be said that he acted without jurisdiction, or in excess of it, or m violation of the principles of natural justice. I would therefore, dismiss this appeal but make no order as to costs. B. Z. Haikus, J.-This is an appeal by special leave against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property dated the 19th November 1960, dismissing a revision petition against the appellate order of the Additional Custodian confirming two transactions of sale of evacuee property. It is necessary to state the facts in some detail. By a sale deed which was executed on the 19th December 1946, R. M. Gandhi sold plot No. 298, A. M. Quarters, Karachi, to Bataan Singh for a sum of Rs. 49,703-10-0. Out of this consideration Rs. 28,771-5- 0 were retained by the Vendée for payment to the Karachi Estate Board from whom R. M. Gandhi had purchased this plot. The total area of the plot was 832'5 square yards. Bataan Singh raised some construction on this plot and on the 11th August 1947, sold 297 square yards out of the total area to Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh for a sum of Rs. 31,540 out of which Rs. 17,000 were paid in cash and the balance of Rs. 14,540 was left with Ishtar Singh and Amassing for payment in eleven equal installments to the Karachi Estate Board. This sum of Rs. 14,540 represented the proportionate amount payable to the Karachi Estate Board in respect of 297 square yards. The deed in favor of Amar Singh and Ishtar Singh was presented for registration on the 11th August 1947, but was registered on 16th June 1948. Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh In turn sold the property purchased from Bataan Singh to Rashid Merwin Irani and Haddad Archer Irani by a sale-deed dated the 13th September 1947, which was registered on 27th July 1948. The consideration for this sale was Rs. 27,000, out of which Rs. 2,000 were stated to have been paid as earnest money, Rs. 15,000 were stated to have been paid in cash

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): Haddad Archer Irani by a sale-deed dated the 13th September 1947, which was registered on 27th July 1948. The consideration for this sale was Rs. 27,000, out of which Rs. 2,000 were stated to have been paid as earnest money, Rs. 15,000 were stated to have been paid in cash on the day the deed was executed, and Rs. 10,000 were to be paid to the Karachi Estate Board in respect of the balance of the installments. It was stated in the deed that the vendees were to pay to the Karachi Estate Board either the sum of Rs. 10,000 or such sum as may be found to be payable as the proportionate share of the price which remained payable in respect of the whole plot. Ishtar Singh and Harm Singh were both evacuees. Rashid Merwin Irani and Haddad Archer Irani who are respondents 5 and 6 in this appeal and are hereafter referred to as such filed an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property on the 23rd May 1950, under section 16 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, praying for confirmation of the sale in their favor. On the 14th of October 1950, Mr. Akbar Hussain, the then Custodian of Evacuee Property, confirmed the sale. In September 1947, Abdullah Mark who is the appellant in this appeal had been allotted the plot which had been sold by Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh to respondents 5 and 6. On the Sth of July 1951, he applied to Mr. Akbar Hussain, Custodian of Evacuee Property, for a review of his order confirming the sale in favor of respondents 5 and 6 on the ground that the sale in favor of Ishtar SMG and Amar Singh itself required confirmation. This application for review came up for decision before Mr. Ayaz Ali, the successor-in-office of Mr. Akbar Hussain on 29th February 1951. Mr. Ayaz Ali set aside the order of Mr. Akbar Hussain on the ground that there being no confirmation of the sale by Bataan Singh who was himself an evacuee there could be no confirmation of the sale in favor of respondents 5 and 6. On the 7th April 1952, respondents 5 and 6 put in another application for confirmation of both the sale-deeds before the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi In this application the only persons who were made respondents were Ishtar Singh, Amar Singh and Bataan Singh evacuees. Neither the appellant, on whose application the previous order of confirmation had been set aside, nor the Rehabilitation Authorities were made parties. It was stated in this application that the order passed by Mr. Akbar Hussain on 14th October 1950, had on review been set aside by the Custodian, but there was no mention of the person who had filed the review application. The evacuee respondents were served by a notice in the Daily Annam Karachi. The appellant though he had not been made a party was imp leaded on his own application. At some stage, it

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): the Custodian, but there was no mention of the person who had filed the review application. The evacuee respondents were served by a notice in the Daily Annam Karachi. The appellant though he had not been made a party was imp leaded on his own application. At some stage, it does not appear how, the proceedings were transferred from the Additional Custodian to the Deputy Custodian. There were a large number of hearings and ultimately on the 19th May 1955, the Deputy Custodian after having granted a number of adjournments for the production of the income-tax clearance certificates rejected the application for non-production of such certificates. He observed in the order that the income-tax abilities of the vendors were above Rs. 30,000 and the total consideration for the sale BMG only Rs. 27,000 it was doubtful whether the income-tax would be paid for getting the sales confirmed. While rejecting the application, however, the Deputy Custodian permitted respondents 5 and 6 to move for the revival of the application for confirmation within fifteen days from the date of obtain the income-tax clearance certificate. It may be stated here that the application for confirmation was barred by time and an application for condonation of delay bad also been filed by respondents 5 sad 6 under section 5 of the LUnjJtgtion AET, OF the 16th May 1953, the Deputy Custodian had condoned the delay. Against the order passed by the Deputy Custodian rejecting application for confirmation it was the appellant who filed an appeal before the Custodian. The appellant contended in this appeal that the permission given to respondents 5 and 6 to move for the revival of the application within fifteen days of obtain the momenta clearance certificate was improper. Notice of this appeal was served on respondents 5 and 6, but nobody appeared on their behalf; By an order dated the 9th November 1955, the Custodian deleted the last sentence in the order of the Deputy Custodian by which an application for revival had been permitted. This sentence ran “It will be, however, open to the applicants to move for the revival of this application within 15 days from the date of obtaining the Income Clearance Certificate.” The Custodian observed in his order that the position with regard to evacuee properties which were subject to agreements of transfer had to be finalized. On the 7th May 1958, that is, about three years after the dismissal of the second application for confirmation respondents 5 and 6 applied to the Deputy Custodian for resumption of the proceedings. They attached to this application a certificate dated the 30th April 1958, granted by the Income-tax Authorities which stated that there was no objection to the confirmation of the transfer mentioned in the certificate. In the particulars of the transfer stated MN this certificate the only person mentioned as the vendor was Bataan Singh while respondents 5 and 6 were mentioned as transferees. The certificate obviously related only to the lability of Bataan SMG and was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): confirmation of the transfer mentioned in the certificate. In the particulars of the transfer stated MN this certificate the only person mentioned as the vendor was Bataan Singh while respondents 5 and 6 were mentioned as transferees. The certificate obviously related only to the lability of Bataan SMG and was not an income-tax clearance certificate in respect of Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh whom it did not mention at all. This application as already stated was for resumption of proceedings, and it was presumably filed on the strength of the permission granted to respondents 5 ' and 6 to file an application for revival within fifteen days of obtaining the income-tax clearance certificate. The application made no mention of the appellate order of the Custodian by which he had deleted the last sentence of the order of the Deputy Custodian, thereby setting aside that portion of the order of the Deputy Custodian by which permission for revival had been granted. The number of the original application Le. F. (22)/52 was mentioned in the heading of the application, and it was prayed that the same application may be revived. As the application was for revival the names of the respondents were only shown as “Ishtar SMG, Harm Singh and others.” In the original application as has already been stated, only the vendors had been made parties. On the very day on which this application was presented the following order was passed by the Deputy Custodian : “The application or case is allowed to be reviewed as per order of previous D. C. Judicial.”. The words “as per order of previous D. C. Judicial’ show that though called a “review” a revival was being allowed on account of the order passed by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th May 1955. No notice of this application for revival was served on any party. By an order dated 30th July 1958, the Deputy Custodian dismissed the application on the merits. The order of the Deputy Custodian shows that he was dealing with the Original Application No. F. (22)/52. He stated in the beginning of his order that notices had been served on the parties concerned through “Annam’ on 16th April 1952. This reference related to the original application and the persons on whom notices were so served were only the vendors. The Deputy Custodian was of the opinion that in the first place with respect to the transaction between Bataan Singh and Amar Singh respondents 5 and 6 had no right to apply for confirmation and secondly the consideration for the transfer in favor of the respondents 5 and 6 was “much below the market rates.” For an assessment of the market value the Deputy Custodian had inspected the spot. Against the order of the Deputy Custodian respondents 5 and 6 filed an appeal before the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property. In this appeal to the only persons who were made parties were the vendors the. Ishtar Singh, Amar Singh and Bataan Singh who

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): Deputy Custodian had inspected the spot. Against the order of the Deputy Custodian respondents 5 and 6 filed an appeal before the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property. In this appeal to the only persons who were made parties were the vendors the. Ishtar Singh, Amar Singh and Bataan Singh who were all evacuees and as a result no notice was served either on the appellant or on the Rehabilitation Authorities. The Additional Custodian held that respondents 5 and 6 had locus standi to file an application for confirmation. He did not deal with the question of actual payment or the confides of the consideration, but assuming that the consideration mentioned in the deed had in fact been paid, he dealt with the question of adequacy of consideration and said : “there is a presumption that the vendor was sensible enough to obtain adequate consideration for the property sold by him and the burden of proving that the consideration is inadequate lay on the party who alleges it to be inadequate.” It is not entirely out of place to observe here that no notice having been served of the application or the appeal on any party except the vendors the Additional Custodian, if he was aware of the persons on whom notice of the proceedings had been served could only have been contemplating an objection by the vendor that the consideration was inadequate and a burden on the vendor to show that it was inadequate. The Additional Custodian found that on the record inadequacy of consideration was not established and on the basis of this finding, by an order dated 10th September 1958, he accepted the appeal and confirmed the transaction of sale. It is a matter of some surprise that neither the Deputy Custodian nor the Additional Custodian exam med the Income-tax Clearance Certificate which had been produced by respondents 5 and 6 which related to Bataan Singh alone and which referred only to a direct transfer by Bataan Singh in favor of respondents 5 and 6. Section 16 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (now section 20 of the Act) debars the Custodian from confirming a transfer not covered by a proper certificate. It was the duty of the Deputy Custodian and the Additional Custodian to satisfy themselves as to the existence of a proper certificate. It is surprising to that the Additional Custodian neither made the Rehabilitation Authority a party nor dealt with the question of payment and bona fides of consideration. On the 11th December 1959, the present appellant submitted an application m revision before the Custodian against the order of the Additional Custodian dated the 10th September 1958. He stated in this application that as an allottee of the property in dispute he had applied for an order of transfer of the property in his favor and that during the proceedings for transfer he had come to know that respondents 5 and 6 had got the sale-deeds of 11th August 1947 and 13th September

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): as an allottee of the property in dispute he had applied for an order of transfer of the property in his favor and that during the proceedings for transfer he had come to know that respondents 5 and 6 had got the sale-deeds of 11th August 1947 and 13th September 1947, confirmed. (The order of transfer in favor of the appellant had been passed on the 16th October 1959, but the P. T. O. appears to have been issued subsequently). He attacked the order of confirmation as having been “obtained by concealment of facts, mis-statement, deception and fraudulently.” He pointed out that while the Deputy Custodian in his order of 19th May 1955, had granted respondents 5 and 6 permission to file an application for revival, the Custodian of Evacuee Property on appeal had deleted this part of the order of the Deputy Custodian and the application for revival was incompetent. He alleged that he as well as the Settlement Department had been kept in ignorance of the proceedings for revival and that respondents 5 and 6 had not given him any notice for rent in spite of the fact that he was in occupation of the property in dispute. He made a vehement attack on the bona fides of respondents 5 and 6 as well as on the genuineness of the transaction which they had got confirmed. He prayed that the order of the Additional Custodian be set aside and that he be also compensated for the loss he had suffered on account of the fraud of respondents 5 and 6. It was also stated in the application that there was no proper income-tax certificate which was essential for the confirmation of the sales. During the pendency of the application for revision before the Custodian the Income-tax Officer, N. C. A. Circle Karachi, informed the Custodian by a letter dated 10th March 1960, that the clearance certificate granted to respondents 5 and 6 on the 30th April 1959, with respect to the property of Vardar Bataan Singh had been cancelled and that a sum of Rs. 34,000 was still due from this person on account of income-tax. It has already been observed that the income-tax clearance certificate filed with the application for confirmation related only to Bataan SMG and with respect to Ishtar SMG and Amar Singh no certificate had been produced. The Custodian allowed time to respondents 5 and 6 to secure a fresh certificate. There were some adjournments and ultimately on the 25th October 1960, respondents 5 and 6 secured a certificate from the Income-tax Officer which stated that there was no objection to the confirmation of a sale by three persons Le. Bataan Singh, Ishtar Singh and Amar Singh in favor of respondents 5 and 6 for a sum of Rs. 27,000. It would be proper to observe here that the first momenta certificate had been granted to respondents 5 and 6 on the 28th of June 1950, with respect to Amar Singh and Ishtar Singh.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): and Amar Singh in favor of respondents 5 and 6 for a sum of Rs. 27,000. It would be proper to observe here that the first momenta certificate had been granted to respondents 5 and 6 on the 28th of June 1950, with respect to Amar Singh and Ishtar Singh. This certificate was cancelled on the 24th November 1954, on the allegation that it had been “wrongly issued” and that there were income-tax liabilities outstanding against TBS evacuee vendor who in this case was Ishtar Singh. The second income-tax certificate of ' 30th April 1958, which related to Bataan Singh only was cancelled v on 10th March 1960. The certificate obtained by respondents 5 and 6 on 25th October 1960, states that there is no objection to a transfer by Bataan Singh, Amar Singh and Ishtar Singh. After the issue of the certificate of 25th October 1960, the Income-tax J Officer, N. C. A. Circle, Karachi, again wrote to the Deputy Superintendent, Enforcement Police, Karachi, on 24- 3-1962, saying “a sum of Rs. 15,112 is also outstanding against the Sikh evacuees Ishtar Singh, Harm Singh, etc. this was left by an oversight. Now the total lability is Rs. 34,000”. The Custodian in the order which he passed on the revision application of the appellant dealt with three matters 1e.- (0 the momenta clearance certificate ; (1) the imitation regarding the original application ; and ( ) the consideration with respect to the transaction in dispute. So far as the momenta certificate is concerned, the Custodian just referred to the certificate of 25th October 1960, and said that the objection had disappeared. The delay in filing the original application had according to the Custodian been satisfactorily explained because an order of confirmation had first been obtained which had later been set aside. So far as the proof of consideration is concerned respondents 5 and 6 produced before the Custodian on the 19th November 1960, the very day on which he passed the order, an affidavit of one Mr. Dhanjishaw Coast Aga in which it was stated that Rs. 2,000 were paid as earnest money by the vendees to the vendors in his office and a sum of Rs. 15,000 was paid in his presence in the office of the SubRegistrar. This affidavit of Mr. Aga was accepted by the Custodian as sufficient proof of the passing of consideration. The Custodian also observed in the order, though he did not refer to any material on the record in support of it, that instead of a sum of Rs. 10,000 as stipulated in the sale-deed respondents 5 and 6 had paid a sum of Rs. 14,892-4-0 to the Karachi Estate Board. So far as the adequacy of consideration is concerned the Custodian simply said that for reasons given in the order of the Additional Custodian he held the consideration to be adequate. ' In this appeal learned counsel for the appellant challenges the order of the Custodian on the following grounds (i) That

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): as the adequacy of consideration is concerned the Custodian simply said that for reasons given in the order of the Additional Custodian he held the consideration to be adequate. ' In this appeal learned counsel for the appellant challenges the order of the Custodian on the following grounds (i) That the application for revival or for resumption of proceedings was not competent because in the first place the Deputy Custodian had no jurisdiction to pass such an order and in the second place the Custodian had by his order dated 9-11-1955, set aside that portion of the order of the Deputy Custodian which permitted withdrawal The application for revival was merely based on the order of the Deputy Custodian which had been set aside, and it had been entertained by the successor of the Deputy Custodian because he assumed that the order of his predecessor had not been set aside. The whole basis, therefore, of the application for revival was nonexistence. (ii) That the application was fraudulent. It suppressed the fact that the order permitting withdrawal had been set aside. It also deliberately did not show as a party the appellant, who had got the first order of confirmation set aside by review, who was allottee of the property and in possession of it, and who was a party of the previous proceeding in which the revival had in the first instance been ordered. Respondents 5 and 6 also did not imp lead the Rehabilitation Authorities. (i) That neither the appellant nor the Rehabilitation Authorities had notice of the proceedings and, therefore, quite apart from the question of fraud the whole proceedings before the Deputy Custodian were without jurisdiction and null and void. (iv) When it was suggested to learned counsel for the appellant that the application for revival may be treated as a fresh application, he contended- (a) that the fresh application was barred by section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance ; (b) that the fresh application would be time-barred and there was no extension of time by the Deputy Custodian, the Additional Custodian or the Custodian in accordance with section 5 of the Limitation Act; (c) that the rules framed under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance necessitated that he as well as the Rehabilitation Authority be made parties to an application for confirmation of sale and that notice of application be served on them and on account of failure to comply with statutory rules and a principle of natural justice, the proceedings would be without jurisdiction ; (v) that the Custodian had acted without jurisdiction in receiving in evidence an affidavit sworn in 1952, for the first time on the day when he passed the order without giving the appellant an opportunity of contesting the affidavit; (vi) that there is no proper legal proof on the record either of the passing of consideration or its adequacy and the Custodian has not dealt with it in a manner which would satisfy the requirements

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): he passed the order without giving the appellant an opportunity of contesting the affidavit; (vi) that there is no proper legal proof on the record either of the passing of consideration or its adequacy and the Custodian has not dealt with it in a manner which would satisfy the requirements of law ; (VU) that the first transaction, 1e. the sale in favor of Bataan Singh by R. M. Gandhi also required confirmation ; and (VM) that there was ho proper income-tax clearance certificate before the Custodian. Mr. Bro hi who appears for respondents 5 and 6 does not contest that in view of the order of the Custodian dated the 9th November 1955, an application for revival was not competent. He contends, however, that the application for revival can be treated as a fresh application, and he does not accept that there was any fraud in presenting the application for revival. According to him respondents 5 and 6 had no knowledge of the order passed by the Custodian on 9th November 1955. He even urged that no notice of the appeal in which the order dated 9-11-1955, was passed was properly served on respondents 5 and 6, but we did not allow him to contest the service of notice as the post had not been taken either before the Custodian or in the concise statement filed on behalf of respondents 5 and 6. With respect to the contention of learned counsel for the appellant that if the application for revival was treated as a fresh application it should be dismissed as time-barred because there was no application for extension of time, Mr. Bro hi’s reply is that the Custodian should be deemed to have extended time for the filing of a fresh application by his order dismissing the revision petition. As regards the plea of learned counsel for the appellant that the proceedings were null and void for want of service of notice on the appellant and the Rehabilitation Authorities, the answer of Mr. Bro hi is that it was open to the appellant to have applied to the Custodian for an opportunity to lead evidence when he filed his application in revision and as he failed to do so he had no right to agitate this post before the Supreme Court. The sale by R. M. Gandhi in favor of Bataan Singh does not according to Mr. Bro hi require confirmation by the Custodian because the sale was of 19th December 1946. Mr. Bro hi also does not accept that a second application for confirmation would not be competent. Mr. Speed A. Sheikh has appeared for the Custodian. He has made no substantial addition to the pleas put forward by Mr. Bro hi. The Custodian has filed a concise statement and that statement too does not disclose any further plea. I would in the first place deal with the contentions as to the need of confirmation for the sale by R. M. Gandhi and the utter incompetence of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): forward by Mr. Bro hi. The Custodian has filed a concise statement and that statement too does not disclose any further plea. I would in the first place deal with the contentions as to the need of confirmation for the sale by R. M. Gandhi and the utter incompetence of the second application for confirmation because if either of these contentions has force this appeal must succeed and the order of the Custodian should be set aside. The Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance is effective so far as transfers by evacuees are concerned from 1-3-1947. Even if a person became an evacuee after that date any transfer by him made on or after the 1st of March 1947, would have no effect in law till it was confirmed by the Custodian. On this point there is no contest between the parties. The contest is due to the fact that according to Mr. Mahmud Ali the transfer took place on the 14th March 1947, when the sale-deed was copied into the relevant book in the office of the Sub-Registrar while according to Mr. Bro hi the transfer took place on 19-12-1946, and is therefore outside the mischief of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. The sale-deed had been presented for registration on the very day on which it was executed Le. the 19th December 1946. The Sub-Registrar made the usual endorsement on the back of the deed on the same day saying that the executant had admitted execution and that a sum of Rs. 16,932-5-0 had been paid to the vendor in his presence. However, the sale-deed was copied MTO the relevant book on 14-3-1947, and it is on this day that the endorsement as to its having been “registered”’, was made by the _ Sub- Registrar. In accordance with section 60 of the Registration Act such an endorsement can only be made after the document has been copied into a book. The contention of Mr. Mahmud Ali that registration took place on 14-3-1947, is based on/section 61 of the Registration Act which it would be convenient to reproduce here: “61.- (1) The endorsements and certificates referred to and mentioned in sections 59 and 60 shall thereupon be copied into the margin of the Registration-book, and the copy of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in section 21 shall be filed in book No. 1. (2) The registration of the document shall thereupon be deemed complete, and the document shall then be returned to the person who presented the same for registration, or to such other person (if any) as he has nom mated in writing in that behalf on the receipt mentioned in section 52. It is true that in accordance with this section registration of a document is to be deemed completed when the endorsements and certificate mentioned in sections 59 and 60 have been copied MTO the margin of the Register-book. So far as the document itself is concerned, it is to be copied into

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): true that in accordance with this section registration of a document is to be deemed completed when the endorsements and certificate mentioned in sections 59 and 60 have been copied MTO the margin of the Register-book. So far as the document itself is concerned, it is to be copied into a book before the certificate of registration under section 60 is endorsed on the document. But the duty of a person who wants to get a document registered is finished when he presents the document for registration. The endorsements and entries in the books are the duties of Registration Department, and it does not seem reasonable that a person should be prejudiced by the fact that the entries were not made expeditiously. In accordance with section 52 “every document admitted to registration shall without delay be copied in the book appropriated therefor according to the order of its admission.” In a case where the question is whether a person had notice of a registered document relating to a particular property it would be reasonable to hold that as long as that person is not NBA position to know whether there exists an entry in the books relating to that property he should not be deemed to-have notice of registration. But considerations are not the same when the question is as to the competence of person to make a transfer. It is not necessary, however, to labor this post further or to decide it finally because of section 47 of the Registration Act which is in the following words : “47. A registered document shall operate from the time from which it commenced to operate if no registration thereof had been required and not from the time of registration.” This section is a complete answer to the contention that title passed at the time of registration. When an unregistered deed is executed, a deed which requires registration, transfer of title remains in abeyance till the deed is registered, but as soon as it is registered the transfer operates in the words of section 47 not from the date of the registration but from the date on which TT would, if no registration was needed, have taken effect. So even If the sale-deed in dispute was registered on 14-3-1947, the transfer took place on the 11th December 1946, and the transaction did pot require confirmation by the Custodian. For the contention that a second application for confirmation was not legally competent at all Mr. Mahmud Ali relied upon section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act. It is provided in section 43 that any order passed by a Custodian (which expression includes an Assistant, Deputy or Additional Custodian) shall subject to the provisions relating to appeal, review and revision be final. Learned counsel contended that as the order dismissing the application implied a refusal to confirm this refusal was final, and a new application was incompetent. Learned counsel referred to that part of section 16 wherein it is provided that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): to the provisions relating to appeal, review and revision be final. Learned counsel contended that as the order dismissing the application implied a refusal to confirm this refusal was final, and a new application was incompetent. Learned counsel referred to that part of section 16 wherein it is provided that if COMETA clearance certificate is not produced the application shall be dismissed. I find no force in this contention. Whenever there is a condition to be complied with by a party before a proceeding becomes competent the dismissal of that proceeding for failure to comply with the condition precedent does not debar the submission of a fresh competent proceeding. Examples of such conditions precedent will be found in the failure to pay Court-fees or to deposit one-fifth of the preemption money in a preemption suit or to procure sanction of a liquidation Court for filing a suit against an insolvent. The word “‘final’ in section 43 would only mean that a point which has been decided in a proceeding cannot be reagitated. If the Applin*.10on was dismissed on the merits, the merits could not be agitated again, but if the application was dismissed because of w NT of a income-tax clearance certificate the only post that was decided was that a valid clearance certificate did not exist. That post cannot be agitated again except by way of appeal, review or revision, but the filing of a fresh application which is supported by a clearance certificate is not incompetent. H Having cleared the ground by a disposal of these two matters I proceed to deal with the other ports raised. I will deal first with whether, if we were to accede to the request of Mr. Bro hi and treat the application for revival as a fresh application, this appeal could be dismissed. Even if the application for revival were treated as a fresh application there will still be two reasons why the order under appeal could not stand. The first is that the fresh application would be time-barred and there is no application for condonation of delay under section 5 of the Limitation Act at all. In accordance with rule 17-A of the rules framed under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, section 5 of the Limitation Act is applicable to proceedings before the Custodian. Mr. Bro hi has contended that the Custodian should be deemed to have decided the question of limitation when he dismissed the revision application of the appellant. It is impossible to accept such contention. The Custodian was not even conscious of the fact that the application for revival was incompetent, and he certainly never applied his mind to whether time should be extended after treat in git as a fresh application. Under section 5 of the Limitation Act there has to be a finding of sufficient cause. In pre-Partition India sufficient cause had been defined as circumstances beyond the control of the party and I do not know of any case wherein this definition

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): treat in git as a fresh application. Under section 5 of the Limitation Act there has to be a finding of sufficient cause. In pre-Partition India sufficient cause had been defined as circumstances beyond the control of the party and I do not know of any case wherein this definition of sufficient cause bad been rejected. However, at least in determining sufficient cause while deal mg with the same expression in Order IX, rule 8, C. P. C. and Order IX, rule 3, C. P. C. the Courts had been lenient and had been condoning some negligence e. negligence to the extent to which it is regarded as human though they never condoned gross negligence. At the same time the Courts had always been strict in demanding proof of sufficient cause for everyday which had expired after the ordinary period of limitation. In the present case the question as to whether time should be extended if the application for revival was treated as a fresh application was not at all an easy one to decide. The first application which was dismissed on the ground of want of clearance certificate was itself time-barred and the Deputy Custodian had to pass an order condoning delay. If a time-barred application be dismissed for want of a certificate and a fresh application be filed what is the principle on which the question of condonation of delay should be decided ? It would be difficult to hold that the failure to obtain a clearance certificate is by itself sufficient cause. It is true that the ability to pay COMETA is of the vendor, but the fact that the vendor does not pay is not by itself a ground for extension of limitation. The vendor was an evacuee who left the country long ago. He is not interested in paying the income-tax and if extension were granted on this ground a second application for confirmation could always be filed after getting a certificate. The Vendée has to pay the COMETA if he wants to get the sale deed confirmed and can his failure to pay be regarded as sufficient cause ? I have no intention of answering this question so as to affect its decision by the Custodian. I have only posted out the difficulties of the situation and the utter impossibility MN the circumstances of imputing any implied decision to the Custodian on the question of sufficient cause. The second reason why the order of the Custodian could not stand is the want of service of notice of the proceedings on parties who ought to have been served. Rule 12 (5) of the rules framed under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance which relates to proceedings for confirmation of transfers runs: “12 (5) The Custodian shall cause a notice to be served on the respondent, and the Rehabilitation Authority of the area in which the property is situated, and on any other person likely to be interested in or affected by the result of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): to proceedings for confirmation of transfers runs: “12 (5) The Custodian shall cause a notice to be served on the respondent, and the Rehabilitation Authority of the area in which the property is situated, and on any other person likely to be interested in or affected by the result of the application, and may also cause a public notice to be published in a newspaper at the expense of the applicant.” The rule makes notice obligatory not only in respect of the Rehabilitation Authority, but in respect of any person interested MN or likely to be affected by the result of the application. The appellant was surely a party interested in and affected by the result of the proceedings. He was an allottee of the property in dispute and in possession of it, and he would under the Displaced Persons Act be entitled to its transfer. It is pertinent to observe here that so far as the order of the Additional Custodian is concerned it was, apart from all other considerations illegal on the ground that there was as yet no proper certificate from the Income-tax authorities so that really we have to consider the position of the appellant at the time when the case came to the Custodian. Before the case came to the Custodian he had secured an order for transfer of the house in his favor on the 16th October 1959. But even when the case was with the Deputy 01 the Additional Custodian he was an allottee with possession. In fact by virtue of the enactment of the Displaced Persons Compensation Act which came into force on 26-3-1958 he had a vested right with respect to the transfer of the property in dispute. Learned counsel for the appellant contends that the proceedings being in the absence of necessary parties without even an attempt to serve them were null and void and without jurisdiction. The only reply of Mr. Bro hi to this objection is that when the appellant approached the Custodian in revision he should himself have applied for an opportunity to lead evidence and if he did not do so he cannot now attack the validity of the proceedings on the ground that he had no opportunity of being heard. There is little force in the reply of Mr. Bro hi and if we consider all the circumstances the argument put forward does not appear to be a possible one. The proceedings before the Deputy Custodian which were being attacked were proceedings for revival of the original application. The plea of the appellant was that the revival was in the first place fraudulent and m the second place wholly incompetent on account of the previous order of the Custodian. It was quite sufficient for the appellant to have simply attacked the proceedings for revival as being of no legal effect for either of these two reasons and to pray that they be quashed. It was not for him to assume that the application for revival

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): order of the Custodian. It was quite sufficient for the appellant to have simply attacked the proceedings for revival as being of no legal effect for either of these two reasons and to pray that they be quashed. It was not for him to assume that the application for revival will be converted into a fresh application (and as I will presently show there were reasons which may have led to an ultimate refusal on the part of the Custodian to treat the application for revival as a fresh proceeding). But let me even assume that there was no application for revival, but only a fresh application and let me assume further (to none of these assumptions are respondents 5 and 6 entitled) that the application was, within limitation, but the appellant had, though entitled to notice, not been served. Would there be under the circumstances any obligation on the appellant to ask for an opportunity to lead evidence ? The proceedings before the Deputy Custodian if they were not totally void for failure to imp lead necessary parties 1e. the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the appellant would constitute an illegal exercise of jurisdiction and the appellant when he approached the Custodian need only have said that the proceedings were illegal and should be set aside. There is no law which obliges' a party against whom an order has been passed without imp leading him and without serving him with notice when he was entitled to be served, to put forward before an appellate or revisional Court a plea that he should be allowed an opportunity of leading evidence. He is entitled simply to say, in the absence of any provision of law to the contrary, that the proceedings being illegal should be set aside. Of course the Custodian could himself offer an opportunity to the appellant to lead evidence (after first converting the revival proceedings into a fresh application) in order to cure the defect in the proceedings, but it may be posted out that a simple opportunity to lead evidence would not have been sufficient. There would have to be at the Sam« time an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the other party. The whole onus in this case lay on respondents 5 and 6. They would not only have to lead evidence, but one of them who had knowledge of the facts would in accordance with accepted principles relating to production of evidence in civil proceedings have to put himself in the witness-box and subjects himself to cross- examination unless he was not afraid of an adverse inference which might be drawn against him. Rights which parties have in procedure are not to be lightly treated nor can the parties be punished for failure to put forward pleas at stages of a proceeding which they are not by law bound to put forward. It appears to me that in this case not only has there been a failure to comply with a statutory provision as to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): nor can the parties be punished for failure to put forward pleas at stages of a proceeding which they are not by law bound to put forward. It appears to me that in this case not only has there been a failure to comply with a statutory provision as to notice, but there is a gross violation of the principle that orders affecting parties are not to be based without a proper opportunity of contest. It would be proper here to consider the propriety of the order passed by the Custodian. As has already been stated there was a strong attack by the appellant on the proceedings for revival for two reasons, that 1s, fraud and incompetence of the application for revival on account of the order of the Custodian forbidding revival. Yet in the order of the Custodian by which he dismissed the revision application of the appellant there is not one word either about fraud or about the order of 9-11-1955. Not only that, the Custodian, assuming that the revival proceedings were wholly competent dealt, though in a summary way, with the question of limitation for the original application, and made a statement that the delay had already been condoned by the K Deputy Custodian. Coming to the question of consideration so far as the payment of consideration is concerned the Custodian admitted in evidence, apparently, to the surprise of the appellant, on the very day on which he passed the order, an affidavit sworn by Mr. Aga, an Advocate, without affording the appellant any opportunity of meeting this evidence. It may be observed that every person against whom an affidavit is produced is entitled in the absence of special circumstances to have the deponent put m the witness-box and to cross-examine him. So far as adequacy of consideration is concerned the Custodian contented himself with saying that he agreed with the Additional Custodian as to his reasons for accepting the adequacy of consideration. have already stated that according to the Additional Custodian the onus of proving inadequacy was on the party asserting. There was no party before the Deputy Custodian or the Additional Custodian to assert this for only the evacuee vendors had been made parties. I will now consider whether we should give a direction that the application for revival be treated as a fresh application. Primarily Courts have no objection to treat proceedings of one kind as proceedings of another kind of that becomes necessary for doing justice between the parties and would have had no objection to allow the application for revival to be treated as a fresh application were it not for the fact that a plea of fraud has been raised and if this plea be correct I would not be inclined to accede to the request of learned counsel for the respondents. The appellant contends that respondents 5 and 6 with full knowledge of the order passed by the Custodian on the 9th November 1955, suppressed that order and submitted an

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): if this plea be correct I would not be inclined to accede to the request of learned counsel for the respondents. The appellant contends that respondents 5 and 6 with full knowledge of the order passed by the Custodian on the 9th November 1955, suppressed that order and submitted an application in accordance with the permission granted by the Deputy Custodian which permission had been set aside in appeal and they at the same time deliberately did not make either the appellant or the Rehabilitation Authority a party in order that the truth may not be revealed. Learned counsel for the appellant ports out that even after obtain the order of the Additional Custodian for confirmation on 10th September 1958, respondents 5 and 6 kept the matter a secret and made no effort to assert their rights as vendees against the appellant who was in possession. It is during the proceedings for transfer of the house that the appellant came to know of the confirmation. He had received an order of transfer on 16th October 1959. The question of fraud has not been tried, but it is surely a matter which under the circumstances calls for a decision. Conversion of one proceeding into another is an act of leniency on the part of the Court the object of which TS the advancement of justice and such leniency may not be shown in a case where the proceeding sought to be converted is a proceeding conceived in fraud. So instead of deciding the question of conversion of the application for revival into a fresh application ourselves, I tank we should leave the matter to be decided by the Custodian. I would, therefore, accept this appeal, set aside the order of the Custodian and remand the case to the Custodian who will either himself or through a subordinate otherwise competent to deal with the matter first decide the question of conversion and if the application for revival be treated as a fresh application further proceedings will be taken as in any original application -for confirmation and questions of limitation and merits will be determined. All proceedings shall be taken after notice to the Rehabilitation Authority and the appellant. Costs of this appeal should be costs in the cause. Seymour Rahman, J.-I have had the advantage of reading in advance the judgments proposed to be announced by my Lord the Chief Justice and my learned brother Haikus, J. This appeal by special leave (granted on the 15th of December 1961) is from an order of Mr. Maud Ahmad, Custodian of Evacuee Property, Federal Capital of West Pakistan. By this order the Custodian had refused to interfere in revision with the order of the Additional Custodian passed in appeal confirming certain sales in favor of some of the respondents here. Such an appeal directly from the order of the Custodian was, no doubt, then tamable under Article 160 of the late Constitution. But this Court has consistently held that in exercising this supervisory jurisdiction

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 236?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 236 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-02-06): Additional Custodian passed in appeal confirming certain sales in favor of some of the respondents here. Such an appeal directly from the order of the Custodian was, no doubt, then tamable under Article 160 of the late Constitution. But this Court has consistently held that in exercising this supervisory jurisdiction given under Article 160 of the late Constitution in an appeal from an order of a Tribunal other than a Court some restrictions have, of necessity, to be imposed. Thus this jurisdiction should not be allowed to be invoked successfully in a case where the Tribunal had “functioned within the spirit and the intention of the statute that created it and while so functioning had made a real and honest endeavor to judge facts on the evidence and to apply the law to them.” (Vide Muhammad Saeed v. Election Petitions Tribunal, West Pakistan) Keeping this principle in view I have carefully examined the facts of the present case and the orders of the Custodian Authorities, and have come to the conclusion that the appellant has not been able to establish that the Custodian had acted without jurisdiction or had made “no honest effort to arrive at a correct conclusion. The Custodian when passing the impugned order was dealing in revision with an appellate order of an Additional Custodian wherein the facts were fully set out. He was also aware of the fact that the petitioner before him was alleging that the confirmation had been obtained by concealing an earlier order of Mr. Manner Adam, a predecessor Custodian, who had revoked the permission earlier granted to revive the application for confirmation on receipt of the Income-tax Certificate. The revision of the order was also sought on the ground that it had been made ex parte without any notice even to the present appellant. I am in agreement with my Lord the Chief Justice that neither the first ground took away the jurisdiction of the Custodian Authorities to entertain the second application for confirmation nor the second rendered the impugned order so defective that it must be set aside. The reasons which have led me to this conclusion are substantially the same as those given in the judgment of my Lord the Chief Justice, which I respectfully adopt and do not propose to repeat. I, therefore, also agree that this appeal must be dismissed with costs. M Order of The Court In accordance with the view of the majority, we dismiss this appeal, but make no order as to costs. Ap peal dismissed WWW.

Question: What is case 1964 PLD 865 about?
Answer: Case 1964 PLD 865 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1964-06-22. The case involved 1) CH. SIR MUHAMMAD ZAFRULLAH KHAN,(2) SHEIKH IJAZAHM AD, (3) BEGUM IJAZ AHMAD, AND(4) CH. ASADULLAH KHAN (APPELLANTS) VERSUS (1) THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYWEST PAKISTAN AND KARACHI(2) ADDITIONAL REHABILITATION AND SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER HYDERABAD(3) NANIKRAM(4) LEELARAM(S) () NANIKRAM (ID) LEELARAM (HI) BHAMUMALAND(6) CH RASHID AHMAD RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1956 - ARTICLE 160 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 250. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - SS. (2), (3) AND 18 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 16 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 18 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 36(4), PROVISO PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 30, S. 25 (2)(N) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 98 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 99 HINDU LAW CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908S) - S. 11. The case was heard by A. R. CORNELIUS, C. J. S. A. RAHMAN, FAZLE-AKBAR,B. Z. KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: In case 1964 PLD 865, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1956 - ARTICLE 160 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 250. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - SS. (2), (3) AND 18 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 16 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 18 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 36(4), PROVISO PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 30, S. 25 (2)(N) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 98 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 99 HINDU LAW CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908S) - S. 11. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1964-06-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1964 PLD 865 were: MAHMUD ALI AND KARAM ELAHI CLIUHAN SENIOR ADVOCATES SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY M. SIDDIQ SENIOR ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANTS. NAZIR AHMAD KHAN AND A. R. SHEIKH SENIOR ADVOCATES SUPREME COURT (SHAUKAT ALI KHAWAJA AD VOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH THEM) INSTRUCTED BY IFTIKHARUDDIN https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_865.html 1/27 28/10/2025, 00:35 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_865.html AHMAD ATTORNEY FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 5() IN PERSON.. The judges presiding were: A. R. CORNELIUS, C. J. S. A. RAHMAN, FAZLE-AKBAR,B. Z. KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: The parties in case 1964 PLD 865 were: 1) CH. SIR MUHAMMAD ZAFRULLAH KHAN,(2) SHEIKH IJAZAHM AD, (3) BEGUM IJAZ AHMAD, AND(4) CH. ASADULLAH KHAN (APPELLANTS) VERSUS (1) THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYWEST PAKISTAN AND KARACHI(2) ADDITIONAL REHABILITATION AND SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER HYDERABAD(3) NANIKRAM(4) LEELARAM(S) () NANIKRAM (ID) LEELARAM (HI) BHAMUMALAND(6) CH RASHID AHMAD RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1964 PLD 865.
Answer: Judgment Cornelius, C. J.-This appeal is directed against an order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated the 29th July 1960. Leave to appeal was granted by this Court on the 30th November 1960. Under the Constitution of 1956 such an appeal was competent, but under the present Constitution the power of this Court to admit appeals is confined to judgments and orders of the High Court. On this ground, a preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the respondent that this Court had no jurisdiction to decide this appeal. It is clear that in the absence of an express provision in the new Constitution to that effect, this appeal does not abate. The appellants were entitled under the Constitution of 1956 to seek special leave to appeal from this Court, and when such leave was granted, the right became a vested right to have the decision of the Tribunal appealed from examined by the Court. There is nothing in the new Constitution which can operate to take away a right so vested. Again by virtue of Article 250 of the present Constitution, the repeal of a law effected by that Constitution is not to affect anything already done or suffered under that law. One of the laws so repealed was the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, which had the effect of keeping the previous Constitution of 1956 in operation, in the relevant, respect but at sub- Constitutional level. Consequently, this appeal having been competently admitted by this Court under power derived from the previous Constitution, in the absence of a provision for abatement, this Court clearly has jurisdiction to proceed with end to decide this appeal. The subject-matter consists of 900 acres (902 acres, 16 funds to be exact) of land situated in the area commanded by the Lloyd Barrage m Sind, and it is common ground that at present, the land stands transferred to the three appellants, Sheikh LAZ Ahmad, Begum jazz Ahmad and Ch. Abdullah Khan. These appellants were transferees in 1955 from the first appellant, Ch. Sir Muhammad Zafrulluh Khan, to whom the land had been transferred in 1951-52 by Ch. Rashid Ahmad who is also a respondent in this appeal. Ch. Rashid Ahmad in his turn had obtained a transfer of the land from the respondent Nanogram on the 9th February 1950, and Nanogram himself had taken the land on transfer on the 23rd June 1949 from his brother Mammal, who immigrated to India thereafter. The original grant was made in the name of Mammal, and the subsequent transfers were all duly made with the consent of the Barrage authorities and mutation of names was duly sanctioned on each occasion. A short account of the various proceedings before the Evacuee Property authorities is desirable. Mammal and Nanogram who have already been mentioned had two other brothers Harman and Leelanau, who with their mother Sarmatia Poonjibai constituted a joint Hindu Family. Harman in 1940 took his share of the Jolt Family Property and separated from them, and he and his affairs are outside the sphere of consideration in this judgment. The three other brothers continued to live jointly with their mother, although TT is a question whether they were once again constituted as a Jolt Hindu Family after the rupture caused by the separation of Harman. It is in evidence that these three brothers acquired substantial areas of land subsequently, but did so in their joint names, and not as a joint Hindu family. After the departure of Mammal to India, the two remaining brothers Nanogram and Leelanau applied to the Custodian in 1950 for declarations that they were not evacuees, and that three-fourths of the family property, 1e. excluding the share of Mammal, the evacuee, should be declared non-evacuee property. Details of the property were given, which included the land here in question. The Custodian referred the matter to the Centra! Government and following receipt of orders on the 24th May 1950, he made an order allowing “their appeal’. There was in fact no appeal. The order is silent as to the property, but that is maternal, for any property which can be shown to belong to the persons who had been declared to be non-evacuees would clearly be non-evacuee property. At the time when the petition was presented, the transfer to Ch. Rashid Ahmad had not yet taken place. It took place on the 9th February 1950, and the order of the Custodian aforesaid was made on the 24th May s 1950. Later, the same Custodian by order dated the 3rd March 1951 allowed an application by Nanogram, Leelanau and Poonjibai to be appointed managers of the share of Mammal, but imposed certain conditions, one being that the allottees should not have raised any objection to their managership. In 1955, a successor Custodian issued notice to these persons to show cause why “the order of Mr. Akbar Hussain dated 3rd March 1951 regarding management of property belonging to Nanogram Shades, and others may not be reviewed.” (It appears that the Rehabilitation Commissioner had also moved the Custodian in this behalf as well as to determine the nature of the property, although the order eventually male, in two places states that it was a so moth proceeding). The Custodian heard counsel on behalf of Nanogram, etc. as well as counsel for the “Administration”’ (Rehabilitation Authorities). He found that 1,082 acres of Barrage land, “other property stood in the name of his father and other brothers, were sufficient to establish conclusively that the Barrage land belonged to Mammal exclusively, the Custodian by order dated the 23rd February 1956 declared all the Barrage land to be evacuee property. He had earlier removed Nanogram, etc. from managership of Mammal’s share, and this order too was also confirmed. Later, on the 15th March 1956, when it was brought to his notice that “the area of Barrage land in the name of Mammal was only 900 acres,” the Custodian refused to amend his previous order, saying that he relied on the figure of 1,082 acres furnished by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. An incident which had occurred earlier as that in November 1951, the Deputy Custodian declared Nanogram to be an “intending evacuee” and also declared his property in Pakistan to be evacuee property. The latter part of his order was set aside in appeal by the Additional Custodian on the ground that the necessary condition for declaring the property of an intending evacuee to be evacuee property was not satisfied. This order was maintained in revision by the Custodian. Since their lands had been ordered to be treated as evacuee property, Nanogram and Leelanau became entitled to seek a decision on the post under section 18 of the Ordinance of 1949, and they moved such an application before the Assistant Custodian, who made an order thereon the 19th December 1957. With reference to the 900 acres of Barrage land, which had been transferred to Ch. Rashid Ahmad, the Assistant Custodian held that this land could not be held to be evacuee property in 1956, “as provisions of section 36, subsection (4) of Ordinance No. XV of 1949 corresponding to section 43 (4) of the present Act were not complied with,” and therefore any order passed “affecting this portion of land would be against natural justice and also altogether illegal”’ This defect did not however appear MN relation to the balance of 90 acres of Barrage land with which the order was concerned. The Assistant Custodian held that the order in review made by the Custodian was free of defect in respect of these 90 acres which were still held in their possession by Nanogram and Leelanau. He made a brief examination of the evidence led in relation to the proprietorship of this land and relying on the fact that the name in the Barrage papers was that of Mammal alone as owner, he finally maintained the view already expressed by the Custodian that as to 90 acres of the Barrage land, it must be held to be evacuee property, and had been rightly treated as such. It should be mentioned that as before the Custodian, so before the Assistant Custodian, Ch. Rashid Ahmad was not made a party. Against the assistant Custodian’s order, an appeal was brought, not by the Rehabilitation Authorities, but by Nanogram, Leelanau and their mother Poonjibai, for the purpose of saving their three-fourths share in the 90 (ninety) acres which the Assistant Custodian had held to be rightly treated as evacuee property. In this application, they expressly stated that in June 1949, before his migration, Mammal had received the value of his one-fourth share in the 900 acres of unpaid (Le. partially paid) Barrage land, and thereafter had made a statement before the Revenue Officer, and following that, Nanogram’s name was entered in place of Mammal in the Barrage registers. A statement to that effect is also included in affidavit by Nanogram supporting the appeal which was on behalf of both brothers. It was when this appeal came up for hearing before the Custodian, that the question of the nature of the 900 acres of Barrage land, which were not the subject of the appeal, was taken up so moth by the Custodian. Notice was issued to Ch. Rashid Ahmad and later to Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan, Sheikh and Begum Jazz Ahmad and Ch. Abdullah Khan. In his order by which the entire land was declared to be evacuee property, the Custodian dealt with whether the provisions of section 36 of the Ordinance of 1949 stood in the way of the declaration by his predecessor of the 23rd February 1956 that all the Barrage lands were evacuee property. The argument he employed was that the section aforesaid only required notice to be served upon the “parties concerned” and since Ch. Rashid Ahmad and Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan had not been made parties to the proceedings before his predecessor they were not “parties concerned” and therefore it was not necessary for the Custodian to hear them before modifying the Assistant Custodian’s order. It should be mentioned that at no stage had it been suggested that either the transfer in favor of Ch. Rashid Ahmad or any of the subsequent transfers was not made bona fide for proper consideration. The Custodian however held that the price paid for the land by Ch. Rashid Ahmad was not adequate. On this point, it may be said at once that on the valuation adopted by the Custodian himself} the difference between the price he assessed, and that actually paid is no more than Rs. 8,000, which is only a small fraction of the price assessed, viz. Rs. 1,08,000. By adding certain supplements made necessary in the Custodian’s opinion by rising prices and improved condition of the land, he came to the conclusion that the differential should be as much as some Rs. 23,000. These estimates were not based on any pleadings, or issues or evidence. There was no application for confirmation of a sale of evacuee property before the Custodian. Here, the question of the nature of the greater part of the property had yet to be decided. The difference of value found by the Custodian 1s clearly too small to reflect upon the bona fide nature of the transaction. ' Determination of the nature of the property was a judicial question, involving as it did an exact ascertainment of title in immovable property. It was apparent on the face of the record that rights in that property had accrued by virtue of transfers in favor of Ch. Rashid Ahmad and the subsequent transferees at the time when the Custodian’s order of the 23rd February 1956 was made, and on a proper reading’ of section 36 of the Ordinance of 1949 of which the proviso to subsection (4) is in particular relevant, it would indeed seem that the Custodian was forbidden to make an order revising or modifying any order “affecting any person without giving such person and the Rehabilitation Authority an opportunity of being heard.” To say that these transferees for value were not “parties concerned” qua review of the earlier orders, vague though they might be thought to be, under which Nanogram and Leelanau and their mother were treated as non-evacuees and their share of the joint property as non-evacuee property, is in my opinion to avoid a early patent issue. But the real flaw in the matter appears to me to be this, that the Assistant Custodian having discovered the bar of section 36(4), and being required under section 18 of the Ordinance of 1949 to determine judicially how much was evacuee property and how much non-evacuee, his own duty was to summon all persons affected thereby and after full and proper hearing, to give his decision. Before him there was only a single respondent, namely, the Rehabilitation Authority He was aware of the transfer, and there was nothing to prevent him from imp leading the transferees and proceeding to a full and proper examination of the questions in the case. As observed earlier, since title in land was involved and complex questions had arisen, the case was an eminently suitable one for application of the full procedures of the law appropriate to decision of such questions. By the time that the Assistant Custodian decided the matter, Central Act No. XII of 1957 had come into force, containing express provisions in section 30 enabling the Custodian to exercise all the powers of a Civil Court for the proper investigation and decision of questions arising. Under section 25(2)(n), the Custodian was also empowered to “refer any dispute between the evacuee and any other person to arbitration or to a Civil Court for adjudication.” If the Assistant Custodian had acted under these powers, it would have been possible for him to have investigated the rival contentions in the manner which is accepted m all jurisdictions as appropriate to the determination of a question of title in movable property. The property was clearly of very considerable value. The title which the Rehabilitation Department was invoking is a title which, under the law, is deemed to be vested in the Custodian with effect from the IST March 1947. But much depended, in the circumstances of this case, upon proof being adduced as to the nature of the pre-existing titles, and the effect thereon of a transaction which took place in the year 1949, between a person Mammal who was permanently absent from Pakistan when the question came up for decision in 1957, and his brothers who continued to live in Pakistan. The latter were entitled to the belief that their rights in the land were squarely based upon the orders made on the 24th May 1950 by the Custodian, followed by the later order of the 3rd March 1951, by which managership of a defined evacuee share MN the property, viz. the share of Mammal was also entrusted to them. Moreover, a further title by acquisition for value made bona fide with the full knowledge and approval of the Barrage authorities had developed in the interval, thus introducing a party with a real interest which according to the law they were entitled to assert in the litigation in support of Nanogram and Leelanau, on all grounds which were available to the latter. For a proper appreciation of these rival contentions, it was clearly essential that each party should be allowed to state the grounds of attack and defense in respect of each other’s claims in detail. The questions thus arising having been ascertained and formulated in the shape of issues, due opportunity might then be provided to all parties to produce evidence in support of their respective cases and thereafter, arguments having been heard for proper appreciation of the questions of fact and law arising, a decision could be given. These are processes with which the Civil Courts are entirely familiar, and the question being one of title in immovable property, whose nature was obviously complicated, a Civil Court was probably the best instrument for its resolution. Nothing of the kind was attempted by the Assistant Custodian. The transferees were not made parties to the proceeding. He recorded a CERTAM amount of evidence, but probably on account of the inferiority of his position to that of the Custodian, he contended himself with saying (1) that the Custodian’s order was ineffective qua the transferred portion of the land, for lack of notice to the transferees, without going on to decide whether it was evacuee property or not, and (2) he merely repeated the grounds advanced by the Custodian, in support of the decision that the balance of the land, which he fixed at 90 acres, was evacuee property. Thus, there was no adjudication by the Assistant Custodian such as the case demanded. G Nor was a proper adjudication attempted by the Custodian whose order in the case is before us in appeal. The appeal before him related merely to the 90 acres which had been declared evacuee by the Assistant Custodian. A new challenge to the title of the transferees in respect of 900 acres was raised by the Custodian himself so moth. The Custodian examined two witnesses, namely, Lai Baths, a Barrage Official and the first transferees, Ch. Rashid Ahmad. He did not obtain from the parties detailed statements of their respective claims, nor did he draw issues. His order which TS before us deals with the following contentions:- H (1) Whether the land was the exclusive property of Mammal or whether it was owned by the joint family of which he was a member? (2) Whether Mammal had an owner’s title in the land or merely that of a grantee who had not paid the price in full? (3) Whether the price paid by the transferee was an adequate price ? As has been seen, the last question did not immediately or substantially arise in the case. The second question was decided on the basis that whatever rights Mammal had in the land would vest in the Custodian since he was admittedly an evacuee. On the first post, the decision of the Custodian proceeds on considerations of Hindu law relevant to ownership by a joint Hindu family. He came to the conclusion that at the time when the disputed land was acquired the three brothers, Mammal, Nanogram and Leelanau possessed only 106 acres of land. Of this, 61 acres had been acquired by them jointly, and this was a factor which the Custodian thought operated against the three brothers having become reconstituted as a joint Hindu Family after the separation of Harman. In the absence of proof on the record to show how much income was derived from these 106 acres of land, the Custodian observed that “it cannot be held that the 990 acres of land which were acquired by Mammal had been purchased with the income of the property jointly owned by the three brothers.” He noted that the record equally did not show that Mammal had any separate source of income apart from that derived from these 106 acres, but he held that it was “for the respondents to show by production of clear evidence, preferably documentary, that Mammal had no other source of income and that all the acquisitions were made by him on behalf of the family and with the help of the income of joint family property.” He further observed that “the respondents have not even attempted to prove” these facts and in the absence of such proof, he could not hold that “Mammal was holding this land on behalf of the joint family and that the same was not his exclusive property.” It is important to note the stress laid by the Custodian upon the absence of evidence on this point which he held to be crucial in relation to the decision of the question before him. An onus of proof was laid, in a proceeding which at best can be described as a side wind, and a decision as to title has been given, on the basis of responsibility to discharge such onus, without any attempt at any stage to bring the question concerned, viz. of joint Hindu family into proper focus, and place it in issue between the parties. Before the Assistant Custodian, the descriptions “Jolt’, and in another place “jot family property” had been applied to the land, but there had been no clear assertion of a joint Hindu family and its property. Having parted with the bulk of the land, and their present interest being to save the balance of 90 acres only for themselves, Nanogram and Leelanau did not have the same concern to save the property from being declared evacuee as the transferees had, and they were not parties before, the Assistant Custodian. At the stage of evidence, therefore, there was no real contest on the question which assumed paramount importance before the Custodian. The Custodian’s order deals with two points of Hindu Law. The point of separation of one member, viz. of Harman, offered no difficulty, as the facts were admitted. The other post, namely, of the existence or otherwise of a nucleus of property, and its surplus income being sufficient to finance fresh acquisitions, resolved itself into a question of determination of the availability of such a surplus from the produce of the joint holding of 106 acres. The onus of proof was upon Leelanau and Nanogram, and it seems plain that a decision contrary not only to their interest, but to the much larger interest of the transferees for, value has been given on this point, though no issue was framed, and no opportunity allowed to produce evidence thereon. The final decision of the Custodian is stated in the following passage:- “The evidence on the record is not sufficient to show that the income of the property jointly owned by the three brothers was sufficient with which about 990 acres of Barrage land could be acquired and as the land in dispute had been acquired in the name of one of the brothers alone, in the absence of evidence to indicate that it was acquired with the help of jot family funds, that land will have to be treated as the separate property of Mammal in whose name it had been so acquired.” This case was argued before the Court for four separate days, and its consideration has caused me a great deal of anxiety. Mr. Mahmud Ah for the appellants, who are transferees from Ch. Rashid Ahmad, argued with great emphasis that the Custodian was wrong in drawing the dispute wholly within the context of the law related to joint Hindu families. He drew our attention to a number of pieces of evidence on the record, which, in his submission went to show that the probabilities strongly favored the conclusion that the acquisition by Mammal of Barrage land was not his personal or separate acquisition, but was in line with the earlier acquisition by the three brothers, that is to say, it was an acquisition on behalf of the members of the previous joint Hindu family remain after the separation of Harman and respective of whether they constituted a new joint Hindu family. He conceded that Mammal had executed a power-of-attorney in favor of Nanogram before he left for India and that in it, he acknowledged that the Barrage lands acquired in his name were joint Hindu family property, although they stood in his name exclusively, but he suggested that the reference to “Jolt Hindu Family ” may be a mere misconception. He pointed out that the fact that Mammal had no separate property of his own should stand in the way of the conclusion that the large sums he had to pay for the Barrage lands were his exclusive responsibility. Such land grants for which the price is to be paid by extended installments, are, moreover, usually acquired out of the income from the land itself} as it is gradually brought under cultivation. Learned counsel referred to statements made before the Assistant Custodian by Nanogram, his brother Leelanau and another Hindu named Autosomal, as well as by a respectable Laminar of the locality, Muhammad Aqua Heidi to the effect that Mammal, Ankara and Leelanau were joint and that the purchases of Barrage land were in fact joint purchases and that the lands used to be looked after jointly and the produce was also appropriated jointly by the family who continued to be joint in residence and mess after the separation of Harman. Ch. Rashid Ahmad also made a statement to the same effect, although his information would not appear to be of the same personal character as that of the three Hindu witnesses and Muhammad Aqua Heidi. In the course of the argument, by search among the papers on the file, Mr. Mahmud Ali was able to produce a receipt for land revenue paid in respect of this land by Nanogram in the year 1946, in support of his contention that Mammal’s interest in the Barrage land was not exclusive. On the basis of these pieces of evidence it was urged with emphasis that it was possible on the evidence to come to the conclusion that the Barrage land had been acquired by all the three brothers, and not by Mammal alone, and this contention was supported by the assertion that the Barrage authorities did not allow land to be entered m multiple names, but preferred that it should be in a single name. Mr. Mahmud Ali pleaded that in a civil case, the burden of proof is capable of being discharged on a balance of probabilities and here the probabilities favored jointless in purchase and enjoyment. I do not propose in this judgment to consider in detail all the arguments presented on the two sides. There has clearly been confusion as to the issues in the case, arising from the fact that no issues were ever framed. The argument of joint ownership had been placed before the Assistant Custodian, who decided the case before him on quite other grounds, viz. that the sale to the transferees could not be touched for lack of notice, and as to the remaining 90 acres, the fact of the land being entered originally in the Barrage papers in the name of Mammal was regarded as sufficient for holding that portion to be evacuee property. The Custodian, on the other hand, viewed the matter wholly in the light of considerations arising out of the law of the joint Hindu Family, without their being any issue relating to, or decision upon, whether there was in fact a joint Hindu Family, or it was merely a case of three Hindu brothers, owning and acquiring property jointly, and being joint in mess with their mother. K Sitting in appeal from a Tribunal such as a Custodian, this Court would not interfere with any decision taken by him on the administrative side, provided it is shown that in reaching the decision the Custodian had satisfied the conditions of the relevant law by taking into consideration and dealing fairly with all the matters which under the law he was required to evaluate in arriving at his decision. But the present is not a case of that kind. It is a case involving what is strictly a judicial question, namely, the demarcation of rival titles in an existing property. It was clearly expressed by the Custodian in the following words: “whether this land was the exclusive property of Mammal or whether it was owned by the joint family of which he was one of the members.” Substantially and essentially, the question is one which lay between Mammal the evacuee and the other members of his family who were non-evacuees. The Custodian could only be vested with that share of the property which belonged to Mammal Under the law, the power of deciding upon the exact share was undoubtedly reserved to the Custodian but as was remarked at the outset of this judgment, the Custodian had all the powers of a Civil Court to investigate the matter, and he also had the power, when the question lay between an evacuee and a non-evacuee, to refer the matter for decision to a Civil Court. In other words, it was open to the Custodian to deal with the case as if it wear a suit relating to title in land, according to the recognized procedure of the Civil Courts. In the alternative, he could have referred the contesting parties to a Civil Court for decision of the suit. The requirement was that justice should be done. The case was such that, except by the full procedure, justice could not be done. The procedures followed were such as to make it plain that in this case, justice was not seen to be done. M In an appeal from a Tribunal such as a Custodian this Court does not substitute its own view of evidence for that formed by the Custodian, unless the conclusion of the Tribunal be vitiated by some grave departure from either the maximum requirements of procedure for the doing of justice between the parties, or unless the conclusion upon a point of law or even on a post of fact is vitiated by a similar departure from accepted principles of the admission and evaluation of evidence, or of natural justice and the requirements of reason. Mr. Mahmud Ali has pressed upon us that we should upon the available evidence come to the conclusion that Mammal and his brother did not form a joint Hindu family, but nevertheless were joint in mess and property and the Barrage land was such property. As has been remarked already the Custodian treated the case as one falling exclusively within the law of the joint Hindu family. To concede the argument of Mr. Mahmud Ali would therefore involve not only conclusion upon the evidence contrary to that reached by the Custodian but also a decision on a post which was never before Custodian. That would be an action in excess of the limited jurisdiction which this Court exercises in respect of Tribunals such as the Custodian, but in my opinion the decision of the Custodian in this case cannot be allowed to stand for the reason that it is decision taken by a procedure which was wholly inadequate for the doing of justice in the case, and therefore it is appropriate for this Court to exercise in the present case the limited powers available in certiorari, namely, to quash the order and direct that the matter should be decided as indicated above; Le. by the full procedure of a civil suit within the powers given to the Custodian under the relevant law. N I would therefore allow this appeal and setting aside the order of the Custodian, would remand the case to him for a fresh decision, which may be made in one of the following forms; the case may be heard and decided by the Custodian or one of his subordinates, but in the manner of a civil suit allowing the parties the usual facilities to set out their cases and the reliefs they seek in full, thereafter, drawing issues and giving the parties adequate opportunity to lead their evidence upon the questions arising, Alternatively, if the Custodian so thinks fit, he may refer the whole case to a Civil Court for decision of questions other than, those e.g. confirmation of sale of evacuee property, lying, within his special jurisdiction. The error being one of procedure, I would leave the parties to bear their own costs. S. A. Rahman, J-I agree. Fable-Akbar, J.-I agree. Seymour Rahman, J.-I agree, B. Z. Haikus, J.-I have had the advantage of reading the judgment which my Lord the Chief Justice intends to deliver in this case. I find that my Lord is unable to entertain the plea that even if the land MN dispute was not joint family property it was jointly owned by the brothers because this plea had not been taken before the Assistant Custodian or the Custodian, but my Lord has remanded the case on the ground that in the procedure adopted by the Custodian “Justice was not seen to be done.” have studied the judgment of my Lord carefully in order to find out what exactly are the defects in the procedure adopted by the Custodian. I find that the defects are contained in the three consecutive paragraphs beginning with : “If the Assistant Custodian had acted under these powers.” with respect to the Assistant Custodian the defect pointed out is that he did not frame any issues and did not make the transferees parties. There is at the same time an observation that he “recorded a certain amount of evidence” which may suggest that he did not record all the evidence that was produced. So far as the Custodian is concerned the defect in his procedure is that “he did not OCTAM from the parties detailed statements of their respective claims nor did he draw issues” and that he examined only two witnesses a Barrage official and the first transferee Ch. Rashid Ahmad. No plea had been raised by the appellants either in their petition for special leave or at the time when the petition for special leave was argued or in the concise statement or in the arguments before us that there was any defect in the procedure adopted by the Custodian. A question of defect of procedure is always a question of prejudice. Obviously when there is no point made of any defect of procedure by the party there is no prejudice to the party. With great respect I do not in the first place see any ground for our raising this question so moth. It is at the same time to be remembered that the respondents had no opportunity of meeting this point, and it will not be proper, apart from all other considerations, to order a remand without there BMG any opportunity to the respondents to argue the post. Also TT may not be possible on the present record to decide the question as to defect of procedure satisfactorily for the record that is printed has reference only to the pleas raised and documents which related to this plea may not have been printed. However, I have gone through the printed record and I have little doubt that no fault can be found with the procedure of the Custodian. Let me state the facts in brief in so far as they relate to the question under discussion. The application that the property m dispute was not evacuee property which had been filed before the Assistant Custodian related to the whole of 990 acres. The application stated that 900 acres had already been transferred to Rashid Ahmad, but as the declaration by the Custodian dated 23-2-1956 as to their being evacuee property affected the lability of the applicants they had filed the application in relation to these 900 acres too. Before the Assistant Custodian only the Rehabilitation Department had been cited as the opposite-party. Evidence was produced by the applicants Nanogram and Lila ram before the Assistant Custodian and there never has been any complaint by them (they are parties even in appeal before us and have filed a concise statement and also argued their case) that there was any lack of full opportunity of producing evidence. That no issue was framed could hardly create prejudice for the applicants for on the merits the only fact to be proved was that the property in dispute was joint family property and the absence of an issue did not in any way prevent the applicants from producing evidence on this post. A good deal of evidence was produced. Six witnesses were examined; the original partnership deed between the four brothers, a number of sale deeds jointly in favor of three brothers, a number of receipts of payments to Barrage authorities and also the previous orders in favor of the family made by the Custodian were produced. It is not suggested that there was any further evidence which could be produced, but which for some misunderstanding was not produced. Ch. Rashid Ahmad the transferee though not made party was examined as a witness by the applicants. The Assistant Custodian dismissed the application with respect to 90 acres, but with respect to 900 acres he said that the applicants had no locus standi to apply as they had already transferred. However, he held that the order of the Custodian of 23-2-1956 declaring these 900 acres to be evacuee was illegal as it was passed without notice to the transferee. Against the order of the Assistant Custodian only Nanogram etc. filed an appeal. This appeal related only to 90 acres. When the matter came up for hearing before the Custodian he was Prima facie not satisfied with the order that had been passed by the Assistant Custodian and in the first instance he ordered that Ch. Rashid Ahmad the transferee as well as Choudhury Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan to whom the land had been transferred, by Rashid Ahmad be made parties. For the purpose of understanding the order of the Custodian which I am going to reproduce it may be stated here that these two were henceforth shown as respondents Nos. and 2 in the appeal. When notice was served on these two respondents they appeared and objected to their being imp leaded at all on the ground that there being no prayer in the appeal with respect to 900 acres of land. The Custodian then decided to act- so moth in the matter and directed a notice under section 43(4) against these respondents for showing cause as to why the order of the Assistant Custodian in the favor should not be set aside. Following is the order which the Custodian passed:- ‘Mr. Dingo Mai, who has appeared for respondents Nos. and 2, says that as the appellants have not made any prayer in their appeal with regard to 900 acres of land, transferred in favor of these respondents, they should not have been made a party in this case. At this stage, it is not necessary for me to give any decision on this post, but with a view to meet the objection raised by Mr. Dingo Mai, I direct, under section 43, clause (4) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. that a notice be issued to these respondents to show cause why the order dated the 19th December 1957, passed by the Assistant Custodian, Hyderabad, so far as it effects their rights, should not be set aside. This notice may be served formally on Mr. Diagonal on behalf of these respondents, who may, FHE so desires, file a written reply on the next date. This case is adjourned to the 25th September, 1959, for further proceedings. A separate file should be opened with regard to the notice which I have ordered should be issued under section 43, clause (4) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957.” It will be observed that by this order the Custodian issued a notice to “respondents 1 and 2” for showing cause why the order of the Assistant Custodian should not be set aside and gave a direction to Mr. Gomal who appeared for them to file a written reply if the respondents so desired. A separate file was then prepared in relation to the notice served on the respondents. On the 29th October 1959, it was brought to the notice of the Custodian that Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan had already transferred the whole of his land in dispute in favor of Sheikh and Begum Jazz Ahmad and Ch. Muhammad Abdullah. The Custodian ordered that these three should also be made parties and that notice to all of them should be issued “on the same Ines as the notice ordered to be served by means of my order dated 29-8-1959.” On the next date ‘that is, 30th August 1959, Mr. Diagonal who had already appeared for Ch. Rashid Ahmad and Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan accepted notice on behalf of the other respondents as well. Whether actually a reply was filed by Mr. Diagonal we do not know because as already stated there BMG no objection on this ground the relevant documents have not been printed. As regards the opportunity which the Custodian gave to the respondents for leading evidence similarly we have not got the day today orders, but it becomes clear on what just by chance appears on this record that there was an opportunity to produce evidence and the respondents closed their case. So far as the documents with the Barrage authorities are concerned the Custodian had himself made through inquiries and Lai Baths the Clerk of the Barrage Department had been examined under the orders of the Custodian, but Ch. Muhammad Rashid appeared as a witness on behalf of the respondents and made a statement which covers about seven typed pages. Mr. Gomal who was appearing on behalf of all the respondents then made the following statement:- “I do not wish to produce any more evidence and close my case. With great respect I am unable to see that the Custodian did anything which was not consistent with the proper administration of justice. He found that the Assistant Custodian had not decided the questions whether 900 acres of land transferred to Ch. Rashid Ahmad were evacuee while the Custodian had found this property to be evacuee by his order of 23-2-1956. That order had been found to be not binding on the transferee for want of notice, but the matter had to be decided. The Custodian would have failed in his duty if he had taken no further notice of this area of 990 acres. So he made the transferees parties in the appeal in order to decide the question finally. The transferees objected that the appeal did not relate to these 900 acres. The Custodian, to avoid any technical objection, started proceedings so moth - under section 43 and as is required by section 43(4) he served a notice on the transferees and started a separate file. In the notice he called upon the transferees to show cause why the order of the Assistant Custodian should not be set aside, and he also gave the transferees opportunity to file a written reply. He then allowed them to lead evidence. The respondents led evidence and closed their case. The point before the Custodian so far as facts are concerned was only one, that is, whether the property was joint family property. This is the only post on the merits which was argued before the Assistant Custodian, and the Custodian. I do not find it possible under the circumstances to say that there was any denial of the principles of justice. No particular purpose would have been served by framing a specific issue on the question as to whether the property in dispute was joint family property. Everybody concerned knew that that was the only question of fact evolved. As already stated an objection as to procedure has force only if prejudice be caused unless there be some strict statutory provision which vitiates proceedings in case of noncompliance and there is no such statutory provision here. But as a matter of fact there was no defect in procedure at all. That is why no grievance was ever made by the present appellants that they did not have a fair opportunity of putting their case before the Custodian. The case was argued before the Custodian for a number of days. There were two preliminary objections and there was exhaustive discussion on whether the property m dispute was joint family property. Yet no objection was ever taken to the propriety of the procedure adopted by the Custodian. The same Mr. Diagonal who had appeared before the Custodian then filed the petition for special leave, and it was he who filed concise statement when the case came up for hearing before this Court. He did not in the grounds of petition for leave refer to any defect in procedure nor did he argue this matter when leave to appeal was granted. He filed a concise statement the last paragraph of which enumerates the grounds of attack on the order of the Custodian. These grounds are fifteen and cover five typed pages. Although there are a large number of legal questions raised in these grounds there is not a single reference to any lack of opportunity before the Custodian or to any defect in procedure. x Nor was the post as already stated argued at the hearing. With respect to such defects in procedure the settled rule is that they can always be waived and had there been any defect in procedure it would surely have been waived by the fact that no objection was ever taken at any stage. Even if this was an appeal in an ordinary civil suit I would not in the circumstances be prepared to remand the case on the ground that the principles of natural justice had not been adhered to. But we are dealing with a case of special appeal under Article 160 of the late Constitution which in accordance with the view taken by this Court in a number of cases and by my Lord the Chief Justice in the Judgment in this very case has a very limited scope. My Lord has posted out that interference in such appeals is not possible unless “the conclusion of the Tribunal be vitiated by some grave departure from either the minimum requirements of procedure for the dog of justice between the parties, or unless the conclusion upon a post of law or even on a post of fact is vitiated by a similar departure from accepted principles of the admission and evaluation of evidence or of natural justice and the requirements of reason.” In Muhammad Said v. The Election Petitions Tribunal (1) which appears to be the first case where the jurisdiction exercised under Article 160 was explained it was said:- “I may state at the very outset that the supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 160 is a restricted jurisdiction and an appeal to evoke it will not succeed where a special Tribunal like the Election Tribunal, has functioned within the spirit and the intention of the statute that created it and while so functioning has made a real and honest endeavor to judge facts on the merits of the evidence and to apply the law to them. A finding of fact thus arrived at, however, erroneous, will not be scrutinized or reviewed by this Court, and even if an error of law be committed by the Tribunal that will not be considered to be a sufficient ground for interference unless the law so misunderstood or misapplied raises some general question of fundamental importance to the proper functioning of the Tribunal or the decision of the case.” In ATA Allah Malik v. Custodian of Evacuee Property (2) this judgment was relied upon by a majority of this Court for dismissing an appeal under circumstances which call for attention. An application had been put in before a Deputy Custodian for confirmation of a transfer by a transferee from an evacuee and the allottee of the property in dispute had been made a party. The application was rejected by the Deputy Custodian on the ground of want of income-tax clearance certificate, but permission was given for revival of the application on production of such certificate. The allottee appealed against this order to the Custodian and the Custodian set aside the order permitting revival. Subsequently the transferee filed an application for revival before the Deputy Custodian (his successor) without imp leading the allottee as a party and without bringing it to the notice of the Deputy Custodian that the order permitting revival had been set aside by the Custodian. The Deputy Custodian enter tamed the application for revival on the basis of the order (of his predecessor) permitting revival, but on the merits dismissed the application. On appeal by the transferee in which to the allottee was not made a party the sale was confirmed by the Additional Custodian. The allottee had become entitled to the transfer of the house and had secured a provisional transfer order, and he came to know from the Settlement authorities of the proceedings taken by the transferee. He then approached the Custodian in revision attacking the whole proceedings as fraudulent because the order of TFE Custodian disallowing revival was suppressed, and he was deliberately not made a party to the proceedings, and also as without jurisdiction, because the Deputy Custodian had in the second application simply proceeded to revive the old application on the basis of the previous order of the Deputy Custodian which had in fact been set aside in appeal. The allottee posted out further that there was no proof of payment or adequacy of consideration. The Additional Custodian had not considered the question of payment of consideration at all though assuming payment he had determined its adequacy. The allottee at the same time attacked the proceedings on the ground that he was a necessary party under the rules and had not been imp leaded at any stage and also contended that the application for confirmation was time-barred. The Custodian did not go MTO the question of fraud and did not go into whether the revival was competent. As to limitation he considered only whether the first application which had been dismissed for want of a certificate was within time for the second application being for revival of the first no question of limitation arose with respect to it. As to payment of consideration the Custodian received from the transferee on the last day on which the case was argued before him an affidavit which had been sworn a few years earlier, and without giving the slightest opportunity to the allottee to rebut the affidavit or to call the deponent in the witness-box as he was entitled to, held that the sale price had been paid in the office of the Registrar before the deed was presented for registration though it was not paid before the Registrar. On this finding he dismissed the application in revision. When the appeal was argued before us the transferee contended that though the revival was not competent it could be regarded as a fresh application. But as a fresh application it was time-barred by some years. There never had been any application for extension of time though section 5 of the Limitation Act had been made applicable by a rule. The Custodian had never considered the question of extension of time because he had regarded the revival to be competent and had not acted on the basis that this was a second application. His judgment did not deal with whether the revival was competent or whether there was fraud, although on the first question the transferee had no answer before us and as to the second the plain facts were that a revival had been asked for on the basis of an order set aside in appeal, the order of the Custodian had been suppressed, and the allottee had not been made a party. He also did not deal with whether the proceedings were vitiated by failure to imp lead the allottee who was entitled to be mm pleaded under rule 17 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules and who was also entitled to be imp leaded in the application for revival as he was a party to the original application of which revival was sought. Regarded as a fresh application the second application was barred by a few years and even before us there was no statement as to what could possibly constitute sufficient cause. In fact a finding as to sufficient cause was essential before the Custodian could have jurisdiction to entertain an application for confirmation. Important property rights were involved. The Custodian was admittedly function mg as a judicial tribunal and not in any administrative capacity for otherwise an appeal under Article 160 would not have been competent. On these facts a majority of this Court held that in accordance with the view taken in Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal the order should not be interfered with. In order that I may not be misunderstood let me state that my own view as to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in an appeal under Article 160 of the late Constitution is not in accord with the view taken MN Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal. Article 160 provides for an appeal without any Imitation as to grounds of interference. Where the word appeal alone is used without any qualification it means a rehearing of the matter by a superior tribunal that being the ordinary connotation of “appeal”. When the Legislature intends to limit the grounds on which an appellate Tribunal can interfere it says so. In section 100 C. P. C. the provision is that a second appeal will be on questions of law and procedure only. In section 96 however which relates to first appeals all that is said 1s that an appeal will lie and the effect of absence of words of limitation is that the appellate Court decides the matter afresh like the trial Court. In section 411-A Cr. P. C. where the intention was that an appeal against the order of a single Judge of the High Court appeal should lie on limited grounds it is so stated. There are enumerable enactments where the word appeal only is used. No limitation can in those cases be read into the provision and this rule applies to the jurisdiction conferred by Article 160 also. I cannot, with great respect see any reason for attributing to the Constituent Assembly that enacted the Constitution the intention that the Supreme Court should have jurisdiction to interfere on limited grounds. If that was its intention it would have said so. In the opening words of the passage from Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal, which I have reproduced above, the words used are “supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is a restricted jurisdiction” which would show that the Supreme Court would have no jurisdiction to interfere except on grounds stated in the passage, but in the latter portion of the passage it is said that an erroneous finding of fact “will not be scrutinized or reviewed by this Court “and an error of law will not be considered to be a sufficient ground for interference’ which words do not relate to jurisdiction, but to the propriety of interference on certain grounds. I do not think the latter portion of the passage regards an interference with an erroneous finding of fact or law as an act without jurisdiction. If it does so regard it I express a respectful dissent. An order without jurisdiction is a void order which has no existence in the eye of law and which every Court is bound to treat as a nullity however superior the Tribunal that passed TT. It may be urged that even if the jurisdiction to set aside an order on any ground of fact, law or procedure existed there was no bar to the Court adopting a practice of not interfering except on certain well recognised grounds. But if the jurisdiction which Article 160 granted to the Supreme Court was not subject to any limitations can the Court by its practice create any limitation? That would be legislation which is beyond the province of a Court. If this Court refused to consider grounds which under the provision that created the appellate jurisdiction were legal grounds that would be a failure to exercise jurisdiction and failure to discharge! its duty towards a litigant whom the law has given the right to) appeal on those grounds. It should not be referred from what have said above that I regard all practices by which we refuse to entertain appeal on certain ports as illegal. They are permissible, not on the basis that the jurisdiction of this Court to hear appeals can be limited to any grounds by the practice of Court but because, in cases where appeal lies by leave only, this Court has a discretion to grant or not to grant leave and there is nothing in the Constitution regulating the exercise of this discretion. While granting leave therefore we can confine the appeal to any grounds we regard proper. There is no bar to our doing that. This in my opinion is the only logical way in which the practice of this Court limiting the grounds of appeal in spite of absence of any limitation in the provision creating jurisdiction can be justified. But it is only in cases where appeal lies only by leave that this can be done and in cases where an appeal less as of right and there is no limitation as to grounds in the relevant provision, this Court, in my opinion, would have no jurisdiction to refuse TC entertain a particular ground. Suppose a District Judge hearing a first appeal refuses to entertain a particular ground. For stance he says he will not question the determination of market value of property by the trial Court. His order will be set aside not only in appeal but, quite easily, even in certiorari. The Supreme Court, while dealing with an appeal which lie; as of right will be committing a similar mistake if it refused to consider a particular ground. The party has a right to a decision, of this Court on that post. Suppose the Legislature specifically mentioned two matters which could constitute grounds for an appeal. If the appellate Court refused to consider one of the two grounds there will be a failure to exercise jurisdiction. When the Legislature grants a right of appeal without limiting the grounds it amounts to saying that appeal will be on all grounds and a refusal of the appellate Court to consider a ground of appeal in such a case is like the refusal of Court to consider a ground specifically mentioned in the provision granting right of appeal. An appeal, it should be remembered, is the night of a party. That is what distinguishes it from a proceeding which is generally called a revision, and which too is a review of an order by a superior tribunal, but which is a power granted to the superior tribunal which it may exercise so moth or on application. I now come to the merits of this appeal. I am of the opinion that on the record the property in dispute is proved to be joint family property and the finding of the Custodian is vitiated by the omission to take MTO consideration material evidence including a receipt of the year 1946 which is a receipt for payment in respect of barrage land and is in the name of Nanogram alone. I proceed to state my reasons for the finding. The first document of importance is the partition deed dated 20th May 1940,-which records a partition between Harman and the other three sons of Amanda. Admittedly the family was on that date a Hindu joint family. The question that arises in connection U with this document is whether this was a partition by which only one brother separated and the other three remained joint or whether the other three also separated inter se. When one coarsened separates from others there is no presumption whether the remaining members of the joint family remained joint ' or separated inter se and the question is to be decided on the facts of each particular case. The important fact in connection with the document with which we are dealing is that by it no share was granted to MST. Poonyibai the mother of the coarseness and the widow of Amanda who was entitled on partition to a share equivalent to that of one of the brothers. This in my opinion is strong evidence of the fact that the other three brothers, that 1s, Shameful, Nanogram and Lila ram remained joint. Had there been a partition even between these three brothers there is no reason why Poonyibai should not have been allotted a share. There is no explanation o fie red on behalf of the respondents as to why, if there was a complete partition MST. Poonjibai received no share except that the brothers may not be intending to give a share to the mother. But the presumption is of honest and bona fide conduct, and we cannot assume in the absence of some evidence that the brothers were depriving the mother of her due share. From 1940 to 1942 the three brothers made four joint purchases which are evidenced by four registered sale deeds. These documents are some indication of the fact that the family was at that time a joint family. It has been argued on behalf of the respondents that in these documents the word“joint family’ nowhere appear, and these deeds are simple joint purchases in favor of the three brothers. In this connection there are two facts to which attention may be drawn. The first is that in the partition deed dated 20-5-1940 also the word “joint family’ now here appears though admittedly this was a deed of partition between the members of the Hindu joint family. All that is said in this partition deed is that the land “belongs to all our brothers jointly’. The executants of this deed apparently regarded this as a sufficient statement of the fact that they constitute a joint Hindu family. The other fact to be mentioned is that the word much invariably occurs against the name of Mammal who was next eldest after Harman and who was on separation of Harman entitled to become the karma. It was vehemently urged on behalf of the appellants before us that the word much meant a karma. On behalf of the respondents it was alleged that much only meant a leading person. In the appeals relating to land reforms cases which we have heard at Karachi and in which judgment has not yet been delivered a serious question arose as to how a karma was described in the Sindhi Language, and it was accepted by both parties that he was described as much. It may be that the word much has not exactly the same connotation as much, but it may be that it has the same connotation. It has not been explained why it should be necessary to state that a person is the leading member of the family if the family is not joint. I would, therefore, under the circumstances not make any adverse inference from the fact that the word “joint family’ has not appeared in these sale deeds. ' On 21-2-1948 Mammal executed a general power of attorney in his capacity as the Manager of the Hindu joint family in favor of his younger brother. Nanogram in order that he may manage the joint lands. At the time when this power of attorney was executed there was no evacuee law yet in force in the Sind area the first Evacuee Ordinance having come into force on 20-10- 1948. It has been contended on behalf of the respondents that the parties may have foreseen the evacuee law which was enacted after some time and may have deliberately shown Mammal as Manager of the HMD joint family. One cannot, therefore, regard this power of attorney as a strong piece of evidence, but consider mg it along with other evidence it may have some probative force. The next item of evidence is the receipt (Ex. A-5) of the year 1946 obtained by Nanogram in his own name for payment of an installment in respect of barrage lands. This is an important; document for no explanation has been offered on behalf of the respondents as to why Nanogram should have obtained this receipt if he was not a co-sharer in the barrage lands. Now it is possible ' to argue that Mammal may have only been a beamier in respect of the two shares of his brother and this may not have been joint family property, but if the three brothers had already separatedtherewas.no need for the purchase of shares in the name of Mammal alone. It has been argued that the rules for the purchase of barrage lands: permitted sale only to one person. But there was no difficulty in purchasing the land in three separate names. This receipt is indicative of the land being held not by Mammal alone, but for himself and others and along with other circumstances it is evidence of the existence of the Hindu joint family. Before I refer in this connection to the orders passed by the. Custodian at different times in respect of this family I have to refer to the oral evidence produced in this case. Nanogram and Lila ram applicants in addition to making their own statements in the witness-box about the family BMG joint produced two respectable seminars of the locality Autosomal and Muhammad Aqua Heidi who stated that even after the separation of Harman the family continued to be joint in residence as well as in estate. The mother of Nanogram and Lila ram was also said to be living with them. There is no rebuttal of this evidence. I now come to the orders passed by the Custodian which have been relied upon by the appellants as constitute a bar to the reconsideration of whether they constitute a joint family, but which though they do not in my opinion constitute such a bar would have evidential value for proof of the fac tum of joint family. The first order to be referred to is the one passed by the Custodian on the 7th March 1950 in the appeal of Nanogram and Lila ram who claimed that 1600 acres of agricultural land including 900 acres of barrage land belonged to a joint family consisting of Nanogram, Lila ram, Mammal and Poonjibai. Mammal it was said had gone to India and in respect of the income already accrued from Mammal’s share of land the applicants were prepared to render accounts to the Custodian. On this application the Custodian last Lila ram m Appeal No. 247 and Nanogram the in Appeal No. 249 are along with their mother roonjibai and the brother Mammal members of a Hindu joint family. They own m all about 1600 acres of agricultural land including 900 acres of Barrage land. ] Lila ram and Nanogram and their mother are proved to be bona fide residents of Pakistan and have been managing the lands themselves; It is admitted that Mammal is an evacuee. His share of /4th in the joint family property is evacuee property. I refer the case of Nanogram, Lila ram and MST. Poonjibai to Government under section 3 of Ordinance XV of 1949. The two appellants are willing to manage the evacuee share of the property for and on behalf of the Custodian and to render accounts. They agree also to the partitioning off the fourth share which is evacuee property which the Rehabilitation Authority can be permitted to do under section 20(2)(a), Ordinance XV of 1949.” It would be observed that in this order joint family had been accepted and the case which was referred to the Government includes Poonjibai who is it was not a joint family would have no interest in the land. The Government having agreed to declare Nanogram, Lila ram and Poonjibai to be not evacuees the Custodian passed the following order on the 24th May 1950. “In accordance with the decision of the Central Government I hold Nanogram, Lila ram sons and Poonjibai widow of Shamans to be not evacuees I allow the appeal accordingly.” On the 3rd March 1951; the Custodian appointed Nanogram and Lila ram to be managers of the share in the joint family property of Mammal the evacuee. In this order the Custodian stated that if the share of the evacuee exceeded one-half he was entitled under section 10 of Ordinance XV of 1949 to take over the joint family property, but in this case his share was only one-fourth. It would be observed that the share of Mammal ‘would be one-, fourth only on the assumption that this was joint family property and Poonjibai was entitled to one-fourth share in it on partition. On the 13th of July 1954, Mr. Manner Adam the successor-in-office of Mr. Akbar Hussain, Custodian, who had passed the order which has f already been referred to, set aside the order of the appointment of Nanogram and Lila ram as managers and by the same order directed a notice to be issued for determine the nature of the property of Mammal. On 23rd of February, '1956, Mr. Manner Adam again found the family to be a “joint family and Mammal to have MN it only a one-fourth share. However, he came to conclusion that 1028 acres of barrage land were self acquired property of Mammal. The following paragraph in his judgment relates to this matter “The next point is regarding the 1028 acres of Barrage land which stood exclusively in the name of Mammal. I think there is considerable force in the contention of the Rehabilitation Authority that these lands were self-acquired property Beam#fall p.ND must be treated as his exclusive property, it appears-from the record that these lands stood in the exclusive name of End’mural at a time when other property stood MN the name of h7s "father and other brothers. It also appears TL a1 Mammal 'of himself executed a transfer of 900 acres of this land in favor of his brother Nanogram on 21-6-1949. These two facts conclusively establish that the property was dealt with by Mammal exclusively and that the other members of the joint family had no concern with it. The 1028 acres of Barrage land, therefore, is held to belong to Mammal exclusively, his brothers or others having no interest in it, and is held to be evacuee property. - It was this order of the Custodian which necessitated the submission of an application for a declaration that the barrage lands were not evacuee property. While the above-mentioned orders do not constitute res-judicata because the question as to whether a joint family existed, was never judicially determined by the Custodian, they still contain admissions by the Custodian as to the existence of a joint family, and they show a consistent course of conduct on the party of the Custodian recognizing the joint family. In proceeding's for a declaration as to the non-evacuee nature of a particular property the real opposite-party is the Custodian himself for evacuee property vests in. him though the law has made him a judge in his own cause, and he can himself decide whether property is evacuee or not. Statements made by him, therefore, amount to admissions 'and thus considered they are valuable pieces of evidence. The Custodian may show that the admissions were based on a misconception and the burden on him of exp laming the admission may possibly be lighter than the burden on an ordinary litigant who had made an admission, but it cannot be urged that his admissions are without value as evidence. To sum up I find the following circumstances in support of the existence of a joint family (1) The partition deed of 1940 in which no share was granted to Poonjibai though admittedly she was a member of the joint family. (h) Four purchases from 1940 to 1942 in the name of three brothers. - (I'm) The receipt Ex. A-5 of 1946 relating to Bear - lands in the name of Nanogram alone. 'Se (iv) The fact that the family was joint in mess and its property too was held jointly. (v) The various orders of the Custodian in which the family had been found to be joint family and in which the share of Mammal was accepted as one-fourth. The learned Custodian had while discussing the question of joint family not referred to receipt Ex. A-5 or to the evidentiary value of the admissions contained in the previous orders of the Custodian. His finding was thus vitiated by omission to consider material evidence so that even applying the tests me.one in Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal IIS.augment would be label to be set aside. I would allow TL, n.appeal and/ grant a declaration that the property in dispute is not evacuee! property. I would leave the parties to bear their costs. Order of the Court In accordance with the view of the majority we allow this appeal and setting aside the order of Custodian, remand the case to him for a fresh decision. We leave the parties to bear their own costs. A.H Ap peal allowed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): Judgment Cornelius, C. J.-This appeal is directed against an order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated the 29th July 1960. Leave to appeal was granted by this Court on the 30th November 1960. Under the Constitution of 1956 such an appeal was competent, but under the present Constitution the power of this Court to admit appeals is confined to judgments and orders of the High Court. On this ground, a preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the respondent that this Court had no jurisdiction to decide this appeal. It is clear that in the absence of an express provision in the new Constitution to that effect, this appeal does not abate. The appellants were entitled under the Constitution of 1956 to seek special leave to appeal from this Court, and when such leave was granted, the right became a vested right to have the decision of the Tribunal appealed from examined by the Court. There is nothing in the new Constitution which can operate to take away a right so vested. Again by virtue of Article 250 of the present Constitution, the repeal of a law effected by that Constitution is not to affect anything already done or suffered under that law. One of the laws so repealed was the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, which had the effect of keeping the previous Constitution of 1956 in operation, in the relevant, respect but at sub- Constitutional level. Consequently, this appeal having been competently admitted by this Court under power derived from the previous Constitution, in the absence of a provision for abatement, this Court clearly has jurisdiction to proceed with end to decide this appeal. The subject-matter consists of 900 acres (902 acres, 16 funds to be exact) of land situated in the area commanded by the Lloyd Barrage m Sind, and it is common ground that at present, the land stands transferred to the three appellants, Sheikh LAZ Ahmad, Begum jazz Ahmad and Ch. Abdullah Khan. These appellants were transferees in 1955 from the first appellant, Ch. Sir Muhammad Zafrulluh Khan, to whom the land had been transferred in 1951-52 by Ch. Rashid Ahmad who is also a respondent in this appeal. Ch. Rashid Ahmad in his turn had obtained a transfer of the land from the respondent Nanogram on the 9th February 1950, and Nanogram himself had taken the land on transfer on the 23rd June 1949 from his brother Mammal, who immigrated to India thereafter. The original grant was made in the name of Mammal, and the subsequent transfers were all duly made with the consent of the Barrage authorities and mutation of names was duly sanctioned on each occasion. A short account of the various proceedings before the Evacuee Property authorities is desirable. Mammal and Nanogram who have already been mentioned had two other brothers Harman and Leelanau, who with their mother Sarmatia Poonjibai constituted a joint Hindu Family. Harman in 1940 took his share of the Jolt Family Property and separated from them,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): various proceedings before the Evacuee Property authorities is desirable. Mammal and Nanogram who have already been mentioned had two other brothers Harman and Leelanau, who with their mother Sarmatia Poonjibai constituted a joint Hindu Family. Harman in 1940 took his share of the Jolt Family Property and separated from them, and he and his affairs are outside the sphere of consideration in this judgment. The three other brothers continued to live jointly with their mother, although TT is a question whether they were once again constituted as a Jolt Hindu Family after the rupture caused by the separation of Harman. It is in evidence that these three brothers acquired substantial areas of land subsequently, but did so in their joint names, and not as a joint Hindu family. After the departure of Mammal to India, the two remaining brothers Nanogram and Leelanau applied to the Custodian in 1950 for declarations that they were not evacuees, and that three-fourths of the family property, 1e. excluding the share of Mammal, the evacuee, should be declared non-evacuee property. Details of the property were given, which included the land here in question. The Custodian referred the matter to the Centra! Government and following receipt of orders on the 24th May 1950, he made an order allowing “their appeal’. There was in fact no appeal. The order is silent as to the property, but that is maternal, for any property which can be shown to belong to the persons who had been declared to be non-evacuees would clearly be non-evacuee property. At the time when the petition was presented, the transfer to Ch. Rashid Ahmad had not yet taken place. It took place on the 9th February 1950, and the order of the Custodian aforesaid was made on the 24th May s 1950. Later, the same Custodian by order dated the 3rd March 1951 allowed an application by Nanogram, Leelanau and Poonjibai to be appointed managers of the share of Mammal, but imposed certain conditions, one being that the allottees should not have raised any objection to their managership. In 1955, a successor Custodian issued notice to these persons to show cause why “the order of Mr. Akbar Hussain dated 3rd March 1951 regarding management of property belonging to Nanogram Shades, and others may not be reviewed.” (It appears that the Rehabilitation Commissioner had also moved the Custodian in this behalf as well as to determine the nature of the property, although the order eventually male, in two places states that it was a so moth proceeding). The Custodian heard counsel on behalf of Nanogram, etc. as well as counsel for the “Administration”’ (Rehabilitation Authorities). He found that 1,082 acres of Barrage land, “other property stood in the name of his father and other brothers, were sufficient to establish conclusively that the Barrage land belonged to Mammal exclusively, the Custodian by order dated the 23rd February 1956 declared all the Barrage land to be evacuee property. He had earlier removed Nanogram, etc. from managership of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): stood in the name of his father and other brothers, were sufficient to establish conclusively that the Barrage land belonged to Mammal exclusively, the Custodian by order dated the 23rd February 1956 declared all the Barrage land to be evacuee property. He had earlier removed Nanogram, etc. from managership of Mammal’s share, and this order too was also confirmed. Later, on the 15th March 1956, when it was brought to his notice that “the area of Barrage land in the name of Mammal was only 900 acres,” the Custodian refused to amend his previous order, saying that he relied on the figure of 1,082 acres furnished by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. An incident which had occurred earlier as that in November 1951, the Deputy Custodian declared Nanogram to be an “intending evacuee” and also declared his property in Pakistan to be evacuee property. The latter part of his order was set aside in appeal by the Additional Custodian on the ground that the necessary condition for declaring the property of an intending evacuee to be evacuee property was not satisfied. This order was maintained in revision by the Custodian. Since their lands had been ordered to be treated as evacuee property, Nanogram and Leelanau became entitled to seek a decision on the post under section 18 of the Ordinance of 1949, and they moved such an application before the Assistant Custodian, who made an order thereon the 19th December 1957. With reference to the 900 acres of Barrage land, which had been transferred to Ch. Rashid Ahmad, the Assistant Custodian held that this land could not be held to be evacuee property in 1956, “as provisions of section 36, subsection (4) of Ordinance No. XV of 1949 corresponding to section 43 (4) of the present Act were not complied with,” and therefore any order passed “affecting this portion of land would be against natural justice and also altogether illegal”’ This defect did not however appear MN relation to the balance of 90 acres of Barrage land with which the order was concerned. The Assistant Custodian held that the order in review made by the Custodian was free of defect in respect of these 90 acres which were still held in their possession by Nanogram and Leelanau. He made a brief examination of the evidence led in relation to the proprietorship of this land and relying on the fact that the name in the Barrage papers was that of Mammal alone as owner, he finally maintained the view already expressed by the Custodian that as to 90 acres of the Barrage land, it must be held to be evacuee property, and had been rightly treated as such. It should be mentioned that as before the Custodian, so before the Assistant Custodian, Ch. Rashid Ahmad was not made a party. Against the assistant Custodian’s order, an appeal was brought, not by the Rehabilitation Authorities, but by Nanogram, Leelanau and their mother Poonjibai, for the purpose of saving their three-fourths share in the 90

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): as before the Custodian, so before the Assistant Custodian, Ch. Rashid Ahmad was not made a party. Against the assistant Custodian’s order, an appeal was brought, not by the Rehabilitation Authorities, but by Nanogram, Leelanau and their mother Poonjibai, for the purpose of saving their three-fourths share in the 90 (ninety) acres which the Assistant Custodian had held to be rightly treated as evacuee property. In this application, they expressly stated that in June 1949, before his migration, Mammal had received the value of his one-fourth share in the 900 acres of unpaid (Le. partially paid) Barrage land, and thereafter had made a statement before the Revenue Officer, and following that, Nanogram’s name was entered in place of Mammal in the Barrage registers. A statement to that effect is also included in affidavit by Nanogram supporting the appeal which was on behalf of both brothers. It was when this appeal came up for hearing before the Custodian, that the question of the nature of the 900 acres of Barrage land, which were not the subject of the appeal, was taken up so moth by the Custodian. Notice was issued to Ch. Rashid Ahmad and later to Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan, Sheikh and Begum Jazz Ahmad and Ch. Abdullah Khan. In his order by which the entire land was declared to be evacuee property, the Custodian dealt with whether the provisions of section 36 of the Ordinance of 1949 stood in the way of the declaration by his predecessor of the 23rd February 1956 that all the Barrage lands were evacuee property. The argument he employed was that the section aforesaid only required notice to be served upon the “parties concerned” and since Ch. Rashid Ahmad and Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan had not been made parties to the proceedings before his predecessor they were not “parties concerned” and therefore it was not necessary for the Custodian to hear them before modifying the Assistant Custodian’s order. It should be mentioned that at no stage had it been suggested that either the transfer in favor of Ch. Rashid Ahmad or any of the subsequent transfers was not made bona fide for proper consideration. The Custodian however held that the price paid for the land by Ch. Rashid Ahmad was not adequate. On this point, it may be said at once that on the valuation adopted by the Custodian himself} the difference between the price he assessed, and that actually paid is no more than Rs. 8,000, which is only a small fraction of the price assessed, viz. Rs. 1,08,000. By adding certain supplements made necessary in the Custodian’s opinion by rising prices and improved condition of the land, he came to the conclusion that the differential should be as much as some Rs. 23,000. These estimates were not based on any pleadings, or issues or evidence. There was no application for confirmation of a sale of evacuee property before the Custodian. Here, the question of the nature of the greater part of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): that the differential should be as much as some Rs. 23,000. These estimates were not based on any pleadings, or issues or evidence. There was no application for confirmation of a sale of evacuee property before the Custodian. Here, the question of the nature of the greater part of the property had yet to be decided. The difference of value found by the Custodian 1s clearly too small to reflect upon the bona fide nature of the transaction. ' Determination of the nature of the property was a judicial question, involving as it did an exact ascertainment of title in immovable property. It was apparent on the face of the record that rights in that property had accrued by virtue of transfers in favor of Ch. Rashid Ahmad and the subsequent transferees at the time when the Custodian’s order of the 23rd February 1956 was made, and on a proper reading’ of section 36 of the Ordinance of 1949 of which the proviso to subsection (4) is in particular relevant, it would indeed seem that the Custodian was forbidden to make an order revising or modifying any order “affecting any person without giving such person and the Rehabilitation Authority an opportunity of being heard.” To say that these transferees for value were not “parties concerned” qua review of the earlier orders, vague though they might be thought to be, under which Nanogram and Leelanau and their mother were treated as non-evacuees and their share of the joint property as non-evacuee property, is in my opinion to avoid a early patent issue. But the real flaw in the matter appears to me to be this, that the Assistant Custodian having discovered the bar of section 36(4), and being required under section 18 of the Ordinance of 1949 to determine judicially how much was evacuee property and how much non-evacuee, his own duty was to summon all persons affected thereby and after full and proper hearing, to give his decision. Before him there was only a single respondent, namely, the Rehabilitation Authority He was aware of the transfer, and there was nothing to prevent him from imp leading the transferees and proceeding to a full and proper examination of the questions in the case. As observed earlier, since title in land was involved and complex questions had arisen, the case was an eminently suitable one for application of the full procedures of the law appropriate to decision of such questions. By the time that the Assistant Custodian decided the matter, Central Act No. XII of 1957 had come into force, containing express provisions in section 30 enabling the Custodian to exercise all the powers of a Civil Court for the proper investigation and decision of questions arising. Under section 25(2)(n), the Custodian was also empowered to “refer any dispute between the evacuee and any other person to arbitration or to a Civil Court for adjudication.” If the Assistant Custodian had acted under these powers, it would have been possible for him to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): and decision of questions arising. Under section 25(2)(n), the Custodian was also empowered to “refer any dispute between the evacuee and any other person to arbitration or to a Civil Court for adjudication.” If the Assistant Custodian had acted under these powers, it would have been possible for him to have investigated the rival contentions in the manner which is accepted m all jurisdictions as appropriate to the determination of a question of title in movable property. The property was clearly of very considerable value. The title which the Rehabilitation Department was invoking is a title which, under the law, is deemed to be vested in the Custodian with effect from the IST March 1947. But much depended, in the circumstances of this case, upon proof being adduced as to the nature of the pre-existing titles, and the effect thereon of a transaction which took place in the year 1949, between a person Mammal who was permanently absent from Pakistan when the question came up for decision in 1957, and his brothers who continued to live in Pakistan. The latter were entitled to the belief that their rights in the land were squarely based upon the orders made on the 24th May 1950 by the Custodian, followed by the later order of the 3rd March 1951, by which managership of a defined evacuee share MN the property, viz. the share of Mammal was also entrusted to them. Moreover, a further title by acquisition for value made bona fide with the full knowledge and approval of the Barrage authorities had developed in the interval, thus introducing a party with a real interest which according to the law they were entitled to assert in the litigation in support of Nanogram and Leelanau, on all grounds which were available to the latter. For a proper appreciation of these rival contentions, it was clearly essential that each party should be allowed to state the grounds of attack and defense in respect of each other’s claims in detail. The questions thus arising having been ascertained and formulated in the shape of issues, due opportunity might then be provided to all parties to produce evidence in support of their respective cases and thereafter, arguments having been heard for proper appreciation of the questions of fact and law arising, a decision could be given. These are processes with which the Civil Courts are entirely familiar, and the question being one of title in immovable property, whose nature was obviously complicated, a Civil Court was probably the best instrument for its resolution. Nothing of the kind was attempted by the Assistant Custodian. The transferees were not made parties to the proceeding. He recorded a CERTAM amount of evidence, but probably on account of the inferiority of his position to that of the Custodian, he contended himself with saying (1) that the Custodian’s order was ineffective qua the transferred portion of the land, for lack of notice to the transferees, without going on to decide whether it was evacuee

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): but probably on account of the inferiority of his position to that of the Custodian, he contended himself with saying (1) that the Custodian’s order was ineffective qua the transferred portion of the land, for lack of notice to the transferees, without going on to decide whether it was evacuee property or not, and (2) he merely repeated the grounds advanced by the Custodian, in support of the decision that the balance of the land, which he fixed at 90 acres, was evacuee property. Thus, there was no adjudication by the Assistant Custodian such as the case demanded. G Nor was a proper adjudication attempted by the Custodian whose order in the case is before us in appeal. The appeal before him related merely to the 90 acres which had been declared evacuee by the Assistant Custodian. A new challenge to the title of the transferees in respect of 900 acres was raised by the Custodian himself so moth. The Custodian examined two witnesses, namely, Lai Baths, a Barrage Official and the first transferees, Ch. Rashid Ahmad. He did not obtain from the parties detailed statements of their respective claims, nor did he draw issues. His order which TS before us deals with the following contentions:- H (1) Whether the land was the exclusive property of Mammal or whether it was owned by the joint family of which he was a member? (2) Whether Mammal had an owner’s title in the land or merely that of a grantee who had not paid the price in full? (3) Whether the price paid by the transferee was an adequate price ? As has been seen, the last question did not immediately or substantially arise in the case. The second question was decided on the basis that whatever rights Mammal had in the land would vest in the Custodian since he was admittedly an evacuee. On the first post, the decision of the Custodian proceeds on considerations of Hindu law relevant to ownership by a joint Hindu family. He came to the conclusion that at the time when the disputed land was acquired the three brothers, Mammal, Nanogram and Leelanau possessed only 106 acres of land. Of this, 61 acres had been acquired by them jointly, and this was a factor which the Custodian thought operated against the three brothers having become reconstituted as a joint Hindu Family after the separation of Harman. In the absence of proof on the record to show how much income was derived from these 106 acres of land, the Custodian observed that “it cannot be held that the 990 acres of land which were acquired by Mammal had been purchased with the income of the property jointly owned by the three brothers.” He noted that the record equally did not show that Mammal had any separate source of income apart from that derived from these 106 acres, but he held that it was “for the respondents to show by production of clear evidence, preferably documentary, that Mammal

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): owned by the three brothers.” He noted that the record equally did not show that Mammal had any separate source of income apart from that derived from these 106 acres, but he held that it was “for the respondents to show by production of clear evidence, preferably documentary, that Mammal had no other source of income and that all the acquisitions were made by him on behalf of the family and with the help of the income of joint family property.” He further observed that “the respondents have not even attempted to prove” these facts and in the absence of such proof, he could not hold that “Mammal was holding this land on behalf of the joint family and that the same was not his exclusive property.” It is important to note the stress laid by the Custodian upon the absence of evidence on this point which he held to be crucial in relation to the decision of the question before him. An onus of proof was laid, in a proceeding which at best can be described as a side wind, and a decision as to title has been given, on the basis of responsibility to discharge such onus, without any attempt at any stage to bring the question concerned, viz. of joint Hindu family into proper focus, and place it in issue between the parties. Before the Assistant Custodian, the descriptions “Jolt’, and in another place “jot family property” had been applied to the land, but there had been no clear assertion of a joint Hindu family and its property. Having parted with the bulk of the land, and their present interest being to save the balance of 90 acres only for themselves, Nanogram and Leelanau did not have the same concern to save the property from being declared evacuee as the transferees had, and they were not parties before, the Assistant Custodian. At the stage of evidence, therefore, there was no real contest on the question which assumed paramount importance before the Custodian. The Custodian’s order deals with two points of Hindu Law. The point of separation of one member, viz. of Harman, offered no difficulty, as the facts were admitted. The other post, namely, of the existence or otherwise of a nucleus of property, and its surplus income being sufficient to finance fresh acquisitions, resolved itself into a question of determination of the availability of such a surplus from the produce of the joint holding of 106 acres. The onus of proof was upon Leelanau and Nanogram, and it seems plain that a decision contrary not only to their interest, but to the much larger interest of the transferees for, value has been given on this point, though no issue was framed, and no opportunity allowed to produce evidence thereon. The final decision of the Custodian is stated in the following passage:- “The evidence on the record is not sufficient to show that the income of the property jointly owned by the three brothers was sufficient with

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): though no issue was framed, and no opportunity allowed to produce evidence thereon. The final decision of the Custodian is stated in the following passage:- “The evidence on the record is not sufficient to show that the income of the property jointly owned by the three brothers was sufficient with which about 990 acres of Barrage land could be acquired and as the land in dispute had been acquired in the name of one of the brothers alone, in the absence of evidence to indicate that it was acquired with the help of jot family funds, that land will have to be treated as the separate property of Mammal in whose name it had been so acquired.” This case was argued before the Court for four separate days, and its consideration has caused me a great deal of anxiety. Mr. Mahmud Ah for the appellants, who are transferees from Ch. Rashid Ahmad, argued with great emphasis that the Custodian was wrong in drawing the dispute wholly within the context of the law related to joint Hindu families. He drew our attention to a number of pieces of evidence on the record, which, in his submission went to show that the probabilities strongly favored the conclusion that the acquisition by Mammal of Barrage land was not his personal or separate acquisition, but was in line with the earlier acquisition by the three brothers, that is to say, it was an acquisition on behalf of the members of the previous joint Hindu family remain after the separation of Harman and respective of whether they constituted a new joint Hindu family. He conceded that Mammal had executed a power-of-attorney in favor of Nanogram before he left for India and that in it, he acknowledged that the Barrage lands acquired in his name were joint Hindu family property, although they stood in his name exclusively, but he suggested that the reference to “Jolt Hindu Family ” may be a mere misconception. He pointed out that the fact that Mammal had no separate property of his own should stand in the way of the conclusion that the large sums he had to pay for the Barrage lands were his exclusive responsibility. Such land grants for which the price is to be paid by extended installments, are, moreover, usually acquired out of the income from the land itself} as it is gradually brought under cultivation. Learned counsel referred to statements made before the Assistant Custodian by Nanogram, his brother Leelanau and another Hindu named Autosomal, as well as by a respectable Laminar of the locality, Muhammad Aqua Heidi to the effect that Mammal, Ankara and Leelanau were joint and that the purchases of Barrage land were in fact joint purchases and that the lands used to be looked after jointly and the produce was also appropriated jointly by the family who continued to be joint in residence and mess after the separation of Harman. Ch. Rashid Ahmad also made a statement to the same effect, although

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): in fact joint purchases and that the lands used to be looked after jointly and the produce was also appropriated jointly by the family who continued to be joint in residence and mess after the separation of Harman. Ch. Rashid Ahmad also made a statement to the same effect, although his information would not appear to be of the same personal character as that of the three Hindu witnesses and Muhammad Aqua Heidi. In the course of the argument, by search among the papers on the file, Mr. Mahmud Ali was able to produce a receipt for land revenue paid in respect of this land by Nanogram in the year 1946, in support of his contention that Mammal’s interest in the Barrage land was not exclusive. On the basis of these pieces of evidence it was urged with emphasis that it was possible on the evidence to come to the conclusion that the Barrage land had been acquired by all the three brothers, and not by Mammal alone, and this contention was supported by the assertion that the Barrage authorities did not allow land to be entered m multiple names, but preferred that it should be in a single name. Mr. Mahmud Ali pleaded that in a civil case, the burden of proof is capable of being discharged on a balance of probabilities and here the probabilities favored jointless in purchase and enjoyment. I do not propose in this judgment to consider in detail all the arguments presented on the two sides. There has clearly been confusion as to the issues in the case, arising from the fact that no issues were ever framed. The argument of joint ownership had been placed before the Assistant Custodian, who decided the case before him on quite other grounds, viz. that the sale to the transferees could not be touched for lack of notice, and as to the remaining 90 acres, the fact of the land being entered originally in the Barrage papers in the name of Mammal was regarded as sufficient for holding that portion to be evacuee property. The Custodian, on the other hand, viewed the matter wholly in the light of considerations arising out of the law of the joint Hindu Family, without their being any issue relating to, or decision upon, whether there was in fact a joint Hindu Family, or it was merely a case of three Hindu brothers, owning and acquiring property jointly, and being joint in mess with their mother. K Sitting in appeal from a Tribunal such as a Custodian, this Court would not interfere with any decision taken by him on the administrative side, provided it is shown that in reaching the decision the Custodian had satisfied the conditions of the relevant law by taking into consideration and dealing fairly with all the matters which under the law he was required to evaluate in arriving at his decision. But the present is not a case of that kind. It is a case involving what

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): Custodian had satisfied the conditions of the relevant law by taking into consideration and dealing fairly with all the matters which under the law he was required to evaluate in arriving at his decision. But the present is not a case of that kind. It is a case involving what is strictly a judicial question, namely, the demarcation of rival titles in an existing property. It was clearly expressed by the Custodian in the following words: “whether this land was the exclusive property of Mammal or whether it was owned by the joint family of which he was one of the members.” Substantially and essentially, the question is one which lay between Mammal the evacuee and the other members of his family who were non-evacuees. The Custodian could only be vested with that share of the property which belonged to Mammal Under the law, the power of deciding upon the exact share was undoubtedly reserved to the Custodian but as was remarked at the outset of this judgment, the Custodian had all the powers of a Civil Court to investigate the matter, and he also had the power, when the question lay between an evacuee and a non-evacuee, to refer the matter for decision to a Civil Court. In other words, it was open to the Custodian to deal with the case as if it wear a suit relating to title in land, according to the recognized procedure of the Civil Courts. In the alternative, he could have referred the contesting parties to a Civil Court for decision of the suit. The requirement was that justice should be done. The case was such that, except by the full procedure, justice could not be done. The procedures followed were such as to make it plain that in this case, justice was not seen to be done. M In an appeal from a Tribunal such as a Custodian this Court does not substitute its own view of evidence for that formed by the Custodian, unless the conclusion of the Tribunal be vitiated by some grave departure from either the maximum requirements of procedure for the doing of justice between the parties, or unless the conclusion upon a point of law or even on a post of fact is vitiated by a similar departure from accepted principles of the admission and evaluation of evidence, or of natural justice and the requirements of reason. Mr. Mahmud Ali has pressed upon us that we should upon the available evidence come to the conclusion that Mammal and his brother did not form a joint Hindu family, but nevertheless were joint in mess and property and the Barrage land was such property. As has been remarked already the Custodian treated the case as one falling exclusively within the law of the joint Hindu family. To concede the argument of Mr. Mahmud Ali would therefore involve not only conclusion upon the evidence contrary to that reached by the Custodian but also a decision on a post which was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): the Custodian treated the case as one falling exclusively within the law of the joint Hindu family. To concede the argument of Mr. Mahmud Ali would therefore involve not only conclusion upon the evidence contrary to that reached by the Custodian but also a decision on a post which was never before Custodian. That would be an action in excess of the limited jurisdiction which this Court exercises in respect of Tribunals such as the Custodian, but in my opinion the decision of the Custodian in this case cannot be allowed to stand for the reason that it is decision taken by a procedure which was wholly inadequate for the doing of justice in the case, and therefore it is appropriate for this Court to exercise in the present case the limited powers available in certiorari, namely, to quash the order and direct that the matter should be decided as indicated above; Le. by the full procedure of a civil suit within the powers given to the Custodian under the relevant law. N I would therefore allow this appeal and setting aside the order of the Custodian, would remand the case to him for a fresh decision, which may be made in one of the following forms; the case may be heard and decided by the Custodian or one of his subordinates, but in the manner of a civil suit allowing the parties the usual facilities to set out their cases and the reliefs they seek in full, thereafter, drawing issues and giving the parties adequate opportunity to lead their evidence upon the questions arising, Alternatively, if the Custodian so thinks fit, he may refer the whole case to a Civil Court for decision of questions other than, those e.g. confirmation of sale of evacuee property, lying, within his special jurisdiction. The error being one of procedure, I would leave the parties to bear their own costs. S. A. Rahman, J-I agree. Fable-Akbar, J.-I agree. Seymour Rahman, J.-I agree, B. Z. Haikus, J.-I have had the advantage of reading the judgment which my Lord the Chief Justice intends to deliver in this case. I find that my Lord is unable to entertain the plea that even if the land MN dispute was not joint family property it was jointly owned by the brothers because this plea had not been taken before the Assistant Custodian or the Custodian, but my Lord has remanded the case on the ground that in the procedure adopted by the Custodian “Justice was not seen to be done.” have studied the judgment of my Lord carefully in order to find out what exactly are the defects in the procedure adopted by the Custodian. I find that the defects are contained in the three consecutive paragraphs beginning with : “If the Assistant Custodian had acted under these powers.” with respect to the Assistant Custodian the defect pointed out is that he did not frame any issues and did not make the transferees parties. There is at the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): the defects are contained in the three consecutive paragraphs beginning with : “If the Assistant Custodian had acted under these powers.” with respect to the Assistant Custodian the defect pointed out is that he did not frame any issues and did not make the transferees parties. There is at the same time an observation that he “recorded a certain amount of evidence” which may suggest that he did not record all the evidence that was produced. So far as the Custodian is concerned the defect in his procedure is that “he did not OCTAM from the parties detailed statements of their respective claims nor did he draw issues” and that he examined only two witnesses a Barrage official and the first transferee Ch. Rashid Ahmad. No plea had been raised by the appellants either in their petition for special leave or at the time when the petition for special leave was argued or in the concise statement or in the arguments before us that there was any defect in the procedure adopted by the Custodian. A question of defect of procedure is always a question of prejudice. Obviously when there is no point made of any defect of procedure by the party there is no prejudice to the party. With great respect I do not in the first place see any ground for our raising this question so moth. It is at the same time to be remembered that the respondents had no opportunity of meeting this point, and it will not be proper, apart from all other considerations, to order a remand without there BMG any opportunity to the respondents to argue the post. Also TT may not be possible on the present record to decide the question as to defect of procedure satisfactorily for the record that is printed has reference only to the pleas raised and documents which related to this plea may not have been printed. However, I have gone through the printed record and I have little doubt that no fault can be found with the procedure of the Custodian. Let me state the facts in brief in so far as they relate to the question under discussion. The application that the property m dispute was not evacuee property which had been filed before the Assistant Custodian related to the whole of 990 acres. The application stated that 900 acres had already been transferred to Rashid Ahmad, but as the declaration by the Custodian dated 23-2-1956 as to their being evacuee property affected the lability of the applicants they had filed the application in relation to these 900 acres too. Before the Assistant Custodian only the Rehabilitation Department had been cited as the opposite-party. Evidence was produced by the applicants Nanogram and Lila ram before the Assistant Custodian and there never has been any complaint by them (they are parties even in appeal before us and have filed a concise statement and also argued their case) that there was any lack of full opportunity of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): was produced by the applicants Nanogram and Lila ram before the Assistant Custodian and there never has been any complaint by them (they are parties even in appeal before us and have filed a concise statement and also argued their case) that there was any lack of full opportunity of producing evidence. That no issue was framed could hardly create prejudice for the applicants for on the merits the only fact to be proved was that the property in dispute was joint family property and the absence of an issue did not in any way prevent the applicants from producing evidence on this post. A good deal of evidence was produced. Six witnesses were examined; the original partnership deed between the four brothers, a number of sale deeds jointly in favor of three brothers, a number of receipts of payments to Barrage authorities and also the previous orders in favor of the family made by the Custodian were produced. It is not suggested that there was any further evidence which could be produced, but which for some misunderstanding was not produced. Ch. Rashid Ahmad the transferee though not made party was examined as a witness by the applicants. The Assistant Custodian dismissed the application with respect to 90 acres, but with respect to 900 acres he said that the applicants had no locus standi to apply as they had already transferred. However, he held that the order of the Custodian of 23-2-1956 declaring these 900 acres to be evacuee was illegal as it was passed without notice to the transferee. Against the order of the Assistant Custodian only Nanogram etc. filed an appeal. This appeal related only to 90 acres. When the matter came up for hearing before the Custodian he was Prima facie not satisfied with the order that had been passed by the Assistant Custodian and in the first instance he ordered that Ch. Rashid Ahmad the transferee as well as Choudhury Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan to whom the land had been transferred, by Rashid Ahmad be made parties. For the purpose of understanding the order of the Custodian which I am going to reproduce it may be stated here that these two were henceforth shown as respondents Nos. and 2 in the appeal. When notice was served on these two respondents they appeared and objected to their being imp leaded at all on the ground that there being no prayer in the appeal with respect to 900 acres of land. The Custodian then decided to act- so moth in the matter and directed a notice under section 43(4) against these respondents for showing cause as to why the order of the Assistant Custodian in the favor should not be set aside. Following is the order which the Custodian passed:- ‘Mr. Dingo Mai, who has appeared for respondents Nos. and 2, says that as the appellants have not made any prayer in their appeal with regard to 900 acres of land, transferred in favor of these respondents, they

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): not be set aside. Following is the order which the Custodian passed:- ‘Mr. Dingo Mai, who has appeared for respondents Nos. and 2, says that as the appellants have not made any prayer in their appeal with regard to 900 acres of land, transferred in favor of these respondents, they should not have been made a party in this case. At this stage, it is not necessary for me to give any decision on this post, but with a view to meet the objection raised by Mr. Dingo Mai, I direct, under section 43, clause (4) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. that a notice be issued to these respondents to show cause why the order dated the 19th December 1957, passed by the Assistant Custodian, Hyderabad, so far as it effects their rights, should not be set aside. This notice may be served formally on Mr. Diagonal on behalf of these respondents, who may, FHE so desires, file a written reply on the next date. This case is adjourned to the 25th September, 1959, for further proceedings. A separate file should be opened with regard to the notice which I have ordered should be issued under section 43, clause (4) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957.” It will be observed that by this order the Custodian issued a notice to “respondents 1 and 2” for showing cause why the order of the Assistant Custodian should not be set aside and gave a direction to Mr. Gomal who appeared for them to file a written reply if the respondents so desired. A separate file was then prepared in relation to the notice served on the respondents. On the 29th October 1959, it was brought to the notice of the Custodian that Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan had already transferred the whole of his land in dispute in favor of Sheikh and Begum Jazz Ahmad and Ch. Muhammad Abdullah. The Custodian ordered that these three should also be made parties and that notice to all of them should be issued “on the same Ines as the notice ordered to be served by means of my order dated 29-8-1959.” On the next date ‘that is, 30th August 1959, Mr. Diagonal who had already appeared for Ch. Rashid Ahmad and Sir Muhammad Abdullah Khan accepted notice on behalf of the other respondents as well. Whether actually a reply was filed by Mr. Diagonal we do not know because as already stated there BMG no objection on this ground the relevant documents have not been printed. As regards the opportunity which the Custodian gave to the respondents for leading evidence similarly we have not got the day today orders, but it becomes clear on what just by chance appears on this record that there was an opportunity to produce evidence and the respondents closed their case. So far as the documents with the Barrage authorities are concerned the Custodian had himself made through inquiries and Lai Baths the Clerk

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): but it becomes clear on what just by chance appears on this record that there was an opportunity to produce evidence and the respondents closed their case. So far as the documents with the Barrage authorities are concerned the Custodian had himself made through inquiries and Lai Baths the Clerk of the Barrage Department had been examined under the orders of the Custodian, but Ch. Muhammad Rashid appeared as a witness on behalf of the respondents and made a statement which covers about seven typed pages. Mr. Gomal who was appearing on behalf of all the respondents then made the following statement:- “I do not wish to produce any more evidence and close my case. With great respect I am unable to see that the Custodian did anything which was not consistent with the proper administration of justice. He found that the Assistant Custodian had not decided the questions whether 900 acres of land transferred to Ch. Rashid Ahmad were evacuee while the Custodian had found this property to be evacuee by his order of 23-2-1956. That order had been found to be not binding on the transferee for want of notice, but the matter had to be decided. The Custodian would have failed in his duty if he had taken no further notice of this area of 990 acres. So he made the transferees parties in the appeal in order to decide the question finally. The transferees objected that the appeal did not relate to these 900 acres. The Custodian, to avoid any technical objection, started proceedings so moth - under section 43 and as is required by section 43(4) he served a notice on the transferees and started a separate file. In the notice he called upon the transferees to show cause why the order of the Assistant Custodian should not be set aside, and he also gave the transferees opportunity to file a written reply. He then allowed them to lead evidence. The respondents led evidence and closed their case. The point before the Custodian so far as facts are concerned was only one, that is, whether the property was joint family property. This is the only post on the merits which was argued before the Assistant Custodian, and the Custodian. I do not find it possible under the circumstances to say that there was any denial of the principles of justice. No particular purpose would have been served by framing a specific issue on the question as to whether the property in dispute was joint family property. Everybody concerned knew that that was the only question of fact evolved. As already stated an objection as to procedure has force only if prejudice be caused unless there be some strict statutory provision which vitiates proceedings in case of noncompliance and there is no such statutory provision here. But as a matter of fact there was no defect in procedure at all. That is why no grievance was ever made by the present appellants that they did not

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): be some strict statutory provision which vitiates proceedings in case of noncompliance and there is no such statutory provision here. But as a matter of fact there was no defect in procedure at all. That is why no grievance was ever made by the present appellants that they did not have a fair opportunity of putting their case before the Custodian. The case was argued before the Custodian for a number of days. There were two preliminary objections and there was exhaustive discussion on whether the property m dispute was joint family property. Yet no objection was ever taken to the propriety of the procedure adopted by the Custodian. The same Mr. Diagonal who had appeared before the Custodian then filed the petition for special leave, and it was he who filed concise statement when the case came up for hearing before this Court. He did not in the grounds of petition for leave refer to any defect in procedure nor did he argue this matter when leave to appeal was granted. He filed a concise statement the last paragraph of which enumerates the grounds of attack on the order of the Custodian. These grounds are fifteen and cover five typed pages. Although there are a large number of legal questions raised in these grounds there is not a single reference to any lack of opportunity before the Custodian or to any defect in procedure. x Nor was the post as already stated argued at the hearing. With respect to such defects in procedure the settled rule is that they can always be waived and had there been any defect in procedure it would surely have been waived by the fact that no objection was ever taken at any stage. Even if this was an appeal in an ordinary civil suit I would not in the circumstances be prepared to remand the case on the ground that the principles of natural justice had not been adhered to. But we are dealing with a case of special appeal under Article 160 of the late Constitution which in accordance with the view taken by this Court in a number of cases and by my Lord the Chief Justice in the Judgment in this very case has a very limited scope. My Lord has posted out that interference in such appeals is not possible unless “the conclusion of the Tribunal be vitiated by some grave departure from either the minimum requirements of procedure for the dog of justice between the parties, or unless the conclusion upon a post of law or even on a post of fact is vitiated by a similar departure from accepted principles of the admission and evaluation of evidence or of natural justice and the requirements of reason.” In Muhammad Said v. The Election Petitions Tribunal (1) which appears to be the first case where the jurisdiction exercised under Article 160 was explained it was said:- “I may state at the very outset that the supervisory jurisdiction of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): or of natural justice and the requirements of reason.” In Muhammad Said v. The Election Petitions Tribunal (1) which appears to be the first case where the jurisdiction exercised under Article 160 was explained it was said:- “I may state at the very outset that the supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 160 is a restricted jurisdiction and an appeal to evoke it will not succeed where a special Tribunal like the Election Tribunal, has functioned within the spirit and the intention of the statute that created it and while so functioning has made a real and honest endeavor to judge facts on the merits of the evidence and to apply the law to them. A finding of fact thus arrived at, however, erroneous, will not be scrutinized or reviewed by this Court, and even if an error of law be committed by the Tribunal that will not be considered to be a sufficient ground for interference unless the law so misunderstood or misapplied raises some general question of fundamental importance to the proper functioning of the Tribunal or the decision of the case.” In ATA Allah Malik v. Custodian of Evacuee Property (2) this judgment was relied upon by a majority of this Court for dismissing an appeal under circumstances which call for attention. An application had been put in before a Deputy Custodian for confirmation of a transfer by a transferee from an evacuee and the allottee of the property in dispute had been made a party. The application was rejected by the Deputy Custodian on the ground of want of income-tax clearance certificate, but permission was given for revival of the application on production of such certificate. The allottee appealed against this order to the Custodian and the Custodian set aside the order permitting revival. Subsequently the transferee filed an application for revival before the Deputy Custodian (his successor) without imp leading the allottee as a party and without bringing it to the notice of the Deputy Custodian that the order permitting revival had been set aside by the Custodian. The Deputy Custodian enter tamed the application for revival on the basis of the order (of his predecessor) permitting revival, but on the merits dismissed the application. On appeal by the transferee in which to the allottee was not made a party the sale was confirmed by the Additional Custodian. The allottee had become entitled to the transfer of the house and had secured a provisional transfer order, and he came to know from the Settlement authorities of the proceedings taken by the transferee. He then approached the Custodian in revision attacking the whole proceedings as fraudulent because the order of TFE Custodian disallowing revival was suppressed, and he was deliberately not made a party to the proceedings, and also as without jurisdiction, because the Deputy Custodian had in the second application simply proceeded to revive the old application on the basis of the previous order of the Deputy Custodian which had in fact been

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): was suppressed, and he was deliberately not made a party to the proceedings, and also as without jurisdiction, because the Deputy Custodian had in the second application simply proceeded to revive the old application on the basis of the previous order of the Deputy Custodian which had in fact been set aside in appeal. The allottee posted out further that there was no proof of payment or adequacy of consideration. The Additional Custodian had not considered the question of payment of consideration at all though assuming payment he had determined its adequacy. The allottee at the same time attacked the proceedings on the ground that he was a necessary party under the rules and had not been imp leaded at any stage and also contended that the application for confirmation was time-barred. The Custodian did not go MTO the question of fraud and did not go into whether the revival was competent. As to limitation he considered only whether the first application which had been dismissed for want of a certificate was within time for the second application being for revival of the first no question of limitation arose with respect to it. As to payment of consideration the Custodian received from the transferee on the last day on which the case was argued before him an affidavit which had been sworn a few years earlier, and without giving the slightest opportunity to the allottee to rebut the affidavit or to call the deponent in the witness-box as he was entitled to, held that the sale price had been paid in the office of the Registrar before the deed was presented for registration though it was not paid before the Registrar. On this finding he dismissed the application in revision. When the appeal was argued before us the transferee contended that though the revival was not competent it could be regarded as a fresh application. But as a fresh application it was time-barred by some years. There never had been any application for extension of time though section 5 of the Limitation Act had been made applicable by a rule. The Custodian had never considered the question of extension of time because he had regarded the revival to be competent and had not acted on the basis that this was a second application. His judgment did not deal with whether the revival was competent or whether there was fraud, although on the first question the transferee had no answer before us and as to the second the plain facts were that a revival had been asked for on the basis of an order set aside in appeal, the order of the Custodian had been suppressed, and the allottee had not been made a party. He also did not deal with whether the proceedings were vitiated by failure to imp lead the allottee who was entitled to be mm pleaded under rule 17 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules and who was also entitled to be imp leaded in the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): been made a party. He also did not deal with whether the proceedings were vitiated by failure to imp lead the allottee who was entitled to be mm pleaded under rule 17 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules and who was also entitled to be imp leaded in the application for revival as he was a party to the original application of which revival was sought. Regarded as a fresh application the second application was barred by a few years and even before us there was no statement as to what could possibly constitute sufficient cause. In fact a finding as to sufficient cause was essential before the Custodian could have jurisdiction to entertain an application for confirmation. Important property rights were involved. The Custodian was admittedly function mg as a judicial tribunal and not in any administrative capacity for otherwise an appeal under Article 160 would not have been competent. On these facts a majority of this Court held that in accordance with the view taken in Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal the order should not be interfered with. In order that I may not be misunderstood let me state that my own view as to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in an appeal under Article 160 of the late Constitution is not in accord with the view taken MN Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal. Article 160 provides for an appeal without any Imitation as to grounds of interference. Where the word appeal alone is used without any qualification it means a rehearing of the matter by a superior tribunal that being the ordinary connotation of “appeal”. When the Legislature intends to limit the grounds on which an appellate Tribunal can interfere it says so. In section 100 C. P. C. the provision is that a second appeal will be on questions of law and procedure only. In section 96 however which relates to first appeals all that is said 1s that an appeal will lie and the effect of absence of words of limitation is that the appellate Court decides the matter afresh like the trial Court. In section 411-A Cr. P. C. where the intention was that an appeal against the order of a single Judge of the High Court appeal should lie on limited grounds it is so stated. There are enumerable enactments where the word appeal only is used. No limitation can in those cases be read into the provision and this rule applies to the jurisdiction conferred by Article 160 also. I cannot, with great respect see any reason for attributing to the Constituent Assembly that enacted the Constitution the intention that the Supreme Court should have jurisdiction to interfere on limited grounds. If that was its intention it would have said so. In the opening words of the passage from Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal, which I have reproduced above, the words used are “supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is a restricted jurisdiction” which

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): to interfere on limited grounds. If that was its intention it would have said so. In the opening words of the passage from Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal, which I have reproduced above, the words used are “supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is a restricted jurisdiction” which would show that the Supreme Court would have no jurisdiction to interfere except on grounds stated in the passage, but in the latter portion of the passage it is said that an erroneous finding of fact “will not be scrutinized or reviewed by this Court “and an error of law will not be considered to be a sufficient ground for interference’ which words do not relate to jurisdiction, but to the propriety of interference on certain grounds. I do not think the latter portion of the passage regards an interference with an erroneous finding of fact or law as an act without jurisdiction. If it does so regard it I express a respectful dissent. An order without jurisdiction is a void order which has no existence in the eye of law and which every Court is bound to treat as a nullity however superior the Tribunal that passed TT. It may be urged that even if the jurisdiction to set aside an order on any ground of fact, law or procedure existed there was no bar to the Court adopting a practice of not interfering except on certain well recognised grounds. But if the jurisdiction which Article 160 granted to the Supreme Court was not subject to any limitations can the Court by its practice create any limitation? That would be legislation which is beyond the province of a Court. If this Court refused to consider grounds which under the provision that created the appellate jurisdiction were legal grounds that would be a failure to exercise jurisdiction and failure to discharge! its duty towards a litigant whom the law has given the right to) appeal on those grounds. It should not be referred from what have said above that I regard all practices by which we refuse to entertain appeal on certain ports as illegal. They are permissible, not on the basis that the jurisdiction of this Court to hear appeals can be limited to any grounds by the practice of Court but because, in cases where appeal lies by leave only, this Court has a discretion to grant or not to grant leave and there is nothing in the Constitution regulating the exercise of this discretion. While granting leave therefore we can confine the appeal to any grounds we regard proper. There is no bar to our doing that. This in my opinion is the only logical way in which the practice of this Court limiting the grounds of appeal in spite of absence of any limitation in the provision creating jurisdiction can be justified. But it is only in cases where appeal lies only by leave that this can be done and in cases where an appeal less

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): which the practice of this Court limiting the grounds of appeal in spite of absence of any limitation in the provision creating jurisdiction can be justified. But it is only in cases where appeal lies only by leave that this can be done and in cases where an appeal less as of right and there is no limitation as to grounds in the relevant provision, this Court, in my opinion, would have no jurisdiction to refuse TC entertain a particular ground. Suppose a District Judge hearing a first appeal refuses to entertain a particular ground. For stance he says he will not question the determination of market value of property by the trial Court. His order will be set aside not only in appeal but, quite easily, even in certiorari. The Supreme Court, while dealing with an appeal which lie; as of right will be committing a similar mistake if it refused to consider a particular ground. The party has a right to a decision, of this Court on that post. Suppose the Legislature specifically mentioned two matters which could constitute grounds for an appeal. If the appellate Court refused to consider one of the two grounds there will be a failure to exercise jurisdiction. When the Legislature grants a right of appeal without limiting the grounds it amounts to saying that appeal will be on all grounds and a refusal of the appellate Court to consider a ground of appeal in such a case is like the refusal of Court to consider a ground specifically mentioned in the provision granting right of appeal. An appeal, it should be remembered, is the night of a party. That is what distinguishes it from a proceeding which is generally called a revision, and which too is a review of an order by a superior tribunal, but which is a power granted to the superior tribunal which it may exercise so moth or on application. I now come to the merits of this appeal. I am of the opinion that on the record the property in dispute is proved to be joint family property and the finding of the Custodian is vitiated by the omission to take MTO consideration material evidence including a receipt of the year 1946 which is a receipt for payment in respect of barrage land and is in the name of Nanogram alone. I proceed to state my reasons for the finding. The first document of importance is the partition deed dated 20th May 1940,-which records a partition between Harman and the other three sons of Amanda. Admittedly the family was on that date a Hindu joint family. The question that arises in connection U with this document is whether this was a partition by which only one brother separated and the other three remained joint or whether the other three also separated inter se. When one coarsened separates from others there is no presumption whether the remaining members of the joint family remained joint ' or separated inter

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): whether this was a partition by which only one brother separated and the other three remained joint or whether the other three also separated inter se. When one coarsened separates from others there is no presumption whether the remaining members of the joint family remained joint ' or separated inter se and the question is to be decided on the facts of each particular case. The important fact in connection with the document with which we are dealing is that by it no share was granted to MST. Poonyibai the mother of the coarseness and the widow of Amanda who was entitled on partition to a share equivalent to that of one of the brothers. This in my opinion is strong evidence of the fact that the other three brothers, that 1s, Shameful, Nanogram and Lila ram remained joint. Had there been a partition even between these three brothers there is no reason why Poonyibai should not have been allotted a share. There is no explanation o fie red on behalf of the respondents as to why, if there was a complete partition MST. Poonjibai received no share except that the brothers may not be intending to give a share to the mother. But the presumption is of honest and bona fide conduct, and we cannot assume in the absence of some evidence that the brothers were depriving the mother of her due share. From 1940 to 1942 the three brothers made four joint purchases which are evidenced by four registered sale deeds. These documents are some indication of the fact that the family was at that time a joint family. It has been argued on behalf of the respondents that in these documents the word“joint family’ nowhere appear, and these deeds are simple joint purchases in favor of the three brothers. In this connection there are two facts to which attention may be drawn. The first is that in the partition deed dated 20-5-1940 also the word “joint family’ now here appears though admittedly this was a deed of partition between the members of the Hindu joint family. All that is said in this partition deed is that the land “belongs to all our brothers jointly’. The executants of this deed apparently regarded this as a sufficient statement of the fact that they constitute a joint Hindu family. The other fact to be mentioned is that the word much invariably occurs against the name of Mammal who was next eldest after Harman and who was on separation of Harman entitled to become the karma. It was vehemently urged on behalf of the appellants before us that the word much meant a karma. On behalf of the respondents it was alleged that much only meant a leading person. In the appeals relating to land reforms cases which we have heard at Karachi and in which judgment has not yet been delivered a serious question arose as to how a karma was described in the Sindhi Language, and it was accepted

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): alleged that much only meant a leading person. In the appeals relating to land reforms cases which we have heard at Karachi and in which judgment has not yet been delivered a serious question arose as to how a karma was described in the Sindhi Language, and it was accepted by both parties that he was described as much. It may be that the word much has not exactly the same connotation as much, but it may be that it has the same connotation. It has not been explained why it should be necessary to state that a person is the leading member of the family if the family is not joint. I would, therefore, under the circumstances not make any adverse inference from the fact that the word “joint family’ has not appeared in these sale deeds. ' On 21-2-1948 Mammal executed a general power of attorney in his capacity as the Manager of the Hindu joint family in favor of his younger brother. Nanogram in order that he may manage the joint lands. At the time when this power of attorney was executed there was no evacuee law yet in force in the Sind area the first Evacuee Ordinance having come into force on 20-10- 1948. It has been contended on behalf of the respondents that the parties may have foreseen the evacuee law which was enacted after some time and may have deliberately shown Mammal as Manager of the HMD joint family. One cannot, therefore, regard this power of attorney as a strong piece of evidence, but consider mg it along with other evidence it may have some probative force. The next item of evidence is the receipt (Ex. A-5) of the year 1946 obtained by Nanogram in his own name for payment of an installment in respect of barrage lands. This is an important; document for no explanation has been offered on behalf of the respondents as to why Nanogram should have obtained this receipt if he was not a co-sharer in the barrage lands. Now it is possible ' to argue that Mammal may have only been a beamier in respect of the two shares of his brother and this may not have been joint family property, but if the three brothers had already separatedtherewas.no need for the purchase of shares in the name of Mammal alone. It has been argued that the rules for the purchase of barrage lands: permitted sale only to one person. But there was no difficulty in purchasing the land in three separate names. This receipt is indicative of the land being held not by Mammal alone, but for himself and others and along with other circumstances it is evidence of the existence of the Hindu joint family. Before I refer in this connection to the orders passed by the. Custodian at different times in respect of this family I have to refer to the oral evidence produced in this case. Nanogram and Lila ram applicants in addition to making

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): of the existence of the Hindu joint family. Before I refer in this connection to the orders passed by the. Custodian at different times in respect of this family I have to refer to the oral evidence produced in this case. Nanogram and Lila ram applicants in addition to making their own statements in the witness-box about the family BMG joint produced two respectable seminars of the locality Autosomal and Muhammad Aqua Heidi who stated that even after the separation of Harman the family continued to be joint in residence as well as in estate. The mother of Nanogram and Lila ram was also said to be living with them. There is no rebuttal of this evidence. I now come to the orders passed by the Custodian which have been relied upon by the appellants as constitute a bar to the reconsideration of whether they constitute a joint family, but which though they do not in my opinion constitute such a bar would have evidential value for proof of the fac tum of joint family. The first order to be referred to is the one passed by the Custodian on the 7th March 1950 in the appeal of Nanogram and Lila ram who claimed that 1600 acres of agricultural land including 900 acres of barrage land belonged to a joint family consisting of Nanogram, Lila ram, Mammal and Poonjibai. Mammal it was said had gone to India and in respect of the income already accrued from Mammal’s share of land the applicants were prepared to render accounts to the Custodian. On this application the Custodian last Lila ram m Appeal No. 247 and Nanogram the in Appeal No. 249 are along with their mother roonjibai and the brother Mammal members of a Hindu joint family. They own m all about 1600 acres of agricultural land including 900 acres of Barrage land. ] Lila ram and Nanogram and their mother are proved to be bona fide residents of Pakistan and have been managing the lands themselves; It is admitted that Mammal is an evacuee. His share of /4th in the joint family property is evacuee property. I refer the case of Nanogram, Lila ram and MST. Poonjibai to Government under section 3 of Ordinance XV of 1949. The two appellants are willing to manage the evacuee share of the property for and on behalf of the Custodian and to render accounts. They agree also to the partitioning off the fourth share which is evacuee property which the Rehabilitation Authority can be permitted to do under section 20(2)(a), Ordinance XV of 1949.” It would be observed that in this order joint family had been accepted and the case which was referred to the Government includes Poonjibai who is it was not a joint family would have no interest in the land. The Government having agreed to declare Nanogram, Lila ram and Poonjibai to be not evacuees the Custodian passed the following order on the 24th May 1950. “In accordance with the decision

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): the Government includes Poonjibai who is it was not a joint family would have no interest in the land. The Government having agreed to declare Nanogram, Lila ram and Poonjibai to be not evacuees the Custodian passed the following order on the 24th May 1950. “In accordance with the decision of the Central Government I hold Nanogram, Lila ram sons and Poonjibai widow of Shamans to be not evacuees I allow the appeal accordingly.” On the 3rd March 1951; the Custodian appointed Nanogram and Lila ram to be managers of the share in the joint family property of Mammal the evacuee. In this order the Custodian stated that if the share of the evacuee exceeded one-half he was entitled under section 10 of Ordinance XV of 1949 to take over the joint family property, but in this case his share was only one-fourth. It would be observed that the share of Mammal ‘would be one-, fourth only on the assumption that this was joint family property and Poonjibai was entitled to one-fourth share in it on partition. On the 13th of July 1954, Mr. Manner Adam the successor-in-office of Mr. Akbar Hussain, Custodian, who had passed the order which has f already been referred to, set aside the order of the appointment of Nanogram and Lila ram as managers and by the same order directed a notice to be issued for determine the nature of the property of Mammal. On 23rd of February, '1956, Mr. Manner Adam again found the family to be a “joint family and Mammal to have MN it only a one-fourth share. However, he came to conclusion that 1028 acres of barrage land were self acquired property of Mammal. The following paragraph in his judgment relates to this matter “The next point is regarding the 1028 acres of Barrage land which stood exclusively in the name of Mammal. I think there is considerable force in the contention of the Rehabilitation Authority that these lands were self-acquired property Beam#fall p.ND must be treated as his exclusive property, it appears-from the record that these lands stood in the exclusive name of End’mural at a time when other property stood MN the name of h7s "father and other brothers. It also appears TL a1 Mammal 'of himself executed a transfer of 900 acres of this land in favor of his brother Nanogram on 21-6-1949. These two facts conclusively establish that the property was dealt with by Mammal exclusively and that the other members of the joint family had no concern with it. The 1028 acres of Barrage land, therefore, is held to belong to Mammal exclusively, his brothers or others having no interest in it, and is held to be evacuee property. - It was this order of the Custodian which necessitated the submission of an application for a declaration that the barrage lands were not evacuee property. While the above-mentioned orders do not constitute res-judicata because the question as to whether a joint family existed, was never judicially

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 865?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 865 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-06-22): be evacuee property. - It was this order of the Custodian which necessitated the submission of an application for a declaration that the barrage lands were not evacuee property. While the above-mentioned orders do not constitute res-judicata because the question as to whether a joint family existed, was never judicially determined by the Custodian, they still contain admissions by the Custodian as to the existence of a joint family, and they show a consistent course of conduct on the party of the Custodian recognizing the joint family. In proceeding's for a declaration as to the non-evacuee nature of a particular property the real opposite-party is the Custodian himself for evacuee property vests in. him though the law has made him a judge in his own cause, and he can himself decide whether property is evacuee or not. Statements made by him, therefore, amount to admissions 'and thus considered they are valuable pieces of evidence. The Custodian may show that the admissions were based on a misconception and the burden on him of exp laming the admission may possibly be lighter than the burden on an ordinary litigant who had made an admission, but it cannot be urged that his admissions are without value as evidence. To sum up I find the following circumstances in support of the existence of a joint family (1) The partition deed of 1940 in which no share was granted to Poonjibai though admittedly she was a member of the joint family. (h) Four purchases from 1940 to 1942 in the name of three brothers. - (I'm) The receipt Ex. A-5 of 1946 relating to Bear - lands in the name of Nanogram alone. 'Se (iv) The fact that the family was joint in mess and its property too was held jointly. (v) The various orders of the Custodian in which the family had been found to be joint family and in which the share of Mammal was accepted as one-fourth. The learned Custodian had while discussing the question of joint family not referred to receipt Ex. A-5 or to the evidentiary value of the admissions contained in the previous orders of the Custodian. His finding was thus vitiated by omission to consider material evidence so that even applying the tests me.one in Muhammad Saeed v. The Election Petitions Tribunal IIS.augment would be label to be set aside. I would allow TL, n.appeal and/ grant a declaration that the property in dispute is not evacuee! property. I would leave the parties to bear their costs. Order of the Court In accordance with the view of the majority we allow this appeal and setting aside the order of Custodian, remand the case to him for a fresh decision. We leave the parties to bear their own costs. A.H Ap peal allowed

Question: What is case 1964 PLD 351 about?
Answer: Case 1964 PLD 351 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1964-02-19. The case involved MST. JINDO AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. (1) DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVIT OF 1958) - S. WRIT PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN, 1962 - ARTICLE 98. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_351.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 00:36 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_351.html ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. MARTIAL LAW (RECOVERY OF UNAUTHORISED EVACUEE PROPERTY) REGULATION, 1958 - NO. 49.. The case was heard by S.A. MAHMOOD AND MUHAMMAD AKRAM.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: In case 1964 PLD 351, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. (1) DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVIT OF 1958) - S. WRIT PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN, 1962 - ARTICLE 98. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_351.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 00:36 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_351.html ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. MARTIAL LAW (RECOVERY OF UNAUTHORISED EVACUEE PROPERTY) REGULATION, 1958 - NO. 49.. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1964-02-19.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1964 PLD 351 were: S.M. RAHMAN ANSARI FOR PETITIONERS. ISHAQ MUHAMMAD KHAN S. C. (L.) FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.NEMO FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 7.. The judges presiding were: S.A. MAHMOOD AND MUHAMMAD AKRAM.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: The parties in case 1964 PLD 351 were: MST. JINDO AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1964 PLD 351.
Answer: Judgment S. A. Mahmood, J.-Before 1936, Thalamus, husband of MST. Jingo, petitioner No. 1, and father of Raoul Baths, petitioner No. 2, purchased 32 canals of land, bearing Kara Nos. and, situate in village Muhammad Mural Mach, Thesis Sadiqabad, District Railcar Khan, from Drama Mai and others, respondents Nos. to 7, for a sum of Rs. 1,200. In the Jacaranda for the year 1936-37 and the succeeding Jacarandas up to 1956-57, which were exhibited as Exes. P. to P. by the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, he was shown as in possession of the land on account of purchase. This land was not allotted to anyone. As MST. Jingo and Raoul Baths were threatened by the Atari that if they did not obtain a declaration, that the land was non-evacuee the land would be allotted to refugees, they brought an application under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, for.a declaration to the effect that the land in dispute belonged to them and was not evacuee property, having been purchased by Ghulam, who had obtained its possession in pursuance of a sale and had been in its possession all along as owner, and after his death, his heirs had succeeded to the property and had been in undisturbed cultivating possession as owners. Before the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, the applicants produced their Mukhtar Burial, Muhammad Haman Atari (P. W. 1) and Allah Baths (P. W. 3). The Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, came to the conclusion that as presumption of truth attached to the entries in the revenue records and as there was no proof to the contrary, Ghulam was proved to be in continuous possession of land on account of purchase, without paying any Logan to anyone, and that he had even perfected his title over the land in dispute on account of adverse possession, even if it was not admitted that there was a sale. He, therefore, granted a declaration that the applicants were owners of the land in dispute as heirs of Ghulam and the evacuees had no interest in the land, but it was subject to confirmation by the Custodian. When the matter went to the learned Custodian, he was not prepared to accept the statement of Burial and was of the view that the statement of Allah Baths did not advance the case of the petitioner. He held that though it was recorded In the Jacarandas from 1936 onwards that Ghulam was in occupation of the land by purchase, it was not known how ho had purchased it, no sale*deed having been produced in support of it, and that if Ghulam had really purchased It, a mutation would certainly have been entered, and that as no mutation had been entered, Ghulam had not acquired any right or title over the land in dispute on account of adverse possession, because, on the establishment of Pakistan, only eleven years had elapsed and thereafter the property had vested in the Custodian, against whom, according to him, there could be no adverse possession, because, under the law, every person occupying such property held it on behalf of the Custodian. He, therefore, rejected the application of the petitioners and directed the petitioners to render accounts to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner (Land), Railcar Khan, in respect of the come, for BMG in occupation of the land of the evacuees. The petitioners thereupon filed this writ petition under Article 98 (2) (a) of the Constitution for a declaration that the order of the Custodian was illegal and had no legal effect, and for a direction to restore the order of the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property. 2. The first contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner TS that in view of section 3 (1) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII of 1957), no property, not treated as evacuee property before the IST day of January 1957, could be treated as evacuee property after the said date. It is not in dispute that this property was not allotted to anyone by the Rehabilitation Authorities, nor was TT treated as evacuee property by the Custodian. The word “treated” MN subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 has been interred* pretend by the learned Judges of the Supreme Court in Abdul Khalid- Abdul Razz v. Kishanchand and others Their Lordships have held that the ‘treating’ must relate to either a declaration by the Custodian about the nature of the property, or its user for the purposes of the Act by him or by the Rehabilitation Authorities, so as to indie ate a consciousness of the actual or assumed nature of the property. In the instant case, as it had not been so treated, subsection (1) of section 3 of the Act raises a clear bar to the Custodian passing an order m respect of this property which had the effect of so treating it after that date. The order of the Custodian had the effect of declaring it as evacuee property, because he has directed the petitioners to render accounts of the property for the entire period that they were in its possession, and has described it as land of the evacuees. 3. Learned counsel for the Custodian however relies on section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, which provides as under:- “3. Information relating to certain land to be furnished.-(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, but not later than ninety days therefrom, every person who. is in possession, supervision or management of any land which he knows or has reason to believe to be concealed evacuee property shall submit to the Rehabilitation Authority or the Settlement Authority, of the area concerned full information relating to such land, including the date since when, or the period for which, he has been in possession, supervision or management thereof. (2) Any such property as is referred to in subsection (1) shall, notwithstanding the provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, be treated as evacuee property, and shall vest and be deemed to have vested in the Custodian IA accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 7 of that Act.” He argues that this section overrides section 3 of Act XII of 1957. This section is applicable to persons who are in possession, supervision or management of any land which they know or have reason to believe to be concealed evacuee property. Its subsection (2) provides that such property shall, notwithstanding the provisions of section 3 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, be treated as evacuee property and shall vest and be deemed to have vested in the Custodian in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 3 of]fl that Act. This is not, however, the case here, as the land INI dispute was not “concealed evacuee property”. 4. The land in dispute was acquired by Ghulam prior to 1936. He is recorded in the Saraband| Ex. P. as in possession on account of purchase. The entry in the Jacaranda would not have come about unless Ghulam had been in possession for some harvests prior thereto. Reading the instructions in the Land Settlement Manual along with the claim of the petitioners and the evidence led by them, the conclusion could be drawn that Ghulam had been in possession of the land in dispute for more than 12 years, even before the IST day of March 1947. 5. The entries in the Jacarandas, to which presumption of correctness attaches, prove that a sale in favor of Ghulam did take place before 1936. The sale may have been oral, and a mutation was obviously not entered, but the transaction of sale was acted upon, and possession having been delivered, had been completed. The sale was thus a completed transaction. No rights were, therefore, left in the non-Muslim owners, who never asserted their rights to this property. In view of the entries in the Jacarandas the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, was right in holding that Ghulam had acquired proprietary rights in the land and the evacuees had no title or interest left in the land, which may have vested in the Custodian. The property,( therefore, cannot be said to have vested in the Custodian under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949). 6. Learned counsel for the Custodian, respondent No. 1, contends that as the name of the evacuees continued to be recorded as owners in the Jacarandas, they had a right and interest in the land, which vested in the Custodian with effect from the 1st day of March 1947 under section 6 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, corresponding to section 7 of Act XII of 1957. It is obvious that the names of the evacuees continued to be recorded as owners because a mutation was not entered, and the mere fact that the names of the evacuees continued to be entered as owners does not prove that they had proprietary rights left in the land, as they had parted with their rights by sale. Learned counsel for the respondent argued that it could not be said that there was an outright sale in favor of Ghulam and that the finding to the contrary by the Custodian cannot be interfered with in exercise of powers of certiorari. He relies on an unreported judgment of the Supreme Court m Armada and Almada v. MST. Vardar Begum and another Civil Appeal No. 62 of 1962, decided on 25th October 1963, which holds that even on the assumption that the finding of the Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner was wrong, it could not be said that the error was apparent on the face of the record, because it was not self-evident, and required investigation of facts and arguments to establish it. In this judgment reference was made to Rex v. Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal (1) m which Denying, L. J. observed : “It will have been seen that throughout all the cases there is one governing rule : “certiorari is only available to quash a decision for error of law if the error appears on the face of the record’.” In the same case, Morris, L. J. also observed as follows “It is plain that certiorari will not issue as the cloak of an appeal in disguise. It does not lie in order to bring an order of decision for rehearing of the issue raised in the proceedings. It exists to correct error of law ‘where revealed’ on the face of an order or decision or irregular, or absence of, or excess of jurisdiction where shown.” In Tariq Transport Company v. Sargodha Hera Bus Service and others (2) their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed “Particularly with reference to writs of certiorari and prohibition, the error should generally appear on the very face of the proceedings, and the relief granted should be addressed specifically to the correction of such error. If then, no error of the relevant kind is made to appear In the petition itself it is clearly the duty of the Court to reject the petition.” Learned counsel also relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Hard Vishnu Klamath v. Syed Ahmad Issue and others (1) m which observations to the same effect were made. It was held: “TT may, therefore, be taken as settled that a writ of certiorari could be issued to correct an error of law. But it is essential that it should be something more than a mere error ; it must be one which must be manifest on the face of the record. The real difficulty with reference to this matter, however, is not so much in the statement of the principle as in its application to the facts of a particular case. When does an error cease to be mere error, and become an error apparent on the face of the record? Learned counsel on either side were unable to suggest any clear-cut rule by which the boundary between the two classes of errors could be demarcated. Mr. Kathak for the first respondent contended on the strength of certain observations of Charley, C. J. in Batik K. Was v. Murat Municipality AIR 1953 BOM. 133 that no error could be said to be apparent on the face of the record if it was not self-evident, and if it required an examination or argument to establish it. This test might afford a satisfactory basis for decision in the majority of cases. But there must be cases in which even this test might break down, because judicial opinions also differ, and an error that might be considered by one Judge as self-evident might not be so considered by another. The fact is that what is an error apparent on the face of the record cannot be defined precisely or exhaustively, there being an element of indefiniteness inherent in its very nature, and it must be left to be determined judicially on the facts of each case.” We agree respectfully with the view expressed above, that in certiorari we can only interfere if there is an error apparent on the face of the order of the Custodian, and that we cannot deal with his order as an appellate Court correcting mistakes of fact. 7. As observed above, each case has to be decided on its own facts. The real difficulty lies not in the statement of the principle as in its application to the facts of a particular case. In our view, the Custodian committed an error on the face of the record m ignoring altogether the entries in the jacarandas which continuously existed from 1936 onwards. There was no evidence to rebut the entries in the jacarandas. These entries were made at a time long before Independence and no suspicion should normally have been attached to such entries. These entries were made when the Hindu owners still lived in this part of the sub-Continent, and yet they did not assert their rights to the land or contest the correctness of the entries in the jacarandas. The Custodian observed that no sale-deed had been produced and that if Ghulam had really purchased the land, a mutation would have been entered. It is nobody’s case that a sale-deed was executed or that a mutation was entered or sanctioned. It was ignored that If a sale-deed had been produced or if a mutation had been entered and sanctioned, the name of Ghulam would have found mention In column No. 4. It was entirely ignored by the Custodian that Ghulam had been MN possession as a purchaser, so that it was a completed transaction. The learned Custodian, therefore, in our view, committed an error of law, which is apparent on the face of the record, in ignoring the presumption of correctness and truth which attaches to the entries in the jacarandas. 8. The Custodian secondly held that Ghulam had not perfected his title to the land by adverse possession, because 12 years had not elapsed since the entries in the first jacarandas in 1936 came into being. It is true that from 1936 to the IST of March 1947, only a period of eleven years had elapsed, and, by reason of section 7 of Act XII of 1957, “all evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed always to have vested In the Custodian with effect from the first day of March 1947”. Section 10 (1) of Act XII of 1957 also provides that- “Every person who is, or has at any time after the twenty-eighth day of February 1947, been in possession, supervision or management of any evacuee property, shall be deemed to hold or to have held; as the case may be, such property on behalf of the Custodian.” It is true that Ghulam must have been in possession of the land in dispute in assertion of his right as purchaser for some crops prior to 1936, and if the relevant Kara girders had been produced, it would have been possible to hold that 12 years had elapsed even before the 1st of March 1947. But as the records stands, we do not find it necessary to give a considered opinion contrary to the finding of the learned Custodian on the question of adverse possession. 9, To revert to whether the land in dispute was or could be deemed as evacuee property from the IST of March 1947, reference may be made to section 3 of Act XII of 1957, which provides as follows “3. Property not to be treated as evacuee property on or after 1st January 1957.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or, as the case may be, as evacuee property, on or after the said date. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply- (a) to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced, or any proceedings are pending immediately before. the date mentioned therein for treating such person as evacuee or such property as evacuee property; or (ft) to any property which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or night so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approve by the Custodial.” The order of the Custodian is dated the 7th of July 1962, by. which, In effect, he declared the property to be evacuee and directed Ghulam to render accounts of the property, treating it as evacuee property. There is a bar in subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 in treating a person or property, not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property before the IST day of January 1957, as evacuee or evacuee property on or after the said date. It is nobody’s case that the property was treated by the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Department as evacuee property. Therefore, it could not be treated as evacuee property by the Custodian in view of subsection (1) of section 3. Learned counsel for the Custodian, however, relied on, clause (b) to subsubsection (2) of section 3 above, and contended that as the property was occupied or managed by a person whose authority to do so after the 28th of February 1957, had not been accepted or approved by the Custodian, the bar under subsection (1) of section 3 did not apply. We do not, however, consider that the property of Ghulam was evacuee and could be treated as such, because, as already held, Ghulam had acquired proprietary rights in the land, and the evacuees had no right, interest or title left in the land, and the question of the approval of the Custodian for its management does not arise. Therefore clause (b) to subsection (2) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 has no application to this case. We were referred to the decision of this Court in Writ Petition No. 634 of 1959, Vardar Our Muhammad v. The Custodian etc. decided on the IST of June 1960, but the facts of this case are distinguishable. 10. Learned counsel for the Custodian also relies on paragraphs No. and of the Martial Law (Recovery of Unauthorized Evacuee Property) Regulation No. 49. Paragraph 3 deals with a situation where a person has acquired possession of any immovable property, the ownership of which did not vest in him before the IST of March 1947, and such a person is required to make a declaration to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner to give the particulars stated in the regulation and to deliver possession of the property on demand to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. Paragraph of Regulation 49 requires a person, other than a displaced person, who is in possession of evacuee property in any capacity whatever, to make a declaration before the 31st of December G H 1958, to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner giving the/ required particulars. These paragraphs have no application! to this case in view of what we have stated above. 11. For the reasons given above, we hold that the Custodian had committed an error apparent on the face of the record in not giving effect to the entries in the jacarandas from 1936 onwards. We, therefore, quash his order under Article 98 (2) of the Constitution and direct that he shall decide the matter afresh in the light of what we have stated above. 12. This writ petition is accepted with costs against the Custodian, WW"P*!egaldatabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 351 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-02-19): Judgment S. A. Mahmood, J.-Before 1936, Thalamus, husband of MST. Jingo, petitioner No. 1, and father of Raoul Baths, petitioner No. 2, purchased 32 canals of land, bearing Kara Nos. and, situate in village Muhammad Mural Mach, Thesis Sadiqabad, District Railcar Khan, from Drama Mai and others, respondents Nos. to 7, for a sum of Rs. 1,200. In the Jacaranda for the year 1936-37 and the succeeding Jacarandas up to 1956-57, which were exhibited as Exes. P. to P. by the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, he was shown as in possession of the land on account of purchase. This land was not allotted to anyone. As MST. Jingo and Raoul Baths were threatened by the Atari that if they did not obtain a declaration, that the land was non-evacuee the land would be allotted to refugees, they brought an application under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, for.a declaration to the effect that the land in dispute belonged to them and was not evacuee property, having been purchased by Ghulam, who had obtained its possession in pursuance of a sale and had been in its possession all along as owner, and after his death, his heirs had succeeded to the property and had been in undisturbed cultivating possession as owners. Before the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, the applicants produced their Mukhtar Burial, Muhammad Haman Atari (P. W. 1) and Allah Baths (P. W. 3). The Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, came to the conclusion that as presumption of truth attached to the entries in the revenue records and as there was no proof to the contrary, Ghulam was proved to be in continuous possession of land on account of purchase, without paying any Logan to anyone, and that he had even perfected his title over the land in dispute on account of adverse possession, even if it was not admitted that there was a sale. He, therefore, granted a declaration that the applicants were owners of the land in dispute as heirs of Ghulam and the evacuees had no interest in the land, but it was subject to confirmation by the Custodian. When the matter went to the learned Custodian, he was not prepared to accept the statement of Burial and was of the view that the statement of Allah Baths did not advance the case of the petitioner. He held that though it was recorded In the Jacarandas from 1936 onwards that Ghulam was in occupation of the land by purchase, it was not known how ho had purchased it, no sale*deed having been produced in support of it, and that if Ghulam had really purchased It, a mutation would certainly have been entered, and that as no mutation had been entered, Ghulam had not acquired any right or title over the land in dispute on account of adverse possession, because, on the establishment of Pakistan, only eleven years had elapsed and thereafter the property had vested in the Custodian, against whom, according to him,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 351 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-02-19): that as no mutation had been entered, Ghulam had not acquired any right or title over the land in dispute on account of adverse possession, because, on the establishment of Pakistan, only eleven years had elapsed and thereafter the property had vested in the Custodian, against whom, according to him, there could be no adverse possession, because, under the law, every person occupying such property held it on behalf of the Custodian. He, therefore, rejected the application of the petitioners and directed the petitioners to render accounts to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner (Land), Railcar Khan, in respect of the come, for BMG in occupation of the land of the evacuees. The petitioners thereupon filed this writ petition under Article 98 (2) (a) of the Constitution for a declaration that the order of the Custodian was illegal and had no legal effect, and for a direction to restore the order of the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property. 2. The first contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner TS that in view of section 3 (1) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII of 1957), no property, not treated as evacuee property before the IST day of January 1957, could be treated as evacuee property after the said date. It is not in dispute that this property was not allotted to anyone by the Rehabilitation Authorities, nor was TT treated as evacuee property by the Custodian. The word “treated” MN subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 has been interred* pretend by the learned Judges of the Supreme Court in Abdul Khalid- Abdul Razz v. Kishanchand and others Their Lordships have held that the ‘treating’ must relate to either a declaration by the Custodian about the nature of the property, or its user for the purposes of the Act by him or by the Rehabilitation Authorities, so as to indie ate a consciousness of the actual or assumed nature of the property. In the instant case, as it had not been so treated, subsection (1) of section 3 of the Act raises a clear bar to the Custodian passing an order m respect of this property which had the effect of so treating it after that date. The order of the Custodian had the effect of declaring it as evacuee property, because he has directed the petitioners to render accounts of the property for the entire period that they were in its possession, and has described it as land of the evacuees. 3. Learned counsel for the Custodian however relies on section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, which provides as under:- “3. Information relating to certain land to be furnished.-(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, but not later than ninety days therefrom, every person who. is in possession, supervision or management of any land which he knows or has reason to believe to be concealed evacuee property shall submit to the Rehabilitation Authority or the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 351 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-02-19): soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, but not later than ninety days therefrom, every person who. is in possession, supervision or management of any land which he knows or has reason to believe to be concealed evacuee property shall submit to the Rehabilitation Authority or the Settlement Authority, of the area concerned full information relating to such land, including the date since when, or the period for which, he has been in possession, supervision or management thereof. (2) Any such property as is referred to in subsection (1) shall, notwithstanding the provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, be treated as evacuee property, and shall vest and be deemed to have vested in the Custodian IA accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 7 of that Act.” He argues that this section overrides section 3 of Act XII of 1957. This section is applicable to persons who are in possession, supervision or management of any land which they know or have reason to believe to be concealed evacuee property. Its subsection (2) provides that such property shall, notwithstanding the provisions of section 3 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, be treated as evacuee property and shall vest and be deemed to have vested in the Custodian in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 3 of]fl that Act. This is not, however, the case here, as the land INI dispute was not “concealed evacuee property”. 4. The land in dispute was acquired by Ghulam prior to 1936. He is recorded in the Saraband| Ex. P. as in possession on account of purchase. The entry in the Jacaranda would not have come about unless Ghulam had been in possession for some harvests prior thereto. Reading the instructions in the Land Settlement Manual along with the claim of the petitioners and the evidence led by them, the conclusion could be drawn that Ghulam had been in possession of the land in dispute for more than 12 years, even before the IST day of March 1947. 5. The entries in the Jacarandas, to which presumption of correctness attaches, prove that a sale in favor of Ghulam did take place before 1936. The sale may have been oral, and a mutation was obviously not entered, but the transaction of sale was acted upon, and possession having been delivered, had been completed. The sale was thus a completed transaction. No rights were, therefore, left in the non-Muslim owners, who never asserted their rights to this property. In view of the entries in the Jacarandas the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, was right in holding that Ghulam had acquired proprietary rights in the land and the evacuees had no title or interest left in the land, which may have vested in the Custodian. The property,( therefore, cannot be said to have vested in the Custodian under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949). 6. Learned counsel for the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 351 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-02-19): in the land and the evacuees had no title or interest left in the land, which may have vested in the Custodian. The property,( therefore, cannot be said to have vested in the Custodian under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XV of 1949). 6. Learned counsel for the Custodian, respondent No. 1, contends that as the name of the evacuees continued to be recorded as owners in the Jacarandas, they had a right and interest in the land, which vested in the Custodian with effect from the 1st day of March 1947 under section 6 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, corresponding to section 7 of Act XII of 1957. It is obvious that the names of the evacuees continued to be recorded as owners because a mutation was not entered, and the mere fact that the names of the evacuees continued to be entered as owners does not prove that they had proprietary rights left in the land, as they had parted with their rights by sale. Learned counsel for the respondent argued that it could not be said that there was an outright sale in favor of Ghulam and that the finding to the contrary by the Custodian cannot be interfered with in exercise of powers of certiorari. He relies on an unreported judgment of the Supreme Court m Armada and Almada v. MST. Vardar Begum and another Civil Appeal No. 62 of 1962, decided on 25th October 1963, which holds that even on the assumption that the finding of the Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner was wrong, it could not be said that the error was apparent on the face of the record, because it was not self-evident, and required investigation of facts and arguments to establish it. In this judgment reference was made to Rex v. Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal (1) m which Denying, L. J. observed : “It will have been seen that throughout all the cases there is one governing rule : “certiorari is only available to quash a decision for error of law if the error appears on the face of the record’.” In the same case, Morris, L. J. also observed as follows “It is plain that certiorari will not issue as the cloak of an appeal in disguise. It does not lie in order to bring an order of decision for rehearing of the issue raised in the proceedings. It exists to correct error of law ‘where revealed’ on the face of an order or decision or irregular, or absence of, or excess of jurisdiction where shown.” In Tariq Transport Company v. Sargodha Hera Bus Service and others (2) their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed “Particularly with reference to writs of certiorari and prohibition, the error should generally appear on the very face of the proceedings, and the relief granted should be addressed specifically to the correction of such error. If then, no error of the relevant kind is made to appear In the petition

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 351 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-02-19): “Particularly with reference to writs of certiorari and prohibition, the error should generally appear on the very face of the proceedings, and the relief granted should be addressed specifically to the correction of such error. If then, no error of the relevant kind is made to appear In the petition itself it is clearly the duty of the Court to reject the petition.” Learned counsel also relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Hard Vishnu Klamath v. Syed Ahmad Issue and others (1) m which observations to the same effect were made. It was held: “TT may, therefore, be taken as settled that a writ of certiorari could be issued to correct an error of law. But it is essential that it should be something more than a mere error ; it must be one which must be manifest on the face of the record. The real difficulty with reference to this matter, however, is not so much in the statement of the principle as in its application to the facts of a particular case. When does an error cease to be mere error, and become an error apparent on the face of the record? Learned counsel on either side were unable to suggest any clear-cut rule by which the boundary between the two classes of errors could be demarcated. Mr. Kathak for the first respondent contended on the strength of certain observations of Charley, C. J. in Batik K. Was v. Murat Municipality AIR 1953 BOM. 133 that no error could be said to be apparent on the face of the record if it was not self-evident, and if it required an examination or argument to establish it. This test might afford a satisfactory basis for decision in the majority of cases. But there must be cases in which even this test might break down, because judicial opinions also differ, and an error that might be considered by one Judge as self-evident might not be so considered by another. The fact is that what is an error apparent on the face of the record cannot be defined precisely or exhaustively, there being an element of indefiniteness inherent in its very nature, and it must be left to be determined judicially on the facts of each case.” We agree respectfully with the view expressed above, that in certiorari we can only interfere if there is an error apparent on the face of the order of the Custodian, and that we cannot deal with his order as an appellate Court correcting mistakes of fact. 7. As observed above, each case has to be decided on its own facts. The real difficulty lies not in the statement of the principle as in its application to the facts of a particular case. In our view, the Custodian committed an error on the face of the record m ignoring altogether the entries in the jacarandas which continuously existed from 1936 onwards. There was no evidence to rebut the entries in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 351 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-02-19): the principle as in its application to the facts of a particular case. In our view, the Custodian committed an error on the face of the record m ignoring altogether the entries in the jacarandas which continuously existed from 1936 onwards. There was no evidence to rebut the entries in the jacarandas. These entries were made at a time long before Independence and no suspicion should normally have been attached to such entries. These entries were made when the Hindu owners still lived in this part of the sub-Continent, and yet they did not assert their rights to the land or contest the correctness of the entries in the jacarandas. The Custodian observed that no sale-deed had been produced and that if Ghulam had really purchased the land, a mutation would have been entered. It is nobody’s case that a sale-deed was executed or that a mutation was entered or sanctioned. It was ignored that If a sale-deed had been produced or if a mutation had been entered and sanctioned, the name of Ghulam would have found mention In column No. 4. It was entirely ignored by the Custodian that Ghulam had been MN possession as a purchaser, so that it was a completed transaction. The learned Custodian, therefore, in our view, committed an error of law, which is apparent on the face of the record, in ignoring the presumption of correctness and truth which attaches to the entries in the jacarandas. 8. The Custodian secondly held that Ghulam had not perfected his title to the land by adverse possession, because 12 years had not elapsed since the entries in the first jacarandas in 1936 came into being. It is true that from 1936 to the IST of March 1947, only a period of eleven years had elapsed, and, by reason of section 7 of Act XII of 1957, “all evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed always to have vested In the Custodian with effect from the first day of March 1947”. Section 10 (1) of Act XII of 1957 also provides that- “Every person who is, or has at any time after the twenty-eighth day of February 1947, been in possession, supervision or management of any evacuee property, shall be deemed to hold or to have held; as the case may be, such property on behalf of the Custodian.” It is true that Ghulam must have been in possession of the land in dispute in assertion of his right as purchaser for some crops prior to 1936, and if the relevant Kara girders had been produced, it would have been possible to hold that 12 years had elapsed even before the 1st of March 1947. But as the records stands, we do not find it necessary to give a considered opinion contrary to the finding of the learned Custodian on the question of adverse possession. 9, To revert to whether the land in dispute was or could be deemed as evacuee property from the IST of March

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 351 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-02-19): the records stands, we do not find it necessary to give a considered opinion contrary to the finding of the learned Custodian on the question of adverse possession. 9, To revert to whether the land in dispute was or could be deemed as evacuee property from the IST of March 1947, reference may be made to section 3 of Act XII of 1957, which provides as follows “3. Property not to be treated as evacuee property on or after 1st January 1957.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or, as the case may be, as evacuee property, on or after the said date. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply- (a) to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced, or any proceedings are pending immediately before. the date mentioned therein for treating such person as evacuee or such property as evacuee property; or (ft) to any property which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or night so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approve by the Custodial.” The order of the Custodian is dated the 7th of July 1962, by. which, In effect, he declared the property to be evacuee and directed Ghulam to render accounts of the property, treating it as evacuee property. There is a bar in subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 in treating a person or property, not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property before the IST day of January 1957, as evacuee or evacuee property on or after the said date. It is nobody’s case that the property was treated by the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Department as evacuee property. Therefore, it could not be treated as evacuee property by the Custodian in view of subsection (1) of section 3. Learned counsel for the Custodian, however, relied on, clause (b) to subsubsection (2) of section 3 above, and contended that as the property was occupied or managed by a person whose authority to do so after the 28th of February 1957, had not been accepted or approved by the Custodian, the bar under subsection (1) of section 3 did not apply. We do not, however, consider that the property of Ghulam was evacuee and could be treated as such, because, as already held, Ghulam had acquired proprietary rights in the land, and the evacuees had no right, interest or title left in the land, and the question of the approval of the Custodian for its management does not arise. Therefore clause (b) to subsection (2) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 has no application to this case. We were referred to the decision of this Court in Writ Petition No. 634 of 1959, Vardar Our Muhammad v. The Custodian etc.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 351?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 351 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-02-19): Custodian for its management does not arise. Therefore clause (b) to subsection (2) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 has no application to this case. We were referred to the decision of this Court in Writ Petition No. 634 of 1959, Vardar Our Muhammad v. The Custodian etc. decided on the IST of June 1960, but the facts of this case are distinguishable. 10. Learned counsel for the Custodian also relies on paragraphs No. and of the Martial Law (Recovery of Unauthorized Evacuee Property) Regulation No. 49. Paragraph 3 deals with a situation where a person has acquired possession of any immovable property, the ownership of which did not vest in him before the IST of March 1947, and such a person is required to make a declaration to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner to give the particulars stated in the regulation and to deliver possession of the property on demand to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. Paragraph of Regulation 49 requires a person, other than a displaced person, who is in possession of evacuee property in any capacity whatever, to make a declaration before the 31st of December G H 1958, to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner giving the/ required particulars. These paragraphs have no application! to this case in view of what we have stated above. 11. For the reasons given above, we hold that the Custodian had committed an error apparent on the face of the record in not giving effect to the entries in the jacarandas from 1936 onwards. We, therefore, quash his order under Article 98 (2) of the Constitution and direct that he shall decide the matter afresh in the light of what we have stated above. 12. This writ petition is accepted with costs against the Custodian, WW"P*!egaldatabase.com

Question: What is case 1964 PLD 274 about?
Answer: Case 1964 PLD 274 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1964-03-05. The case involved SYED ALI IQTIDAR SHAH DARA AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY WEST PAKISTAN LAHORE RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. (1), (2) (A), (B), SS. 7,11 AND 20 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 41 INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_274.html 1/19 28/10/2025, 00:36 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_274.html. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALI, INAMULLAH KHAN, WAHEEDUDDIN AHMAD, ANWARUL HAQ AND MUHAMMAD DAUD KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: In case 1964 PLD 274, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. (1), (2) (A), (B), SS. 7,11 AND 20 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 41 INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_274.html 1/19 28/10/2025, 00:36 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_274.html. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1964-03-05.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1964 PLD 274 were: SH. BASHIR AHMAD ASSISTED BYS. M. ZAFAR AND INAYAT ULLAH KHAN FOR PETITIONERS. MAJOR ISHAQ MUHAMMAD KHAN SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER (LEGAL) FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALI, INAMULLAH KHAN, WAHEEDUDDIN AHMAD, ANWARUL HAQ AND MUHAMMAD DAUD KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: The parties in case 1964 PLD 274 were: SYED ALI IQTIDAR SHAH DARA AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY WEST PAKISTAN LAHORE RESPONDENT. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1964 PLD 274.
Answer: Judgment Wahiduddin Ahmad, J.-This writ petition is directed against the order of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, dated the 8th of February 1960. By this order the learned Custodian in his so moth revisional powers set aside the order of the Additional Custodian dated the 12th of June 1952, which declared the property in dispute as non-evacuee. 2. It is unnecessary to give in detail all the facts of the case. It will be sufficient to mention that one Baht Bear Shah sold on the 23rd of April 1935 certain agricultural land in Lyallpur District for Rs. 55,250 to one Johan Singh. The vendor died m the year 1945. Brigadier Diaz Hussain Shah, Col. Muhammad Mukhtar Shah and Ali Tidal Shah, the sons of the vendor, along with the sons of Baht Bear Shah, another son of the deceased, on the 30th of October 1947 brought a suit against the purchaser for a declaration that the alienations of ancestral lands did not affect their reversionary interests on the ground that the sale was without legal necessity. The suit was decreed on the 19th of February 1948 ex parte by Ch. Fable Allah, the then Senior Sub- Judge, Lyallpur. After the introduction of the Evacuee Laws, the petitioners filed an application under section 18 of Ordinance No. XV or 1949 for a declaration that the lands in dispute were not evacuee properties. The learned Deputy Custodian, Lyallpur, by order dated the 26th of March 1952, accepted the contention of the petitioners and granted them a declaration subject to confirmation by the Custodian. In giving the above-mentioned declaration he relied on the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Court. Mr. Fate Khan, the then Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, by order dated the 12th of June 1952, confirmed the order of the Deputy Custodian and declared f share in the property in dispute as non-evacuee. This was followed by mutation in the revenue records. In November 1959 this case was brought to the notice of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, who on 13-11-1959 issued notices to the petitioners for so moth revision of the order passed by the learned Additional Custodian referred to above. On the 8th of February 1960 the learned Custodian set aside the order of the learned Additional Custodian and remanded the case for further inquiry. The petitioners seek to challenge this order m this writ petition on the ground that it was passed without jurisdiction. _ 3. The writ petition came up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court. It was brought to the notice of the Court that there is a conflict of opinion about the interpretation of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 expressed in some of the reported and unreported decisions of this Court. In view of this divergence of view, my Lord the Chief Justice referred this question to the Full Bench for disposal. 4. The question for consideration before the Full Bench is about the scope and true import of section 3 of Act XII of 1957. Has it completely taken away the jurisdiction of the Custodian to declare any person or property as evacuee, who or which was not treated as evacuee immediately before the IST of January 1957 or TS it still opens to him to declare the person or properties as evacuee without any limitation? The answer to this question depends on the interpretation of this section, which is reproduced below:- “Property not to be treated as evacuee property on or after 1st January 1957.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or, as the case may be, as evacuee property, on or after the said date. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply- (a) to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before the date mentioned therein for treating such person as evacuee or such property as evacuee property; or (b) to any property which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or night so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian.” Mr. Bashir Ahmed, the learned counsel for the petitioners, pressed at the hearing that any person or property who or which was not treated as evacuee for whatever reason immediately before the IST January 1957, now cannot be declared as evacuee. He contended that only concealed evacuee agricultural land is not covered by this provision of law in view of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958. On the other hand, Major Iraq Muhammad Khan very strongly urged that every concealed and hidden evacuee property is outside its purview. His contention is that under sub-clause (b) of section 3(2) the Custodian has unlimited power to pass such orders as he deems fit in respect of hidden evacuee property. He can still declare such property as evacuee property for inclusion in the compensation pool under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act. 5. Before dealing with the legal aspect of the case it will be convenient to notice the background and legislative history of the impugned legislation. Immediately after Partition, in West Pakistan in almost all the then existing Provinces, the evacuee law was introduced in some shape or other. The idea behind this \ legislation was to protect the property left by the non-Muslims on their migration to India. In October 1948, the Central Government introduced the Evacuee Law by Ordinance No. VIII of 1948 for the whole of Pakistan. The salient features of this legislation were to protect and take care of the property left by the evacuees in Pakistan, and to restore it if the evacuee had returned to Pakistan with the bona fide intention of permanent residence But in October 1949 the trend of legislation changed and by Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance No. XV of 1949 this concession was withdrawn. Section 6 of this Ordinance provided that all evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed to have always vested in the Custodian with effect from the 1st of March 1947. By section 7 it was further provided that every person holding the possession of or managing or supervising any evacuee property shall be deemed to hold or have held it on behalf of the Custodian. This legislation was further amended in 1951 and 1952. The effect of the amended legislation was that the scope of the definition of “evacuee”’ was enlarged ; provision was further made for declaring certain persons residing in Pakistan as “intending evacuees” and under certain circumstances such persons without any formal declaration could be treated as evacuees. 6. The history of the legislation further shows that in 1956 there was a departure in the policy of the State in respect of evacuee legislation. By Ordinance No. XX of 1956 the provisions of “intending evacuees” contained in Chapter 6 were omitted from the statute. Under section 3 of this Ordinance it was provided as under : “Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, no person or property not treated as evacuee or evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or as the case may be, evacuee property, on or after the said date.” Thus, under this legislation the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Authorities were permitted or given time to treat a person or property as evacuee within a month and thirteen days of the commencement of this legislation. In effect after the 1st of January 1957 this power, without any reservation, was taken away. It, however, appears that this legislation did not achieve satisfactory result and, therefore, a fresh permanent legislation was brought into force in the shape of Act XII of 1957. Under section 3 of this enactment certain exceptions were made and the power of the Custodian Authorities to treat certain properties as evacuee was restored. The text of the relevant provision has already been reproduced MN the earlier part of the judgment. It consists of two parts. In subsection (1) the original section 3 of Ordinance No. XVIII of 1956 is kept intact, but under subsection (2) certain class of persons and properties are exempted from the purview of sub-clause There is not much difficulty in the interpretation of subsection (1) of section 3. It is an overriding provision of law and has far-reaching consequences. It contains \ a positive direction that in spite of what is contamed MN other A parts of the Act no person or property not treated as evacuee / or evacuee property Immediately before the 1st day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee on or after the said date. On a plain reading of this part of the section it cannot be doubted that it places restriction on the power of the Custodian in respect of persons or property which were not treated as evacuees before the above-mentioned date by prohibiting him to treat such person or property as evacuee. The form of the words used is a well recognized and convenient method of repealing inconsistent provisions of the statute. 7. Major Iraq Muhammad Khan, on behalf of the Department, has strenuously argued that the scope of this subsection is very narrow and limited. He contended that it would not apply to those properties which admittedly were evacuee properties and vested in the Custodian. He further urged that both under section of Act VII of 1948 of former West Punjab Province and section 7 of Ordinance No. XV of 1949 all evacuee properties are held on behalf of the Custodian and have thereby been treated as evacuee property. This argument has not impressed me. In the first place, the vesting of property in the Custodian or the holding of property on behalf of the Custodian is only by fiction of law. In that application these provisions are of a general nature because they do not deal with any specific or identified property. In the second place, the most formidable hurdle in the way of the Department pertains to the words “not treated” used m the subsection under consideration The significance of these words cannot be overlooked. In my opinion their meaning is that the mere vesting of the property in the Custodian is not sufficient. The competent authorities must have done some overt act in respect of some specific property, namely that any particular person or any particular property must have been treated by a competent authority as evacuee or evacuee property. This view is strengthened by the fact that in another part of the enactment the Legislature has specifically provided a remedy to the parties who feel aggrieved from the treatment of their properties as evacuee. In section 22 of Act XII of 1957, which corresponds to section 18 of Act V of 1949 it is provided that any person claiming any right or interest in any property treated by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Authorities as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian on the ground that the property is not evacuee property or his interest in the property has not been affected by the provisions of this Act. In other words, it means that no person should feel aggrieved by the mere fact that under section 7 of Act XII of 1957 all evacuee property vests in the Custodian. That by itself is nothing. There must be some overt act on the part of the Rehabilitation Authorities or the Custodian Authorities in respect of specific property before the aggrieved party should approach the Custodian Authorities for a declaration that bis property has been wrongly treated as evacuee by any competent authority. In a recent case: Perusal v. Central Government of Pakistan the Lordships of the Supreme Court of Pakistan have also adverted to this aspect of the question and observed that “an application under section 18 competent only if the property in dispute was treated as evacuee C (1) PLD 1963 S C 127 property by a Rehabilitation Authority or the Custodian”. The Lordships further observed that “Whenever a person applies under section 18 he has to assert that the action taken by the Rehabilitation Authorities is illegal and ultra vires and if the Custodian grants him a declaration it amounts to saying that the action of the Rehabilitation Authorities was ultra vires’It seems to me that there is a vast difference between the two notions, namely, the vesting of the property and the treatment of a property. In the first case, by fiction of law the property generally vests in the Custodian, to enable him to take possession or to take other steps for the protection of specified properties. In the other, some overt act in respect of a particular property is implied. The use of the words “not treated” clearly suggests that mere vesting of the property generally in the Custodian under section 7 of Act XII of 1957 is not treatment of a particular person or property as evacuee or evacuee property. I am, therefore, of the opinion that neither the vesting of the property in the Custodian nor the holding of the property on behalf of the Custodian has any material bear mg on to inter’ predation of this subsection. 8. I will now pass on to another argument, namely, that section 3 (1) is not applicable to those cases where a property admittedly was evacuee property and is claimed by a third party on the basis of a transfer in his favor. It is contended that even if such transfer is confirmed, it is open to the Custodian Authorities under their revisional or review powers to re-open the confirmation of such transaction. This contention also cannot be supported on the language of the above-mentioned provision of law. Once the Custodian Authorities have confirmed the transfer in favor of a third party such property ceases to be evacuee property and by no stretch of imagination can be considered to have been treated as evacuee property immediately before the 1st of January 1957. It was urged that if this view is taken, the revisional and review powers given to the Custodian Authorities would become nugatory. It was also suggested that IFA case is decided about ten days before the IST of January 1957 by the Custodian Authorities, the aggrieved party on this interpretation will be deprived of his right to move the Custodian Authorities in their appellate, revisional or review jurisdiction. The hardships pointed out by the learned counsel for the Department are no doubt there, but if the language of the section takes away these powers of the Custodian no Court of law, simply on the ground of hardship, can interpret any provision of law in order to remove such hardships. These arguments were also advanced before a Division Bench of this Court at Karachi in the case of Kishanchand Johanan and others v. Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi and were repelled. It was observed in that case as under :- F “That section 3 is an over-riding provision of law and if in its application in certain cases the other provisions in the evacuee law are rendered ineffective, the Courts of law cannot question the wisdom of the Legislature. The very fact that revisional and review powers under section 43 are not specifically saved clearly indicates that it is also subject to the provisions of section 3.” The learned representative for the Department, who very ably put his case, has not been able to persuade me that the view taken in the above decision is not consistent with the language employed in the subsection under consideration, or in accordance with well accepted principles of interpretation of statutes. In the above-mentioned Karachi decision every aspect of the case was considered and there is’ no escape from the conclusion that if any person or property was not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the IST day of January 1957, the Custodian has no jurisdiction to deal with the case of such person or property. There is a complete prohibition in this respect and the jurisdiction of the Custodian in such matters has been, subject to clause totally taken away. 9. It was next urged on behalf of the Department that in a case where a party has obtained an order by practicing fraud on the Custodian, it is open to him on discovery of the fraud to reopen and examine such case and treat it as a nullity. In support of this contention the learned representative of the Department has placed reliance on a Division Bench decision of this Court at Karachi, in Ahmad Khan and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan and others As will be presently shown the contention of the Department cannot be accepted. In the first place the Custodian as Tribunal of Special Jurisdiction does not possess or exercise any inherent jurisdiction( which the ordinary Civil Courts exercise, to recall so moth an order procured by fraud. In MST. Suraj Fatima and others v. Mahmood Ali and others (2) Sulaiman, J. rejected the contention that the Revenue Courts in exercise of inherent jurisdiction could set aside orders obtained by practicing fraud on them. At page 301, of the report, Sulaiman, J. on this aspect of the question, observed as under:- “In the present case there is clear reason for allowing a separate suit. There is no provision for a review of judgment by a subordinate Revenue Court under the U. P. Land Revenue Act. The doctrine of inherent jurisdiction can hardly be invoked MN such a case. It would not be open to the Revenue Court to reopen the partition on the allegation that the guardian of the Moor had been negligent. As a matter of fact so far as the provisions of that Act go there is no section expressly applying the provisions of Civil Procedure Code relating to the appointment of a guardian for a minor to the proceedings in the Revenue Court. The remedy of the Moor, if any, can be only by a separate suit. The suit for avoidance of a previous order of a competent Court is undoubtedly one of a civil nature and falls within the scope of section 9, Civil Procedure Code. Such a suit is attainable in a Civil Court. IFA review of judgment by the Revenue Court is not permitted, there is no reason why remedy by way of a fresh suit in the Civil Court should not be allowed.” In another Full Bench case, Sambar Biswas v. Amarna Charon Mary and others the learned Judges of the Calcutta High Court m an application for ratable distribution held that the executing Court has no power to inquire whether decree is proper or bona fide one. Their Lordships on this post observed as under "The dominating factor with regard to this point is this: that the Court concerned with the distribution of the assets is doing something in connection with execution proceedings. The distribution of assets is only one of the acts in the execution proceedings, and the Court is function mg I'm an administrative and not in a judicial capacity, and no procedure is provided under the provisions of section 73 of the Act, 1908, and no machinery exists for the holding of an inquiry of the kind involved in the ascertainment whether the decree is not a bona fide or proper decree.” On this view of the matter it is abundantly clear that those tribunals which either act m an administrative capacity or do not'possess inherent, jurisdiction are not competent to disregard any order passed by them on the ground that it was obtained by fraud. H Secondly in Pakistan, apart from this inherent power, the ordinary civil Court exercises the power to treat a judgment or order as nullity on the ground of fraud under section 44 of the Evidence Act. This section provides that where one of the parties to a suit or other proceeding tenders or has put in a judgment, order and decree under sections 40, 41, 42, it is open to the party against whom TT is offered to avoid its effect on the ground of fraud. It is based on the well-established rule of law that a judgment or decree obtained by fraud upon a Court does not bind such Court or any other and TTS nullity upon this ground could be alleged in a collateral proceeding. It is on this basis that every civil Court of competent jurisdiction, whether superior or inferior can treat as nullity any judgment which is proved to have been obtained by fraud discovered after judgment. But unfortunately as the law stands in cases covered by section 3 of Act XII of 1957, the Custodian cannot evoke the provisions of section 44 of the Evidence Act to treat any order obtained by fraud as nullity. In law, judgment or order obtained by fraud is voidable and not void ab initio. In Ambikamoni Dash v Extra Ghost and others this view was enunciated by a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court. In this connection their Lordships observed as under / “That a decree tainted with fraud but passed by a Court competent to try the suit is not void but only voidable and will be binding unless avoided within the prescribed period of the limitation by suitable proceedings.” In Visionary Tiwari and others v. MST. Mir chi this view was also taken ~by the majority of the Judges of the Patna High Court. Ramaswamy, J. on this point observed as under “Fraud does not make a judicial act or transaction void but only voidable at the instance of the party defrauded. The judicial act may be impeached on the ground of fraud or collusion m an active proceeding for rescission by way of suit or application for review. But the judgment may also be impeached in a collateral proceeding in which fraud may be set up as a defense to an action on the judgment or as an answer to a plea of estoppel or res judicata founded upon the judgment.” In Henson v. Shelley the English Court of Appeal also held that a grant of letters of administration obtained by fraud is not when revoked by the probate Court void ab initio but only as from the date of the revocation. In Defend Path Duty v. Administrator-General of Bengal it was pleaded before the Privy Council by the sureties that the letters of administration having been annulled by the Court on the ground of fraud must be regarded as nullity from the beginning and that the bond was, so far as the sureties were concerned void and of no effect. The Lordships repelled this contention and observed as under:- “But there is really no substance in the appellant’s contention. So long as the letters of administration granted to Cowie remained unrevoked, Cole, although a rogue and an impostor, was to all intents and purposes administrator. He, and he alone, represented the deceased in India. His receipts were valid discharges for all monies received by him as administrator. As administrator he collected the assets belonging to the deceased in India, and he misappropriated the assets which he so collected. For his acts and defaults as administrator the appellant and his co-surety became and must remain responsible.” It is thus perfectly clear that so long as a judgment or order stands or is not set aside it is valid and becomes operative only after it is established that it was obtained by fraud. Fraud being a mixed question of law and fact can only be established in an elaborate inquiry. I have no doubt that in ordinary cases the Custodian can investigate this question in his revisional or review jurisdiction. But in those cases which are covered by section 3 (1) of Act XII of 1957, the Custodian is not competent and has no jurisdiction to enter upon any such inquiry. In clause (2) of this section the Legislature has specifically saved certain class of cases from the purview of subsection (1) but the cases involving the question of fraud do not find any place in TT. It is, therefore, not possible in such cases to treat an order obtained by fraud on a different footing from an order which is otherwise illegal or bad. Either section 3(1) applies to such cases or it does not apply. I am not inclined to interpret this subsection in a manner which would destroy its full effect, particularly as the provision relating to ouster of jurisdiction of special tribunal is to be construed in a strict manner. On the language of the subsection under consideration the jurisdiction of the Custodian except in those cases which are provided in subsection (2) is totally barred. In view of this, it cannot be held that the Custodian in such cases is competent to treat any order passed by him or his subordinate as a nullity on the ground that a person or a property was illegally treated as non-evacuee. j In such cases the only remedy open to the Custodian is to file) a suit in a competent Court of civil jurisdiction. 10. It was urged that section 41 of Act XII of 1957, would be a bar to enter tam any such suits. In law when the language of a section of an Act is not ambiguous, in interpreting the play words of such a positive enactment ousting the jurisdiction of a tribunal any suggestion of hardship is irrelevant and out of place. But on a recent decision of the Supreme Court in Detached Multimap v. Deputy Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner and others Civil Appeal No. 40 of 1962, decided on 19th November 1963, there should be no such apprehension. The following observations of the Supreme Court in a settlement case throw abundant light on this aspect:- “Learned counsel appear mg for the respondent and the Settlement Authorities have of course, contended that it would even now be within the jurisdiction of the Custodian to decide this question under section 41 of the Act of 1957, and nobody else would have the jurisdiction to adjudicate in respect of any such matter. Section 41 excludes the jurisdiction of the Civil or Revenue Court only with regard to a matter which the Custodian is empowered to decide under the said Act. Under the said Act, the Custodian has the power to decide whether the property is an evacuee property or not. There is, in the present case, however, no dispute that the property is evacuee property. So there is nothing left for the Custodian to decide. Even otherwise as soon as a property is acquired by Notification under section 3 of the Act of 1958, it ceases to be evacuee and the Custodian has, thereafter no further jurisdiction with regard to it.” Their Lordships further observed:- “We have come to the conclusion therefore, that in the present case by reason of the property having been acquired by a Notification issued under section 3 of the Act of 1958, the Custodian Authorities ceased to have any jurisdiction in respect of the said property. Furthermore, even otherwise the Custodian Authorities would not have in our opinion, had any jurisdiction to decide this particular question under the Act of 1957. Again under the Act of 1958, the Settlement Authorities do not also appear to have acquired any jurisdiction to decide this question. The appellant must therefore of necessity have recourse to the civil Courts to have the character of this trust adjudicated upon after the taking of evidence, particularly, since the transferee-respondent is also challenging the validity of the trust itself on the ground that a trust for Dharma simpliciter is void under the Hindu Law.” It will thus follow that in those cases where the Custodian] has ceased to have jurisdiction there would be no bar for) the civil Courts to adjudicate upon a question which ordinarily falls within the purview on their jurisdiction. This is the natural consequence of the rule of implied repeal, a well recognized principle of interpretation of statute. It seems to me that on this view of the matter the Custodian has ample remedy for the redress of such grievances in suitable cases. 11. I will now proceed to consider the effect of subsection (2) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957. This subsection is subdivided MTO two parts. Clause (a) provides that nothing in subsection (1) shall apply to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before the date mentioned therein for treating such person as an evacuee or such property as evacuee property. There is no dispute about the interpretation of this clause of the subsection. It was conceded that if no action had commenced immediately before the LST of January 1957, and no proceedings were pending before that date, such cases are not covered by this clause. 12. The difficulty, however, arises in interpreting clause (b) of subsection (2) of section 3. Under this sub-clause the effect of section 3(1) has been taken away in respect of any evacuee property which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the 28th day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian. The interpretation of this sub-clause arose in three cases before Division Benches of this Court at Lahore. In the case of Rai's Ghazi Muhammad v. The Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan Kay ani, C. J. observed that “it was not possible to accept the argument that it applies to the cases of all persons other than original owners of property as, for distance, trans fares, trespassers and agents”. He further observed that “On its plain language it applies only to a person whose authority or right to occupy, supervise or manage any property has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian’. In a subsequent unreported case Utah Ali V. Custodian, Evacuee Property, Lahore Writ Petition No. 197 of 1961, decided on the 22nd of December 1961, though the case was decided under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act 1958, the Division Bench referred to CERTAM other aspects involved in the interpretation of this subsection. But did not give any firm decision on TT. Kayak, C. J. who was party to both the decisions, made certain weighty observations. In order to bring out the doubt lurking in his mind TT will be useful to reproduce the relevant portion of this judgment. His Lordship observed as under: “Prima facie, one gets an impression from this definition that clause (b) of section 3, subsection was intended to apply to the case of persons who were residents in India even before the Partition but owned property in Pakistan which before the Partition, was held and managed by other persons. We notice, however, that in other parts of the Act, such as section 11 also the same or similar words have been used in respect of evacuee property whether it belonged to persons originally resident in India or to persons who resided in Pakistan but who left the country at the time of the Partition. Thus, subsection (2) of section 10 requires ‘every person who is in possession, supervision or management of any evacuee property or property which he knows or has reason to believe is evacuee property, and whose authority or right to occupy, supervise or manage such property after the 28th day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian’, to intimate to the Custodian his willingness to surrender such property to the Custodian, etc. It could not have been argued that section 10 or section 11 confined themselves only to one category of evacuee property, namely, that which was managed in Pakistan on behalf of persons who are resident in India. Further, it could not be reasonably argued that clause (b) of section 3, subsection (2) removed from the general protection of that section property which belongs to residents in India but protected the property which had been left by persons who became evacuees in 1947. In order to strengthen his case, learned counsel for the Custodian referred to section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act 1958, which provides in subsection (1) that with ninety days of this Act ‘every person who is in possession, supervision or management of any land which he knows or has reason to believe to be concealed evacuee property shall submit to the Rehabilitation Authority, or the Settlement Authority of the area concerned, full information relating to such land.’ Subsection (2) is to the following effect: ‘Any such property as is referred to in subsection (I) shall, notwithstanding the provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957, be treated as evacuee property, and shall vest and be deemed to have vested in the Custodian in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 7 of that Act.’ Learned counsel argued that after the commencement of this Act, which came MTO force on the 23rd of September 1958, even if any property was protected under section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957, that protection was taken away from it if it was concealed evacuee property’. In one sense the property was not concealed because the petitioner had a mutation effected through an appeal to the Collector. It was argued, however, for the Custodian, and with some reason, that the Collector being not an authority under the Act, any information to him was not information to the Custodian or to one of his subordinates. Section 10 of the Act requires every person who Is in possession, supervision or management of evacuee property to climate to the Custodian his willingness to surrender such property, and section 11 requires him to submit information to the Custodian. In the present case, in addition to these provisions, there was a separate provision under section 20 for obtaining a confirmation of the sale from the Custodian. We should therefore, hold that so far a? the Custodian goes, the present land TS ‘concealed evacuee property’ to which section 3 of the new Act applies. Incidentally the fact that subsection (2) of section 3 of this new Act makes a provision expressly against section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, would show that it was believed at the time when the new Act was drafted that section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957, applied to concealed evacuee property also. If this is so, then the argument of the learned Custodian that section 3 applies only to original owners of the property and not to trespassers, transferees and agents, will become more unacceptable.” 13. In an unreported case: Vardar Nut Muhammad v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore Writ Petition No. 634 of 1959, decided on the IST of June 1960, another Division Bench of this Court recorded a discordant note on the interpretation of the sub-clause under consideration. The contention that clause (b) applies only to those cases in which the property in dispute is in the hands of an agent and not of a trespasser was repelled by the Division Bench to which Jakub Al, J. was a party. On the post urged their Lordships observed as under:- ‘Firstly, we are clearly of the view that the disputed property does not at all fall in the ambit of section 3 for it had in law already been treated as evacuee property as long ago as 24th December 1947, when the Custodian Evacuee Property, West Punjab, issued a notification under Ordinance V of 1947, assuming possession of all evacuee property in the Province. Thereafter, the petitioner was in possession on behalf of the Custodian Evacuee Property and the fact that on account of deceit the petitioner did not surrender the disputed property to the Custodian or to the Rehabilitation Authorities does not entitle him to any premium. If any other view is adopted a startling result will be achieved, viz. that hidden evacuee property shall remain MN the hands of wrong-doers who under law can be prosecuted and punished for the very act of concealing and remaining in possession of evacuee property without any legal authority. The intention behind section 3 clearly is that in future no citizen of Pakistan will be treated as evacuee and his property shall be immune from being treated as such. The section is in negation of the earlier law of “intending evacuees” and does not purport to apply retrospectively to those persons and properties who had already become evacuee in law.” Thus, on this view, the provision of section 3 (1) has no effect in those cases where any person or property had already become evacuee in law or if the property is hidden evacuee property. I have already posted out the distinction between the notion of vesting of the property m the Custodian and treatment of the property as evacuee. In my opinion the mere vesting of the property or a general provision such as section 11 that every person in possession, supervision or management of any evacuee property shall be deemed to hold it on behalf of the Custodian or a general notification by the Custodian resulting in holding possession of certain class of property on his behalf is not in the nature of treatment of any particular person or property as evacuee. This by itself cannot be considered as treatment of any particular property as evacuee and therefore, is clearly affected by clause (1) of section 3. With profound respect to the observations in the last-mentioned case it is not possible for me to accept the view to the contrary in this case on this post. This point need not detain me in view of the full discussion in the earlier part of the judgment. 14. The view that all hidden evacuee property is outside the purview of section 3 (1) in view of clause (b) requires further consideration. In my option the immunity under section 3 (1) fact XII of 1957, is not confined to the citizens of Pakistan but to every one owing property in Pakistan. No distinction can be made in this behalf Subclause (b) of section 3(2) refers only to those cases where { the property being admittedly evacuee property is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the 28th day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian. Now who are those persons, whose authority or right require the approval or acceptance of the Custodian? There is little doubt that such persons cannot be the owners of the property because their occupation, supervision or management is in their own right and their right so to do cannot be assailed on the ground that they had already become evacuee and their property vests in the Custodian. Therefore, by process of reason mg it shall have to be applied only to those persons whose right to do any of the above acts is expected to receive the consent or approval of the Custodian. Looking at this provision from this angle it appears to me that in the first place this sub-clause applies to those persons who claim to / have derived their title through the evacuees and the transaction in their favor for some reason or other remains unconfirmed by the Custodian Authorities. Secondly, it applies to those cases where any such property is occupied by an agent or representative of an evacuee residing in India. It further applies to those cases where an evacuee property is occupied by a person without any legal or valid right, which will also include the case of a trespasser. This is evident from the words “right so to do” used in the subsection. If a trespasser is found to be in possession of an evacuee property, he will certainly be occupying, managing and supervising it without the approval of the Custodian and his right to hold it can be challenged on the ground of his unauthorized occupation. One can conceive of a trespasser who is in possession of a property since before the 28th of February 1947, which has ripened into adverse possession or title before that date. But such a case, besides rate, stands on a different foot mg and would be decided by the Custodian on the general principle of law applicable to such cases. I am, therefore, of the view that it covers not only the case of agents, transferees and representatives of evacuees but also the case of trespassers. 15. The argument that it applies to all hidden evacuee property cannot be accepted in view of the subsequent trend of legislation pyramid to this provision of Jaw. In the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, under section 3 a special provision was made for hidden evacuee property, and it was excluded from the purview of section 3 of Act XII of 1957. Similarly, after the promulgation of Martial Law, in Regulation No. 49 of 1958, similar provision was introduced. Under Para. of this Regulation it was provided as under : “3. Whoever has acquired possession of any immovable evacuee property, the ownership of which did not vest in him before the 1st March 1947, the'her such property has been treated by the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Authorities as evacuee property or not, by making false representations of fact, or by suppressing true facts, and whoever is in possession of such property, shall before the 31st December 1958, make a declaration to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner of the area where the property is located, giving full particulars of the property in question ; the date on which and the manner in which he came into possession of it; (c) the true facts in respect of the matters previously misrepresented or suppressed ; and (d) the total amount, if any, which has been derived as benefit from its use. (ii) Possession of the property in question shall on demand be handed over by the person making the declaration to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, who shall treat it as evacuee property, and the property shall vest in the Custodian. (hi) An equivalent in value of the amount declared under clause (d) of sub-paragraph (1) shall be delivered to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner concerned before the 31st January 1958, by the person making the declaration : Provided that the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded, extend the period and vary the mode of payment in any particular case. (iv) No penalty of any kind whatsoever under any law shall be imposed in respect of any circumstance arising out of the declaration so made before the 31st of December 1958.” Under this provision of law also persons who were in illegal possession of evacuee property were called upon to make a declaration before the 31st of December 1958, in respect of evacuee property, respective of the fact whether, it was treated by the Custodian as evacuee property or not and such property after its possession was demanded by the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner was to be treated as evacuee property and vested in the Custodian. These two pieces of legislation give a clear indication that clause (b) of section 3(2) does not exclude all the hidden evacuee property. It is confined only to those hidden evacuee properties which are in illegal occupation, supervision or management of persons other than the owners of the property. This view 1s further strengthened by the statement of Vardar Amir Adam Khan, Minister of Law, who piloted the Bill on behalf of the Government in his speech delivered MN reply to the criticism of the Opposition on 27-2-1957, in the National Assembly of Pakistan. The relevant portion of the speech is reproduced below: “So it says for all the unauthorized evacuee property or the hidden property if it is in occupation of any person today in any unauthorized manner action lies against that person in spite of the fact that there is this provision that nobody can be declared evacuee. So, Sir, Mr. Farid Ahmad should not think that he has got all the intelligence of the world or SLL the wisdom of the world or all the patriotism of the world. He should realize that others to have, if not that much of intelligence, at least some intelligence to look after the interest of this country. With these few words, would request that this Bill be passed.” I am conscious of the fact that speeches made in the Legislative Assembly are not admissible in evidence as extrinsic aid to the interpretation of statutory provisions, but in my opinion it is 7 relevant and material to consider the circumstances under which an Act was passed and the reasons which necessitated it. I have referred to this speech only from this angle. 16. It was urged by Major Iraq Muhammad Khan, the learned representative for the Department, that if this limited construction is given to sub-clause (b) of section 3 (2) it will render the other provisions in respect of hidden evacuee property in Act XII of 1957, nugatory. In my opinion this apprehension is not well-founded because sections 10 and 11 refer also to cases of those persons who are in unauthorized possession, supervision or management of evacuee property. This is obvious from the fact that this class of property was introduced m sections 10 and 11 of Act XII of 1957, for the first time with a view to bring it to par with section 3(2) of the enactment. Therefore, it isl perfectly clear that it does not apply to the owners of the property]U or to persons whose possession or supervision or management has! been approved by the Custodian. 17. It was further urged by Major Iraq Muhammad Khan that the provisions of the Evacuee Law being of an administrative nature should be given a liberal construction and construed in such a manner that the object of the enactment may be achieved. In this connection the learned counsel has referred to two pronouncements of the Lordships of the Supreme Court of Pakistan : The Punjab Province v. L. Sita Ram and others (1) and Samurai v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi but in my option the principles enunciated in these decisions have no bear mg on the construction of section 3. In the abovementioned two cases their lordships only observed that the evacuee law is an administrative law and the principle of finality cannot with any degree of safety be imported to the orders passed by the Custodian. But MN none of these cases the question before their Lordships was about the interpretation of any provision in the nature of barring the jurisdiction of the Custodian. The provision of law under consideration bars the jurisdiction of the Custodian in certain circumstances. Any provision which takes away the jurisdiction of any authority is to be construed strictly, and no allowance can be made if other provisions of the same enactment become nugatory in cases covered by such provisions of law. 18. My conclusions, therefore, are as under : (1) That no person or property can be declared as evacuee or evacuee property after the 1st of January 1957 if it was not treated as such before that date by the Custodian. The treatment referred to MN this section indicates that some overt act must have been done by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Authorities. Mere vesting of the properties in the Custodian under section 7 or holding possession under section 11 will not mean that such properties were treated as evacuee properties. If a person has been declared as a non-evacuee, his property cannot be declared to be evacuee property. If the Custodian ha-confirmed a transaction or approved the right of supervision, management and possession of any party, such properties also cannot be declared as evacuee properties. (2) All cases in which action has commenced or proceedings are pending immediately before the IST of January 1957, are outside the purview of section 3(1). (3) Only those properties are covered by clause (b) which are in unauthorized possession, management or supervision OL certain parties. These persons cannot be the owners of tub property. Amongst them will fall the cases of agents, transferees claim mg their right after the IST of March 1947, through the evacuee. It will also cover the case of trespasser. Ina mullah, J.-I agree. Muhammad Aqua Ah, J.-I agree with the conclusions reached by my learned brother Wahiduddin Ahmad, J. in paragraph 18 of the judgment. Anwar-UL-Haq, J.-I also agree with the conclusions reached by my learned brother Wahiduddin Ahmad, J. in paragraph 18 of his judgment. Muhammad Dad Khan, J.-I agree with M. Aqua Ali and S. Anwar-UL-Hagq, JJ. Reference answered

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): Judgment Wahiduddin Ahmad, J.-This writ petition is directed against the order of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, dated the 8th of February 1960. By this order the learned Custodian in his so moth revisional powers set aside the order of the Additional Custodian dated the 12th of June 1952, which declared the property in dispute as non-evacuee. 2. It is unnecessary to give in detail all the facts of the case. It will be sufficient to mention that one Baht Bear Shah sold on the 23rd of April 1935 certain agricultural land in Lyallpur District for Rs. 55,250 to one Johan Singh. The vendor died m the year 1945. Brigadier Diaz Hussain Shah, Col. Muhammad Mukhtar Shah and Ali Tidal Shah, the sons of the vendor, along with the sons of Baht Bear Shah, another son of the deceased, on the 30th of October 1947 brought a suit against the purchaser for a declaration that the alienations of ancestral lands did not affect their reversionary interests on the ground that the sale was without legal necessity. The suit was decreed on the 19th of February 1948 ex parte by Ch. Fable Allah, the then Senior Sub- Judge, Lyallpur. After the introduction of the Evacuee Laws, the petitioners filed an application under section 18 of Ordinance No. XV or 1949 for a declaration that the lands in dispute were not evacuee properties. The learned Deputy Custodian, Lyallpur, by order dated the 26th of March 1952, accepted the contention of the petitioners and granted them a declaration subject to confirmation by the Custodian. In giving the above-mentioned declaration he relied on the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Court. Mr. Fate Khan, the then Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, by order dated the 12th of June 1952, confirmed the order of the Deputy Custodian and declared f share in the property in dispute as non-evacuee. This was followed by mutation in the revenue records. In November 1959 this case was brought to the notice of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, who on 13-11-1959 issued notices to the petitioners for so moth revision of the order passed by the learned Additional Custodian referred to above. On the 8th of February 1960 the learned Custodian set aside the order of the learned Additional Custodian and remanded the case for further inquiry. The petitioners seek to challenge this order m this writ petition on the ground that it was passed without jurisdiction. _ 3. The writ petition came up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court. It was brought to the notice of the Court that there is a conflict of opinion about the interpretation of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 expressed in some of the reported and unreported decisions of this Court. In view of this divergence of view, my Lord the Chief Justice referred this question to the Full Bench for disposal. 4. The question for consideration before the Full Bench is about the scope

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): Act XII of 1957 expressed in some of the reported and unreported decisions of this Court. In view of this divergence of view, my Lord the Chief Justice referred this question to the Full Bench for disposal. 4. The question for consideration before the Full Bench is about the scope and true import of section 3 of Act XII of 1957. Has it completely taken away the jurisdiction of the Custodian to declare any person or property as evacuee, who or which was not treated as evacuee immediately before the IST of January 1957 or TS it still opens to him to declare the person or properties as evacuee without any limitation? The answer to this question depends on the interpretation of this section, which is reproduced below:- “Property not to be treated as evacuee property on or after 1st January 1957.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or, as the case may be, as evacuee property, on or after the said date. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply- (a) to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before the date mentioned therein for treating such person as evacuee or such property as evacuee property; or (b) to any property which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or night so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian.” Mr. Bashir Ahmed, the learned counsel for the petitioners, pressed at the hearing that any person or property who or which was not treated as evacuee for whatever reason immediately before the IST January 1957, now cannot be declared as evacuee. He contended that only concealed evacuee agricultural land is not covered by this provision of law in view of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958. On the other hand, Major Iraq Muhammad Khan very strongly urged that every concealed and hidden evacuee property is outside its purview. His contention is that under sub-clause (b) of section 3(2) the Custodian has unlimited power to pass such orders as he deems fit in respect of hidden evacuee property. He can still declare such property as evacuee property for inclusion in the compensation pool under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act. 5. Before dealing with the legal aspect of the case it will be convenient to notice the background and legislative history of the impugned legislation. Immediately after Partition, in West Pakistan in almost all the then existing Provinces, the evacuee law was introduced in some shape or other. The idea behind this \ legislation was to protect the property left by the non-Muslims on their migration to India. In October 1948, the Central Government introduced the Evacuee Law by Ordinance No.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): in almost all the then existing Provinces, the evacuee law was introduced in some shape or other. The idea behind this \ legislation was to protect the property left by the non-Muslims on their migration to India. In October 1948, the Central Government introduced the Evacuee Law by Ordinance No. VIII of 1948 for the whole of Pakistan. The salient features of this legislation were to protect and take care of the property left by the evacuees in Pakistan, and to restore it if the evacuee had returned to Pakistan with the bona fide intention of permanent residence But in October 1949 the trend of legislation changed and by Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance No. XV of 1949 this concession was withdrawn. Section 6 of this Ordinance provided that all evacuee property shall vest and shall be deemed to have always vested in the Custodian with effect from the 1st of March 1947. By section 7 it was further provided that every person holding the possession of or managing or supervising any evacuee property shall be deemed to hold or have held it on behalf of the Custodian. This legislation was further amended in 1951 and 1952. The effect of the amended legislation was that the scope of the definition of “evacuee”’ was enlarged ; provision was further made for declaring certain persons residing in Pakistan as “intending evacuees” and under certain circumstances such persons without any formal declaration could be treated as evacuees. 6. The history of the legislation further shows that in 1956 there was a departure in the policy of the State in respect of evacuee legislation. By Ordinance No. XX of 1956 the provisions of “intending evacuees” contained in Chapter 6 were omitted from the statute. Under section 3 of this Ordinance it was provided as under : “Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, no person or property not treated as evacuee or evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or as the case may be, evacuee property, on or after the said date.” Thus, under this legislation the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Authorities were permitted or given time to treat a person or property as evacuee within a month and thirteen days of the commencement of this legislation. In effect after the 1st of January 1957 this power, without any reservation, was taken away. It, however, appears that this legislation did not achieve satisfactory result and, therefore, a fresh permanent legislation was brought into force in the shape of Act XII of 1957. Under section 3 of this enactment certain exceptions were made and the power of the Custodian Authorities to treat certain properties as evacuee was restored. The text of the relevant provision has already been reproduced MN the earlier part of the judgment. It consists of two parts. In subsection (1) the original section 3 of Ordinance No. XVIII of 1956 is kept intact, but under subsection (2) certain class of persons and properties

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): was restored. The text of the relevant provision has already been reproduced MN the earlier part of the judgment. It consists of two parts. In subsection (1) the original section 3 of Ordinance No. XVIII of 1956 is kept intact, but under subsection (2) certain class of persons and properties are exempted from the purview of sub-clause There is not much difficulty in the interpretation of subsection (1) of section 3. It is an overriding provision of law and has far-reaching consequences. It contains \ a positive direction that in spite of what is contamed MN other A parts of the Act no person or property not treated as evacuee / or evacuee property Immediately before the 1st day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee on or after the said date. On a plain reading of this part of the section it cannot be doubted that it places restriction on the power of the Custodian in respect of persons or property which were not treated as evacuees before the above-mentioned date by prohibiting him to treat such person or property as evacuee. The form of the words used is a well recognized and convenient method of repealing inconsistent provisions of the statute. 7. Major Iraq Muhammad Khan, on behalf of the Department, has strenuously argued that the scope of this subsection is very narrow and limited. He contended that it would not apply to those properties which admittedly were evacuee properties and vested in the Custodian. He further urged that both under section of Act VII of 1948 of former West Punjab Province and section 7 of Ordinance No. XV of 1949 all evacuee properties are held on behalf of the Custodian and have thereby been treated as evacuee property. This argument has not impressed me. In the first place, the vesting of property in the Custodian or the holding of property on behalf of the Custodian is only by fiction of law. In that application these provisions are of a general nature because they do not deal with any specific or identified property. In the second place, the most formidable hurdle in the way of the Department pertains to the words “not treated” used m the subsection under consideration The significance of these words cannot be overlooked. In my opinion their meaning is that the mere vesting of the property in the Custodian is not sufficient. The competent authorities must have done some overt act in respect of some specific property, namely that any particular person or any particular property must have been treated by a competent authority as evacuee or evacuee property. This view is strengthened by the fact that in another part of the enactment the Legislature has specifically provided a remedy to the parties who feel aggrieved from the treatment of their properties as evacuee. In section 22 of Act XII of 1957, which corresponds to section 18 of Act V of 1949 it is provided that any person claiming any right or interest

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): the Legislature has specifically provided a remedy to the parties who feel aggrieved from the treatment of their properties as evacuee. In section 22 of Act XII of 1957, which corresponds to section 18 of Act V of 1949 it is provided that any person claiming any right or interest in any property treated by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Authorities as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian on the ground that the property is not evacuee property or his interest in the property has not been affected by the provisions of this Act. In other words, it means that no person should feel aggrieved by the mere fact that under section 7 of Act XII of 1957 all evacuee property vests in the Custodian. That by itself is nothing. There must be some overt act on the part of the Rehabilitation Authorities or the Custodian Authorities in respect of specific property before the aggrieved party should approach the Custodian Authorities for a declaration that bis property has been wrongly treated as evacuee by any competent authority. In a recent case: Perusal v. Central Government of Pakistan the Lordships of the Supreme Court of Pakistan have also adverted to this aspect of the question and observed that “an application under section 18 competent only if the property in dispute was treated as evacuee C (1) PLD 1963 S C 127 property by a Rehabilitation Authority or the Custodian”. The Lordships further observed that “Whenever a person applies under section 18 he has to assert that the action taken by the Rehabilitation Authorities is illegal and ultra vires and if the Custodian grants him a declaration it amounts to saying that the action of the Rehabilitation Authorities was ultra vires’It seems to me that there is a vast difference between the two notions, namely, the vesting of the property and the treatment of a property. In the first case, by fiction of law the property generally vests in the Custodian, to enable him to take possession or to take other steps for the protection of specified properties. In the other, some overt act in respect of a particular property is implied. The use of the words “not treated” clearly suggests that mere vesting of the property generally in the Custodian under section 7 of Act XII of 1957 is not treatment of a particular person or property as evacuee or evacuee property. I am, therefore, of the opinion that neither the vesting of the property in the Custodian nor the holding of the property on behalf of the Custodian has any material bear mg on to inter’ predation of this subsection. 8. I will now pass on to another argument, namely, that section 3 (1) is not applicable to those cases where a property admittedly was evacuee property and is claimed by a third party on the basis of a transfer in his favor. It is contended that even if such transfer is confirmed, it is open to the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): argument, namely, that section 3 (1) is not applicable to those cases where a property admittedly was evacuee property and is claimed by a third party on the basis of a transfer in his favor. It is contended that even if such transfer is confirmed, it is open to the Custodian Authorities under their revisional or review powers to re-open the confirmation of such transaction. This contention also cannot be supported on the language of the above-mentioned provision of law. Once the Custodian Authorities have confirmed the transfer in favor of a third party such property ceases to be evacuee property and by no stretch of imagination can be considered to have been treated as evacuee property immediately before the 1st of January 1957. It was urged that if this view is taken, the revisional and review powers given to the Custodian Authorities would become nugatory. It was also suggested that IFA case is decided about ten days before the IST of January 1957 by the Custodian Authorities, the aggrieved party on this interpretation will be deprived of his right to move the Custodian Authorities in their appellate, revisional or review jurisdiction. The hardships pointed out by the learned counsel for the Department are no doubt there, but if the language of the section takes away these powers of the Custodian no Court of law, simply on the ground of hardship, can interpret any provision of law in order to remove such hardships. These arguments were also advanced before a Division Bench of this Court at Karachi in the case of Kishanchand Johanan and others v. Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi and were repelled. It was observed in that case as under :- F “That section 3 is an over-riding provision of law and if in its application in certain cases the other provisions in the evacuee law are rendered ineffective, the Courts of law cannot question the wisdom of the Legislature. The very fact that revisional and review powers under section 43 are not specifically saved clearly indicates that it is also subject to the provisions of section 3.” The learned representative for the Department, who very ably put his case, has not been able to persuade me that the view taken in the above decision is not consistent with the language employed in the subsection under consideration, or in accordance with well accepted principles of interpretation of statutes. In the above-mentioned Karachi decision every aspect of the case was considered and there is’ no escape from the conclusion that if any person or property was not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the IST day of January 1957, the Custodian has no jurisdiction to deal with the case of such person or property. There is a complete prohibition in this respect and the jurisdiction of the Custodian in such matters has been, subject to clause totally taken away. 9. It was next urged on behalf of the Department that in a case where a party has

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): the case of such person or property. There is a complete prohibition in this respect and the jurisdiction of the Custodian in such matters has been, subject to clause totally taken away. 9. It was next urged on behalf of the Department that in a case where a party has obtained an order by practicing fraud on the Custodian, it is open to him on discovery of the fraud to reopen and examine such case and treat it as a nullity. In support of this contention the learned representative of the Department has placed reliance on a Division Bench decision of this Court at Karachi, in Ahmad Khan and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan and others As will be presently shown the contention of the Department cannot be accepted. In the first place the Custodian as Tribunal of Special Jurisdiction does not possess or exercise any inherent jurisdiction( which the ordinary Civil Courts exercise, to recall so moth an order procured by fraud. In MST. Suraj Fatima and others v. Mahmood Ali and others (2) Sulaiman, J. rejected the contention that the Revenue Courts in exercise of inherent jurisdiction could set aside orders obtained by practicing fraud on them. At page 301, of the report, Sulaiman, J. on this aspect of the question, observed as under:- “In the present case there is clear reason for allowing a separate suit. There is no provision for a review of judgment by a subordinate Revenue Court under the U. P. Land Revenue Act. The doctrine of inherent jurisdiction can hardly be invoked MN such a case. It would not be open to the Revenue Court to reopen the partition on the allegation that the guardian of the Moor had been negligent. As a matter of fact so far as the provisions of that Act go there is no section expressly applying the provisions of Civil Procedure Code relating to the appointment of a guardian for a minor to the proceedings in the Revenue Court. The remedy of the Moor, if any, can be only by a separate suit. The suit for avoidance of a previous order of a competent Court is undoubtedly one of a civil nature and falls within the scope of section 9, Civil Procedure Code. Such a suit is attainable in a Civil Court. IFA review of judgment by the Revenue Court is not permitted, there is no reason why remedy by way of a fresh suit in the Civil Court should not be allowed.” In another Full Bench case, Sambar Biswas v. Amarna Charon Mary and others the learned Judges of the Calcutta High Court m an application for ratable distribution held that the executing Court has no power to inquire whether decree is proper or bona fide one. Their Lordships on this post observed as under "The dominating factor with regard to this point is this: that the Court concerned with the distribution of the assets is doing something in connection with execution proceedings. The

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): has no power to inquire whether decree is proper or bona fide one. Their Lordships on this post observed as under "The dominating factor with regard to this point is this: that the Court concerned with the distribution of the assets is doing something in connection with execution proceedings. The distribution of assets is only one of the acts in the execution proceedings, and the Court is function mg I'm an administrative and not in a judicial capacity, and no procedure is provided under the provisions of section 73 of the Act, 1908, and no machinery exists for the holding of an inquiry of the kind involved in the ascertainment whether the decree is not a bona fide or proper decree.” On this view of the matter it is abundantly clear that those tribunals which either act m an administrative capacity or do not'possess inherent, jurisdiction are not competent to disregard any order passed by them on the ground that it was obtained by fraud. H Secondly in Pakistan, apart from this inherent power, the ordinary civil Court exercises the power to treat a judgment or order as nullity on the ground of fraud under section 44 of the Evidence Act. This section provides that where one of the parties to a suit or other proceeding tenders or has put in a judgment, order and decree under sections 40, 41, 42, it is open to the party against whom TT is offered to avoid its effect on the ground of fraud. It is based on the well-established rule of law that a judgment or decree obtained by fraud upon a Court does not bind such Court or any other and TTS nullity upon this ground could be alleged in a collateral proceeding. It is on this basis that every civil Court of competent jurisdiction, whether superior or inferior can treat as nullity any judgment which is proved to have been obtained by fraud discovered after judgment. But unfortunately as the law stands in cases covered by section 3 of Act XII of 1957, the Custodian cannot evoke the provisions of section 44 of the Evidence Act to treat any order obtained by fraud as nullity. In law, judgment or order obtained by fraud is voidable and not void ab initio. In Ambikamoni Dash v Extra Ghost and others this view was enunciated by a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court. In this connection their Lordships observed as under / “That a decree tainted with fraud but passed by a Court competent to try the suit is not void but only voidable and will be binding unless avoided within the prescribed period of the limitation by suitable proceedings.” In Visionary Tiwari and others v. MST. Mir chi this view was also taken ~by the majority of the Judges of the Patna High Court. Ramaswamy, J. on this point observed as under “Fraud does not make a judicial act or transaction void but only voidable at the instance of the party

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): Tiwari and others v. MST. Mir chi this view was also taken ~by the majority of the Judges of the Patna High Court. Ramaswamy, J. on this point observed as under “Fraud does not make a judicial act or transaction void but only voidable at the instance of the party defrauded. The judicial act may be impeached on the ground of fraud or collusion m an active proceeding for rescission by way of suit or application for review. But the judgment may also be impeached in a collateral proceeding in which fraud may be set up as a defense to an action on the judgment or as an answer to a plea of estoppel or res judicata founded upon the judgment.” In Henson v. Shelley the English Court of Appeal also held that a grant of letters of administration obtained by fraud is not when revoked by the probate Court void ab initio but only as from the date of the revocation. In Defend Path Duty v. Administrator-General of Bengal it was pleaded before the Privy Council by the sureties that the letters of administration having been annulled by the Court on the ground of fraud must be regarded as nullity from the beginning and that the bond was, so far as the sureties were concerned void and of no effect. The Lordships repelled this contention and observed as under:- “But there is really no substance in the appellant’s contention. So long as the letters of administration granted to Cowie remained unrevoked, Cole, although a rogue and an impostor, was to all intents and purposes administrator. He, and he alone, represented the deceased in India. His receipts were valid discharges for all monies received by him as administrator. As administrator he collected the assets belonging to the deceased in India, and he misappropriated the assets which he so collected. For his acts and defaults as administrator the appellant and his co-surety became and must remain responsible.” It is thus perfectly clear that so long as a judgment or order stands or is not set aside it is valid and becomes operative only after it is established that it was obtained by fraud. Fraud being a mixed question of law and fact can only be established in an elaborate inquiry. I have no doubt that in ordinary cases the Custodian can investigate this question in his revisional or review jurisdiction. But in those cases which are covered by section 3 (1) of Act XII of 1957, the Custodian is not competent and has no jurisdiction to enter upon any such inquiry. In clause (2) of this section the Legislature has specifically saved certain class of cases from the purview of subsection (1) but the cases involving the question of fraud do not find any place in TT. It is, therefore, not possible in such cases to treat an order obtained by fraud on a different footing from an order which is otherwise illegal or bad. Either section 3(1) applies to such

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): (1) but the cases involving the question of fraud do not find any place in TT. It is, therefore, not possible in such cases to treat an order obtained by fraud on a different footing from an order which is otherwise illegal or bad. Either section 3(1) applies to such cases or it does not apply. I am not inclined to interpret this subsection in a manner which would destroy its full effect, particularly as the provision relating to ouster of jurisdiction of special tribunal is to be construed in a strict manner. On the language of the subsection under consideration the jurisdiction of the Custodian except in those cases which are provided in subsection (2) is totally barred. In view of this, it cannot be held that the Custodian in such cases is competent to treat any order passed by him or his subordinate as a nullity on the ground that a person or a property was illegally treated as non-evacuee. j In such cases the only remedy open to the Custodian is to file) a suit in a competent Court of civil jurisdiction. 10. It was urged that section 41 of Act XII of 1957, would be a bar to enter tam any such suits. In law when the language of a section of an Act is not ambiguous, in interpreting the play words of such a positive enactment ousting the jurisdiction of a tribunal any suggestion of hardship is irrelevant and out of place. But on a recent decision of the Supreme Court in Detached Multimap v. Deputy Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner and others Civil Appeal No. 40 of 1962, decided on 19th November 1963, there should be no such apprehension. The following observations of the Supreme Court in a settlement case throw abundant light on this aspect:- “Learned counsel appear mg for the respondent and the Settlement Authorities have of course, contended that it would even now be within the jurisdiction of the Custodian to decide this question under section 41 of the Act of 1957, and nobody else would have the jurisdiction to adjudicate in respect of any such matter. Section 41 excludes the jurisdiction of the Civil or Revenue Court only with regard to a matter which the Custodian is empowered to decide under the said Act. Under the said Act, the Custodian has the power to decide whether the property is an evacuee property or not. There is, in the present case, however, no dispute that the property is evacuee property. So there is nothing left for the Custodian to decide. Even otherwise as soon as a property is acquired by Notification under section 3 of the Act of 1958, it ceases to be evacuee and the Custodian has, thereafter no further jurisdiction with regard to it.” Their Lordships further observed:- “We have come to the conclusion therefore, that in the present case by reason of the property having been acquired by a Notification issued under section 3 of the Act of 1958,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): be evacuee and the Custodian has, thereafter no further jurisdiction with regard to it.” Their Lordships further observed:- “We have come to the conclusion therefore, that in the present case by reason of the property having been acquired by a Notification issued under section 3 of the Act of 1958, the Custodian Authorities ceased to have any jurisdiction in respect of the said property. Furthermore, even otherwise the Custodian Authorities would not have in our opinion, had any jurisdiction to decide this particular question under the Act of 1957. Again under the Act of 1958, the Settlement Authorities do not also appear to have acquired any jurisdiction to decide this question. The appellant must therefore of necessity have recourse to the civil Courts to have the character of this trust adjudicated upon after the taking of evidence, particularly, since the transferee-respondent is also challenging the validity of the trust itself on the ground that a trust for Dharma simpliciter is void under the Hindu Law.” It will thus follow that in those cases where the Custodian] has ceased to have jurisdiction there would be no bar for) the civil Courts to adjudicate upon a question which ordinarily falls within the purview on their jurisdiction. This is the natural consequence of the rule of implied repeal, a well recognized principle of interpretation of statute. It seems to me that on this view of the matter the Custodian has ample remedy for the redress of such grievances in suitable cases. 11. I will now proceed to consider the effect of subsection (2) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957. This subsection is subdivided MTO two parts. Clause (a) provides that nothing in subsection (1) shall apply to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before the date mentioned therein for treating such person as an evacuee or such property as evacuee property. There is no dispute about the interpretation of this clause of the subsection. It was conceded that if no action had commenced immediately before the LST of January 1957, and no proceedings were pending before that date, such cases are not covered by this clause. 12. The difficulty, however, arises in interpreting clause (b) of subsection (2) of section 3. Under this sub-clause the effect of section 3(1) has been taken away in respect of any evacuee property which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the 28th day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian. The interpretation of this sub-clause arose in three cases before Division Benches of this Court at Lahore. In the case of Rai's Ghazi Muhammad v. The Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan Kay ani, C. J. observed that “it was not possible to accept the argument that it applies to the cases of all persons other than original owners of property as, for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): of this Court at Lahore. In the case of Rai's Ghazi Muhammad v. The Custodian, Evacuee Property, West Pakistan Kay ani, C. J. observed that “it was not possible to accept the argument that it applies to the cases of all persons other than original owners of property as, for distance, trans fares, trespassers and agents”. He further observed that “On its plain language it applies only to a person whose authority or right to occupy, supervise or manage any property has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian’. In a subsequent unreported case Utah Ali V. Custodian, Evacuee Property, Lahore Writ Petition No. 197 of 1961, decided on the 22nd of December 1961, though the case was decided under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act 1958, the Division Bench referred to CERTAM other aspects involved in the interpretation of this subsection. But did not give any firm decision on TT. Kayak, C. J. who was party to both the decisions, made certain weighty observations. In order to bring out the doubt lurking in his mind TT will be useful to reproduce the relevant portion of this judgment. His Lordship observed as under: “Prima facie, one gets an impression from this definition that clause (b) of section 3, subsection was intended to apply to the case of persons who were residents in India even before the Partition but owned property in Pakistan which before the Partition, was held and managed by other persons. We notice, however, that in other parts of the Act, such as section 11 also the same or similar words have been used in respect of evacuee property whether it belonged to persons originally resident in India or to persons who resided in Pakistan but who left the country at the time of the Partition. Thus, subsection (2) of section 10 requires ‘every person who is in possession, supervision or management of any evacuee property or property which he knows or has reason to believe is evacuee property, and whose authority or right to occupy, supervise or manage such property after the 28th day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian’, to intimate to the Custodian his willingness to surrender such property to the Custodian, etc. It could not have been argued that section 10 or section 11 confined themselves only to one category of evacuee property, namely, that which was managed in Pakistan on behalf of persons who are resident in India. Further, it could not be reasonably argued that clause (b) of section 3, subsection (2) removed from the general protection of that section property which belongs to residents in India but protected the property which had been left by persons who became evacuees in 1947. In order to strengthen his case, learned counsel for the Custodian referred to section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act 1958, which provides in subsection (1) that with ninety days of this Act ‘every person who is in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): had been left by persons who became evacuees in 1947. In order to strengthen his case, learned counsel for the Custodian referred to section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act 1958, which provides in subsection (1) that with ninety days of this Act ‘every person who is in possession, supervision or management of any land which he knows or has reason to believe to be concealed evacuee property shall submit to the Rehabilitation Authority, or the Settlement Authority of the area concerned, full information relating to such land.’ Subsection (2) is to the following effect: ‘Any such property as is referred to in subsection (I) shall, notwithstanding the provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957, be treated as evacuee property, and shall vest and be deemed to have vested in the Custodian in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 7 of that Act.’ Learned counsel argued that after the commencement of this Act, which came MTO force on the 23rd of September 1958, even if any property was protected under section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957, that protection was taken away from it if it was concealed evacuee property’. In one sense the property was not concealed because the petitioner had a mutation effected through an appeal to the Collector. It was argued, however, for the Custodian, and with some reason, that the Collector being not an authority under the Act, any information to him was not information to the Custodian or to one of his subordinates. Section 10 of the Act requires every person who Is in possession, supervision or management of evacuee property to climate to the Custodian his willingness to surrender such property, and section 11 requires him to submit information to the Custodian. In the present case, in addition to these provisions, there was a separate provision under section 20 for obtaining a confirmation of the sale from the Custodian. We should therefore, hold that so far a? the Custodian goes, the present land TS ‘concealed evacuee property’ to which section 3 of the new Act applies. Incidentally the fact that subsection (2) of section 3 of this new Act makes a provision expressly against section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, would show that it was believed at the time when the new Act was drafted that section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957, applied to concealed evacuee property also. If this is so, then the argument of the learned Custodian that section 3 applies only to original owners of the property and not to trespassers, transferees and agents, will become more unacceptable.” 13. In an unreported case: Vardar Nut Muhammad v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore Writ Petition No. 634 of 1959, decided on the IST of June 1960, another Division Bench of this Court recorded a discordant note on the interpretation of the sub-clause under consideration. The contention

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): unacceptable.” 13. In an unreported case: Vardar Nut Muhammad v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore Writ Petition No. 634 of 1959, decided on the IST of June 1960, another Division Bench of this Court recorded a discordant note on the interpretation of the sub-clause under consideration. The contention that clause (b) applies only to those cases in which the property in dispute is in the hands of an agent and not of a trespasser was repelled by the Division Bench to which Jakub Al, J. was a party. On the post urged their Lordships observed as under:- ‘Firstly, we are clearly of the view that the disputed property does not at all fall in the ambit of section 3 for it had in law already been treated as evacuee property as long ago as 24th December 1947, when the Custodian Evacuee Property, West Punjab, issued a notification under Ordinance V of 1947, assuming possession of all evacuee property in the Province. Thereafter, the petitioner was in possession on behalf of the Custodian Evacuee Property and the fact that on account of deceit the petitioner did not surrender the disputed property to the Custodian or to the Rehabilitation Authorities does not entitle him to any premium. If any other view is adopted a startling result will be achieved, viz. that hidden evacuee property shall remain MN the hands of wrong-doers who under law can be prosecuted and punished for the very act of concealing and remaining in possession of evacuee property without any legal authority. The intention behind section 3 clearly is that in future no citizen of Pakistan will be treated as evacuee and his property shall be immune from being treated as such. The section is in negation of the earlier law of “intending evacuees” and does not purport to apply retrospectively to those persons and properties who had already become evacuee in law.” Thus, on this view, the provision of section 3 (1) has no effect in those cases where any person or property had already become evacuee in law or if the property is hidden evacuee property. I have already posted out the distinction between the notion of vesting of the property m the Custodian and treatment of the property as evacuee. In my opinion the mere vesting of the property or a general provision such as section 11 that every person in possession, supervision or management of any evacuee property shall be deemed to hold it on behalf of the Custodian or a general notification by the Custodian resulting in holding possession of certain class of property on his behalf is not in the nature of treatment of any particular person or property as evacuee. This by itself cannot be considered as treatment of any particular property as evacuee and therefore, is clearly affected by clause (1) of section 3. With profound respect to the observations in the last-mentioned case it is not possible for me to accept the view to the contrary in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): evacuee. This by itself cannot be considered as treatment of any particular property as evacuee and therefore, is clearly affected by clause (1) of section 3. With profound respect to the observations in the last-mentioned case it is not possible for me to accept the view to the contrary in this case on this post. This point need not detain me in view of the full discussion in the earlier part of the judgment. 14. The view that all hidden evacuee property is outside the purview of section 3 (1) in view of clause (b) requires further consideration. In my option the immunity under section 3 (1) fact XII of 1957, is not confined to the citizens of Pakistan but to every one owing property in Pakistan. No distinction can be made in this behalf Subclause (b) of section 3(2) refers only to those cases where { the property being admittedly evacuee property is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the 28th day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian. Now who are those persons, whose authority or right require the approval or acceptance of the Custodian? There is little doubt that such persons cannot be the owners of the property because their occupation, supervision or management is in their own right and their right so to do cannot be assailed on the ground that they had already become evacuee and their property vests in the Custodian. Therefore, by process of reason mg it shall have to be applied only to those persons whose right to do any of the above acts is expected to receive the consent or approval of the Custodian. Looking at this provision from this angle it appears to me that in the first place this sub-clause applies to those persons who claim to / have derived their title through the evacuees and the transaction in their favor for some reason or other remains unconfirmed by the Custodian Authorities. Secondly, it applies to those cases where any such property is occupied by an agent or representative of an evacuee residing in India. It further applies to those cases where an evacuee property is occupied by a person without any legal or valid right, which will also include the case of a trespasser. This is evident from the words “right so to do” used in the subsection. If a trespasser is found to be in possession of an evacuee property, he will certainly be occupying, managing and supervising it without the approval of the Custodian and his right to hold it can be challenged on the ground of his unauthorized occupation. One can conceive of a trespasser who is in possession of a property since before the 28th of February 1947, which has ripened into adverse possession or title before that date. But such a case, besides rate, stands on a different foot mg and would be decided by the Custodian on the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): conceive of a trespasser who is in possession of a property since before the 28th of February 1947, which has ripened into adverse possession or title before that date. But such a case, besides rate, stands on a different foot mg and would be decided by the Custodian on the general principle of law applicable to such cases. I am, therefore, of the view that it covers not only the case of agents, transferees and representatives of evacuees but also the case of trespassers. 15. The argument that it applies to all hidden evacuee property cannot be accepted in view of the subsequent trend of legislation pyramid to this provision of Jaw. In the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, under section 3 a special provision was made for hidden evacuee property, and it was excluded from the purview of section 3 of Act XII of 1957. Similarly, after the promulgation of Martial Law, in Regulation No. 49 of 1958, similar provision was introduced. Under Para. of this Regulation it was provided as under : “3. Whoever has acquired possession of any immovable evacuee property, the ownership of which did not vest in him before the 1st March 1947, the'her such property has been treated by the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Authorities as evacuee property or not, by making false representations of fact, or by suppressing true facts, and whoever is in possession of such property, shall before the 31st December 1958, make a declaration to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner of the area where the property is located, giving full particulars of the property in question ; the date on which and the manner in which he came into possession of it; (c) the true facts in respect of the matters previously misrepresented or suppressed ; and (d) the total amount, if any, which has been derived as benefit from its use. (ii) Possession of the property in question shall on demand be handed over by the person making the declaration to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, who shall treat it as evacuee property, and the property shall vest in the Custodian. (hi) An equivalent in value of the amount declared under clause (d) of sub-paragraph (1) shall be delivered to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner concerned before the 31st January 1958, by the person making the declaration : Provided that the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded, extend the period and vary the mode of payment in any particular case. (iv) No penalty of any kind whatsoever under any law shall be imposed in respect of any circumstance arising out of the declaration so made before the 31st of December 1958.” Under this provision of law also persons who were in illegal possession of evacuee property were called upon to make a declaration before the 31st of December 1958, in respect of evacuee property, respective of the fact whether, it was treated by the Custodian as evacuee property or not and such property after its possession was demanded

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): who were in illegal possession of evacuee property were called upon to make a declaration before the 31st of December 1958, in respect of evacuee property, respective of the fact whether, it was treated by the Custodian as evacuee property or not and such property after its possession was demanded by the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner was to be treated as evacuee property and vested in the Custodian. These two pieces of legislation give a clear indication that clause (b) of section 3(2) does not exclude all the hidden evacuee property. It is confined only to those hidden evacuee properties which are in illegal occupation, supervision or management of persons other than the owners of the property. This view 1s further strengthened by the statement of Vardar Amir Adam Khan, Minister of Law, who piloted the Bill on behalf of the Government in his speech delivered MN reply to the criticism of the Opposition on 27-2-1957, in the National Assembly of Pakistan. The relevant portion of the speech is reproduced below: “So it says for all the unauthorized evacuee property or the hidden property if it is in occupation of any person today in any unauthorized manner action lies against that person in spite of the fact that there is this provision that nobody can be declared evacuee. So, Sir, Mr. Farid Ahmad should not think that he has got all the intelligence of the world or SLL the wisdom of the world or all the patriotism of the world. He should realize that others to have, if not that much of intelligence, at least some intelligence to look after the interest of this country. With these few words, would request that this Bill be passed.” I am conscious of the fact that speeches made in the Legislative Assembly are not admissible in evidence as extrinsic aid to the interpretation of statutory provisions, but in my opinion it is 7 relevant and material to consider the circumstances under which an Act was passed and the reasons which necessitated it. I have referred to this speech only from this angle. 16. It was urged by Major Iraq Muhammad Khan, the learned representative for the Department, that if this limited construction is given to sub-clause (b) of section 3 (2) it will render the other provisions in respect of hidden evacuee property in Act XII of 1957, nugatory. In my opinion this apprehension is not well-founded because sections 10 and 11 refer also to cases of those persons who are in unauthorized possession, supervision or management of evacuee property. This is obvious from the fact that this class of property was introduced m sections 10 and 11 of Act XII of 1957, for the first time with a view to bring it to par with section 3(2) of the enactment. Therefore, it isl perfectly clear that it does not apply to the owners of the property]U or to persons whose possession or supervision or management has! been approved by the Custodian. 17. It

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): the first time with a view to bring it to par with section 3(2) of the enactment. Therefore, it isl perfectly clear that it does not apply to the owners of the property]U or to persons whose possession or supervision or management has! been approved by the Custodian. 17. It was further urged by Major Iraq Muhammad Khan that the provisions of the Evacuee Law being of an administrative nature should be given a liberal construction and construed in such a manner that the object of the enactment may be achieved. In this connection the learned counsel has referred to two pronouncements of the Lordships of the Supreme Court of Pakistan : The Punjab Province v. L. Sita Ram and others (1) and Samurai v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi but in my option the principles enunciated in these decisions have no bear mg on the construction of section 3. In the abovementioned two cases their lordships only observed that the evacuee law is an administrative law and the principle of finality cannot with any degree of safety be imported to the orders passed by the Custodian. But MN none of these cases the question before their Lordships was about the interpretation of any provision in the nature of barring the jurisdiction of the Custodian. The provision of law under consideration bars the jurisdiction of the Custodian in certain circumstances. Any provision which takes away the jurisdiction of any authority is to be construed strictly, and no allowance can be made if other provisions of the same enactment become nugatory in cases covered by such provisions of law. 18. My conclusions, therefore, are as under : (1) That no person or property can be declared as evacuee or evacuee property after the 1st of January 1957 if it was not treated as such before that date by the Custodian. The treatment referred to MN this section indicates that some overt act must have been done by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Authorities. Mere vesting of the properties in the Custodian under section 7 or holding possession under section 11 will not mean that such properties were treated as evacuee properties. If a person has been declared as a non-evacuee, his property cannot be declared to be evacuee property. If the Custodian ha-confirmed a transaction or approved the right of supervision, management and possession of any party, such properties also cannot be declared as evacuee properties. (2) All cases in which action has commenced or proceedings are pending immediately before the IST of January 1957, are outside the purview of section 3(1). (3) Only those properties are covered by clause (b) which are in unauthorized possession, management or supervision OL certain parties. These persons cannot be the owners of tub property. Amongst them will fall the cases of agents, transferees claim mg their right after the IST of March 1947, through the evacuee. It will also cover the case of trespasser. Ina mullah, J.-I agree. Muhammad Aqua Ah, J.-I agree with

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 274?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 274 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1964-03-05): parties. These persons cannot be the owners of tub property. Amongst them will fall the cases of agents, transferees claim mg their right after the IST of March 1947, through the evacuee. It will also cover the case of trespasser. Ina mullah, J.-I agree. Muhammad Aqua Ah, J.-I agree with the conclusions reached by my learned brother Wahiduddin Ahmad, J. in paragraph 18 of the judgment. Anwar-UL-Haq, J.-I also agree with the conclusions reached by my learned brother Wahiduddin Ahmad, J. in paragraph 18 of his judgment. Muhammad Dad Khan, J.-I agree with M. Aqua Ali and S. Anwar-UL-Hagq, JJ. Reference answered

Question: What is case 1964 PLD 117 about?
Answer: Case 1964 PLD 117 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1963-11-25. The case involved GHULAM MUHAMMAD (PETITIONER) VERSUS (1) PAKISTAN, THROUGH SECRETARY, REHABILITATION. PAKISTAN, RAWALPINDI,(2) CHIEF SETTLEMENT COM MISSIONER,(3) CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE(4) ADDITIONAL CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE, AND(S) DEPUTY CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, MUZAFFARGARH AT LAHORE (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_117.html 1/8 28/10/2025, 00:36 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_117.htmI CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ARTICLE 126(2) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLES 9, 49, 91(2), 93, 99(1), 153, 219 (3), 224 (3), 226, 227, 234 (1) &242 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLES 148, 165 AND 172 REMOVAL OF DIFFICULTIES (JUDGES) ORDER [PRESIDENT'S ORDER NO. 28 OF 1962] - ARTICLE 2(2). The case was heard by ABDULAZIZ KHAN, C. J. J. ORTCHESON, MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALL, INAMULLAH KHAN, WAHEEDUDDIN AHMAD AND.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: In case 1964 PLD 117, the court applied the following statutes: https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_117.html 1/8 28/10/2025, 00:36 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1964/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1964_117.htmI CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ARTICLE 126(2) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLES 9, 49, 91(2), 93, 99(1), 153, 219 (3), 224 (3), 226, 227, 234 (1) &242 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLES 148, 165 AND 172 REMOVAL OF DIFFICULTIES (JUDGES) ORDER [PRESIDENT'S ORDER NO. 28 OF 1962] - ARTICLE 2(2). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1963-11-25.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1964 PLD 117 were: AZIZ AHMAD BAJWA FOR PETITIONER (ON ALL DATES). KHALID M. ISHAQ A. G. FOR RESPONDENTM. B. ZAMAN, A. A. G. AND EHSAN-UL- HAQ FOR THE DEPARTMENT (ON ALL DATES).M. A. ZULLAH FOR A. R. CHANGEZ CUSTODIAN (ON ALL DATES).S. M. ZAFAR : AMICUS CURIAE (ON 22-10-1963 AND 23-10-1963).. The judges presiding were: ABDULAZIZ KHAN, C. J. J. ORTCHESON, MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALL, INAMULLAH KHAN, WAHEEDUDDIN AHMAD AND.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: The parties in case 1964 PLD 117 were: GHULAM MUHAMMAD (PETITIONER) VERSUS (1) PAKISTAN, THROUGH SECRETARY, REHABILITATION. PAKISTAN, RAWALPINDI,(2) CHIEF SETTLEMENT COM MISSIONER,(3) CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE(4) ADDITIONAL CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE, AND(S) DEPUTY CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, MUZAFFARGARH AT LAHORE (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1964 PLD 117.
Answer: Judgment Aitcheson, J.-This order will decide one point common to ten Writ Petitions Nos. 427, 453, 481, 671, 699, 700, 701, 702, 795 and 970 of 1963. That point is the interpretation of Article 126(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Pakistan. Nine of the petitions relate, meter Asia, to the appointment as Custodian of Evacuee Property after the commencing day of the Constitution of Mr. A. R. Change, who retired from the office of a Judge of the High Court of West Pakistan on the 3rd of June 1962, while the remaining petition (No. 481 of 1963) challenges the appointment as Munster to the Central Government of Mr. Habit Allah Khan, who relinquished office as a Judge of the same Court on the 10th of October 1961. ' 2. It,may be made clear that this order does not purport to decide the petitions in question finally, but only to dispose of the common post referred to above. 3. In addition to hearing learned counsel for the various petitioners and those representing the respondents, we asked Mr. S. M. Afar to assist us as amicus curiae. 4. Article 126(2) of the Constitution, as it stood before the passing of President’s Order No. 28 of 1962, ran : “A person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court shall not hold any office of profit in the service of Pakistan before the expiration of two years after he ceased to hold that office.” According to the petitioners Mr. Change and Mr. Habit Allah Khan, having been appointed Custodian and Minister, respectively, within two years of their retirement, are hit by the above constitutional provision. 5. The expression “Judge of a High Court” is defined in Article 242 of the Constitution as follows “ ‘Judge’, in relation to the Supreme Court or a High Court, includes the Chief Justice of the Court and also includes- (a) MN relation to the Supreme Court-a person who is acting as a Judge of the Court; and. (b) in relation to the High Court-a person who is an Additional Judge of the Court.” It will be seen that the above definition, which only clarifies that, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression “Judge” includes the Chief Justice on the one hand and Acting and Additional Judges on the other, throws no light on the problem before us, namely, whether Article 126(2) applies to those Judges who retired before the commencing day of the Constitution, and that in order to determine the exact scope of that sub-Article it 1s necessary to examine the other provisions of the Constitution. 6. I may first refer to Article 227. For reasons to be given later, it will be convenient to quote the above Article in extensor. It runs “(1) Any reference MN this Constitution to the President shall, for the purposes of this Constitution at any time before the commencing day, be read as a reference to the person who at that time is President of Pakistan, and any reference in this Constitution to the Governor of a Province shall, for the purposes of this Constitution at any time before the commencing day, be read as a reference to the person who at that time is Governor of the Province. (2) Any reference in this Constitution to the Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court, or to the Chief Justice or a Judge of a High Court, shall, for the purposes of this Constitution at any time before the commencing day, be read as a reference to the Chief Justice of Pakistan, to a Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan as constituted at that time or to the Chief Justice or other Judge of the High Court of a Province as constituted at that time, as the case requires.” The words underlined clearly indicate that the Article draws a distinction between the High Courts established under the Constitution and those set up under the previously existing law. This is confirmed by the further fact that there are certain differences between the Constitution of the former Supreme Court and High Courts and that of the present corresponding Courts. For example, Article 49 of the present Constitution, after stating that there shall be a Supreme Court of Pakistan, goes on to lay down that that Court shall consist, in addition to the Chief Justice, of so many other Judges as may be determined by law, or, until so determined, as may be fixed by the President. Article 148 of the 1956 Constitution is in the following terms “There shall be a Supreme Court of Pakistan consisting of a Chief Justice, to be known as the Chief Justice of Pakistan, and not more than six Judges : Provided that Parliament may buy Act increase the number of other Judges beyond six.” Again, whereas under Article 91(2) of the present Constitution a High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and so many other Judges as may be determined by law, Article 165 of the 1956 Constitution left the determination of the number of Judges exclusively in the hands of the President. 7. In the matter of the transfer of Judges also the provisions of the two Constitutions are not identical. Under Article 99(1) of the present Constitution not only the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court but also the Chief Justices of both High Courts must be consulted before a Judge is transferred from one High Court to another, but’ Article 172 of the Constitution “of 1956 only required consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan and the Chief Justice of the High Court of which the person proposed to be transferred was a Judge. It may further be mentioned that the present Constitution makes provision for the transfer of Judges from one permanent Bench of the High Court of West Pakistan to another, a matter with respect to which the 1956 Constitution was silent. 8. It appears from the above that the expression “Judge of a High Court” as used in the present Constitution refers primarily to a Judge serving in a High Court established thereunder, and that it is only for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the Constitution that the meaning is extended to include the High Courts established under the previous law As an example of the purposes in question, reference may be made to Article 153 of the Constitution, clause (2)(b) of which requires that, even before the commencing day, two Judges, one from the High Court of East Pakistan and the other from the West Pakistan High Court, are to be appointed Members of the Election Committee. 9. The distinction between the position as it stood before the commencing day and that prevailing thereafter is even clearer in the case of the President of Pakistan, and it is for that reason that clause (1) of Article 227 has been cited. Article 9 of the Constitution states that “there shall be a President of Pakistan who shall be elected in accordance with this Constitution and the law.” Further, Article 226(1) runs : “In accordance with the result of the referendum conducted during February, one thousand nine hundred and sixty, Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan, Hill-+-Pakistan, Hill-i-Jura’at, shall, notwithstanding anything in this Constitution but subject to this Article, become the first President of Pakistan under this Constitution on the commencing day.” It is obvious from the above provision that although, for the purposes of the Constitution, the term “President” in relation to the period between the enactment day and the commencing day means the person who at that time was holding the office of t President, he only became President of Pakistan in the full sense of the Constitution as from the commencing day. Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 227 are completely parallel provisions, and the faience appears to me to be irresistible that in the full sense of the term as used in the Constitution the High Courts only came into existence on the commencing day. Reference may also be made to Article 93 and 219(3), the former of which lays down that’ before they enter upon their office both the Chief Justice and the other Judges of a High Court shall make an oath m the form set out in the First Schedule, while the latter states in general terms that where, under the Constitution, a person is required to make an oath before he enters upon an office, he shall be deemed to have entered upon the office on the day on which the maizes the oath. Although, therefore, Article 234(1) declares that every person who, immediately before the commencing day, was in the service of Pakistan shall, as from that day, continue in the service of Pakistan on the same terms and conditions as were applicable to him immediately before that day, no Judge who failed to take the necessary oath could exercise the functions of his office after the commencing day. In my opinion, therefore, there is good ground for confining the use of the expression “a Judge of a High Court” as used m Article 126(2) to those Judges who have taken an oath under the Constitution. 10. Another aspect of the matter is that if the wider construction of the term were adopted, there would be a clear inconsistency between Article 126(2) and Article 234(1) already referred to, since although, under the later Article, a retired Judge of a High Court who had assumed an office of profit under the State before the commencing day is entitled to continue in that office on the same terms and conditions as were applicable to him previously, under Article 126(2) he would stand debarred from continuing in the said office, and consistency is not readily to be attributed to the Legislature. If, on the other hand, the more limited and, in my opinion, the true construction, is adopted there is no inconsistency. h 11. Finally, Mr. Gullah for Mr. Change cited several authorities on the point that where rights have accrued, even constitutional provisions are not to be lightly given retrospectively. For example, in Muhammad Iraq v. The State (1) the question under consideration was whether retrospective effect was to be given to Article 159 of the 1956 Constitution, which imposed CERTAM limitations, not existing previously, on the right of appeal to the Supreme Court from a judgment, final order or sentence of a High Court in criminal proceedings. The learned Judges, following the Privy Council case Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. v. Income-tax Commissioner, Delhi and another held that while those provisions of a statute which deal merely with matters of procedure may properly, unless that construction be textually inadmissible, have retrospective effect attributed to them, provisions which touch a right in existence at the passing of the statute are not to be applied retrospectively in the absence of express enactment of necessary intendment. 12. To the same effect is Ganapati Very v. N. Rubbish Choudhury and others Mr. Gullah further referred to Cranes on Statute Law, Fifth Edition, at pages 360 and 361, in which the same principle is laid down. The learned author cites, for example, Gardner v. Lucas in which it was held that “unless there is some declared intention of the Legislature- clear and unequivocal or unless there are some circumstances rendering It inevitable that we should take the other view, we are to presume that an Act is prospective and not retrospective.” In the present case it is not contended that Mr. Change had any vested right to the office of Custodian, but the fact remains that had it not been for the new Constitution his right to take up any post offered to (1) PLD 1956 S C (PAK.) 256 (2) AI R 1927 PC 242 (3) PLD 1957 S C 448 (4) (1878) 3 App. Ca's. 582 him in the service of the State immediately on his retirement could not have been called in question. The principle that retrospec-1 activity is not to be lightly attributed even to the Constitution,7 therefore, applies with full force to his case and that of! Mr. Habit Allah Khan. 13. The petitioners called attention to the Removal of Difficulties (Judges) Order (President’s Order No. 28 of 1962). Article 2(2) of that Order substituted for the previously existing clause (2) of Article 126 the following “A person who, on or after the commencing day, has held office as a permanent Judge of the Supreme Court or of High Court, shall not hold any office of profit in the service of Pakistan before the expiration of two years after he ceases to hold that office.” According to the petitioners this Order amounts to an amendment, as opposed to a mere adaptation, of the Constitution, and 1s, therefore, valid, reliance BMG placed i this connection on the well-known case of Fall Quaker Chowdhury v. Muhammad Abdul Hague It will be seen that two important changes have been introduced into the clause in question by the order. In the first place, whereas the provisions of clause (2) of Article 126 imposed a disability on all persons who had held the office of a Judge of a High Court, the amended clause limits that disability to permanent Judges. It was vehemently urged that this provision in particular is ultra vires, but this question is not before us, and I prefer to express no opinion with regard to it, since it cannot be successfully contended that if the amended clause is ultra vires in one particular, it thereby becomes wholly invalid. The other change introduced by Order XXVIII is to state specifically that clause (2) of Article 126 applies only to those Judges who held office on or after the commencing day. If the wording of clause (2) as it existed before the 7th of June 1962 (the date on which Order No. XXVIII was passed) had been clear and unambiguous, it might have been held that the change constituted an amendment of substantive provision of the Constitution, but if the view I have expressed above is correct, the impugned clause did no more than clarify the real position,y-and may be considered as having been introduced merely by way of abundant caution. 14. The petitioners also contend that no difficulty existed which had to be removed, but on this post also I am unable to agree with them. Apart from the seeming inconsistency between Article 126(2) and Article 234 of the Constitution, a literal interpretation of the former Article would have rendered it impossible for a Judge of a High Court to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court until the period of two years had elapsed since!’ he relinquished the former office, which was surely not the intention of the Legislature. Another post which required clarification was whether a Judge in office could assume charge of another office of profit even though his emoluments were not thereby increased. In view of these facts, it cannot be argued that the K impugned Order was wholly unnecessary, and I am further of the option that where a genuine doubt exists as to the proper interpretation and application of the Constitution, such a doubt amounts to a “difficulty’ within the meaning of Article 224(3). In this connection the learned Advocate- General pointed out that it was unnecessary to wait until an occasion for the removal of the difficulty actually arose, and he relied in support of this proposition on a ruling of the Supreme Court of India in Shankar Prasad v. Union of India (1) cited by the learned Judges of the Dacca High Court in their judgment in the case of Muhammad Abdul Hague v. Fall Quaker Chowdhury 15. For the above reasons I am of the opinion that, so far at least as the post before us is concerned, President’s Order/7' No. 28 of 1962 is valid. 16. No other argument advanced by the petitioners has any force. I would, therefore, hold that the disqualification imposed by Article 126(2) of the Constitution attaches only to those' Judges who held office on or after the commencing day and has no retrospective application. The parties to bear their own costs of the present proceedings. Abdul Aziz Khan, C. J.-I agree. Muhammad Aqua Ali, J.-I agree. Muhammad Dad Khan, J-I agree. Ina mullah Khan, J.-I agree. Waheeduddin Ahmed. J.-] agree. WWW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 117 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1963-11-25): Judgment Aitcheson, J.-This order will decide one point common to ten Writ Petitions Nos. 427, 453, 481, 671, 699, 700, 701, 702, 795 and 970 of 1963. That point is the interpretation of Article 126(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Pakistan. Nine of the petitions relate, meter Asia, to the appointment as Custodian of Evacuee Property after the commencing day of the Constitution of Mr. A. R. Change, who retired from the office of a Judge of the High Court of West Pakistan on the 3rd of June 1962, while the remaining petition (No. 481 of 1963) challenges the appointment as Munster to the Central Government of Mr. Habit Allah Khan, who relinquished office as a Judge of the same Court on the 10th of October 1961. ' 2. It,may be made clear that this order does not purport to decide the petitions in question finally, but only to dispose of the common post referred to above. 3. In addition to hearing learned counsel for the various petitioners and those representing the respondents, we asked Mr. S. M. Afar to assist us as amicus curiae. 4. Article 126(2) of the Constitution, as it stood before the passing of President’s Order No. 28 of 1962, ran : “A person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court shall not hold any office of profit in the service of Pakistan before the expiration of two years after he ceased to hold that office.” According to the petitioners Mr. Change and Mr. Habit Allah Khan, having been appointed Custodian and Minister, respectively, within two years of their retirement, are hit by the above constitutional provision. 5. The expression “Judge of a High Court” is defined in Article 242 of the Constitution as follows “ ‘Judge’, in relation to the Supreme Court or a High Court, includes the Chief Justice of the Court and also includes- (a) MN relation to the Supreme Court-a person who is acting as a Judge of the Court; and. (b) in relation to the High Court-a person who is an Additional Judge of the Court.” It will be seen that the above definition, which only clarifies that, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression “Judge” includes the Chief Justice on the one hand and Acting and Additional Judges on the other, throws no light on the problem before us, namely, whether Article 126(2) applies to those Judges who retired before the commencing day of the Constitution, and that in order to determine the exact scope of that sub-Article it 1s necessary to examine the other provisions of the Constitution. 6. I may first refer to Article 227. For reasons to be given later, it will be convenient to quote the above Article in extensor. It runs “(1) Any reference MN this Constitution to the President shall, for the purposes of this Constitution at any time before the commencing day, be read as a reference to the person who at

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 117 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1963-11-25): to be given later, it will be convenient to quote the above Article in extensor. It runs “(1) Any reference MN this Constitution to the President shall, for the purposes of this Constitution at any time before the commencing day, be read as a reference to the person who at that time is President of Pakistan, and any reference in this Constitution to the Governor of a Province shall, for the purposes of this Constitution at any time before the commencing day, be read as a reference to the person who at that time is Governor of the Province. (2) Any reference in this Constitution to the Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court, or to the Chief Justice or a Judge of a High Court, shall, for the purposes of this Constitution at any time before the commencing day, be read as a reference to the Chief Justice of Pakistan, to a Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan as constituted at that time or to the Chief Justice or other Judge of the High Court of a Province as constituted at that time, as the case requires.” The words underlined clearly indicate that the Article draws a distinction between the High Courts established under the Constitution and those set up under the previously existing law. This is confirmed by the further fact that there are certain differences between the Constitution of the former Supreme Court and High Courts and that of the present corresponding Courts. For example, Article 49 of the present Constitution, after stating that there shall be a Supreme Court of Pakistan, goes on to lay down that that Court shall consist, in addition to the Chief Justice, of so many other Judges as may be determined by law, or, until so determined, as may be fixed by the President. Article 148 of the 1956 Constitution is in the following terms “There shall be a Supreme Court of Pakistan consisting of a Chief Justice, to be known as the Chief Justice of Pakistan, and not more than six Judges : Provided that Parliament may buy Act increase the number of other Judges beyond six.” Again, whereas under Article 91(2) of the present Constitution a High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and so many other Judges as may be determined by law, Article 165 of the 1956 Constitution left the determination of the number of Judges exclusively in the hands of the President. 7. In the matter of the transfer of Judges also the provisions of the two Constitutions are not identical. Under Article 99(1) of the present Constitution not only the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court but also the Chief Justices of both High Courts must be consulted before a Judge is transferred from one High Court to another, but’ Article 172 of the Constitution “of 1956 only required consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan and the Chief Justice of the High Court of which the person proposed to be

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 117 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1963-11-25): of both High Courts must be consulted before a Judge is transferred from one High Court to another, but’ Article 172 of the Constitution “of 1956 only required consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan and the Chief Justice of the High Court of which the person proposed to be transferred was a Judge. It may further be mentioned that the present Constitution makes provision for the transfer of Judges from one permanent Bench of the High Court of West Pakistan to another, a matter with respect to which the 1956 Constitution was silent. 8. It appears from the above that the expression “Judge of a High Court” as used in the present Constitution refers primarily to a Judge serving in a High Court established thereunder, and that it is only for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the Constitution that the meaning is extended to include the High Courts established under the previous law As an example of the purposes in question, reference may be made to Article 153 of the Constitution, clause (2)(b) of which requires that, even before the commencing day, two Judges, one from the High Court of East Pakistan and the other from the West Pakistan High Court, are to be appointed Members of the Election Committee. 9. The distinction between the position as it stood before the commencing day and that prevailing thereafter is even clearer in the case of the President of Pakistan, and it is for that reason that clause (1) of Article 227 has been cited. Article 9 of the Constitution states that “there shall be a President of Pakistan who shall be elected in accordance with this Constitution and the law.” Further, Article 226(1) runs : “In accordance with the result of the referendum conducted during February, one thousand nine hundred and sixty, Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan, Hill-+-Pakistan, Hill-i-Jura’at, shall, notwithstanding anything in this Constitution but subject to this Article, become the first President of Pakistan under this Constitution on the commencing day.” It is obvious from the above provision that although, for the purposes of the Constitution, the term “President” in relation to the period between the enactment day and the commencing day means the person who at that time was holding the office of t President, he only became President of Pakistan in the full sense of the Constitution as from the commencing day. Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 227 are completely parallel provisions, and the faience appears to me to be irresistible that in the full sense of the term as used in the Constitution the High Courts only came into existence on the commencing day. Reference may also be made to Article 93 and 219(3), the former of which lays down that’ before they enter upon their office both the Chief Justice and the other Judges of a High Court shall make an oath m the form set out in the First Schedule, while the latter states in general terms that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 117 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1963-11-25): Article 93 and 219(3), the former of which lays down that’ before they enter upon their office both the Chief Justice and the other Judges of a High Court shall make an oath m the form set out in the First Schedule, while the latter states in general terms that where, under the Constitution, a person is required to make an oath before he enters upon an office, he shall be deemed to have entered upon the office on the day on which the maizes the oath. Although, therefore, Article 234(1) declares that every person who, immediately before the commencing day, was in the service of Pakistan shall, as from that day, continue in the service of Pakistan on the same terms and conditions as were applicable to him immediately before that day, no Judge who failed to take the necessary oath could exercise the functions of his office after the commencing day. In my opinion, therefore, there is good ground for confining the use of the expression “a Judge of a High Court” as used m Article 126(2) to those Judges who have taken an oath under the Constitution. 10. Another aspect of the matter is that if the wider construction of the term were adopted, there would be a clear inconsistency between Article 126(2) and Article 234(1) already referred to, since although, under the later Article, a retired Judge of a High Court who had assumed an office of profit under the State before the commencing day is entitled to continue in that office on the same terms and conditions as were applicable to him previously, under Article 126(2) he would stand debarred from continuing in the said office, and consistency is not readily to be attributed to the Legislature. If, on the other hand, the more limited and, in my opinion, the true construction, is adopted there is no inconsistency. h 11. Finally, Mr. Gullah for Mr. Change cited several authorities on the point that where rights have accrued, even constitutional provisions are not to be lightly given retrospectively. For example, in Muhammad Iraq v. The State (1) the question under consideration was whether retrospective effect was to be given to Article 159 of the 1956 Constitution, which imposed CERTAM limitations, not existing previously, on the right of appeal to the Supreme Court from a judgment, final order or sentence of a High Court in criminal proceedings. The learned Judges, following the Privy Council case Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. v. Income-tax Commissioner, Delhi and another held that while those provisions of a statute which deal merely with matters of procedure may properly, unless that construction be textually inadmissible, have retrospective effect attributed to them, provisions which touch a right in existence at the passing of the statute are not to be applied retrospectively in the absence of express enactment of necessary intendment. 12. To the same effect is Ganapati Very v. N. Rubbish Choudhury and others Mr. Gullah further referred to Cranes on Statute

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 117 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1963-11-25): provisions which touch a right in existence at the passing of the statute are not to be applied retrospectively in the absence of express enactment of necessary intendment. 12. To the same effect is Ganapati Very v. N. Rubbish Choudhury and others Mr. Gullah further referred to Cranes on Statute Law, Fifth Edition, at pages 360 and 361, in which the same principle is laid down. The learned author cites, for example, Gardner v. Lucas in which it was held that “unless there is some declared intention of the Legislature- clear and unequivocal or unless there are some circumstances rendering It inevitable that we should take the other view, we are to presume that an Act is prospective and not retrospective.” In the present case it is not contended that Mr. Change had any vested right to the office of Custodian, but the fact remains that had it not been for the new Constitution his right to take up any post offered to (1) PLD 1956 S C (PAK.) 256 (2) AI R 1927 PC 242 (3) PLD 1957 S C 448 (4) (1878) 3 App. Ca's. 582 him in the service of the State immediately on his retirement could not have been called in question. The principle that retrospec-1 activity is not to be lightly attributed even to the Constitution,7 therefore, applies with full force to his case and that of! Mr. Habit Allah Khan. 13. The petitioners called attention to the Removal of Difficulties (Judges) Order (President’s Order No. 28 of 1962). Article 2(2) of that Order substituted for the previously existing clause (2) of Article 126 the following “A person who, on or after the commencing day, has held office as a permanent Judge of the Supreme Court or of High Court, shall not hold any office of profit in the service of Pakistan before the expiration of two years after he ceases to hold that office.” According to the petitioners this Order amounts to an amendment, as opposed to a mere adaptation, of the Constitution, and 1s, therefore, valid, reliance BMG placed i this connection on the well-known case of Fall Quaker Chowdhury v. Muhammad Abdul Hague It will be seen that two important changes have been introduced into the clause in question by the order. In the first place, whereas the provisions of clause (2) of Article 126 imposed a disability on all persons who had held the office of a Judge of a High Court, the amended clause limits that disability to permanent Judges. It was vehemently urged that this provision in particular is ultra vires, but this question is not before us, and I prefer to express no opinion with regard to it, since it cannot be successfully contended that if the amended clause is ultra vires in one particular, it thereby becomes wholly invalid. The other change introduced by Order XXVIII is to state specifically that clause (2) of Article 126 applies only to those Judges who held office on or after

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1964 PLD 117?
Answer: From case 1964 PLD 117 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1963-11-25): since it cannot be successfully contended that if the amended clause is ultra vires in one particular, it thereby becomes wholly invalid. The other change introduced by Order XXVIII is to state specifically that clause (2) of Article 126 applies only to those Judges who held office on or after the commencing day. If the wording of clause (2) as it existed before the 7th of June 1962 (the date on which Order No. XXVIII was passed) had been clear and unambiguous, it might have been held that the change constituted an amendment of substantive provision of the Constitution, but if the view I have expressed above is correct, the impugned clause did no more than clarify the real position,y-and may be considered as having been introduced merely by way of abundant caution. 14. The petitioners also contend that no difficulty existed which had to be removed, but on this post also I am unable to agree with them. Apart from the seeming inconsistency between Article 126(2) and Article 234 of the Constitution, a literal interpretation of the former Article would have rendered it impossible for a Judge of a High Court to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court until the period of two years had elapsed since!’ he relinquished the former office, which was surely not the intention of the Legislature. Another post which required clarification was whether a Judge in office could assume charge of another office of profit even though his emoluments were not thereby increased. In view of these facts, it cannot be argued that the K impugned Order was wholly unnecessary, and I am further of the option that where a genuine doubt exists as to the proper interpretation and application of the Constitution, such a doubt amounts to a “difficulty’ within the meaning of Article 224(3). In this connection the learned Advocate- General pointed out that it was unnecessary to wait until an occasion for the removal of the difficulty actually arose, and he relied in support of this proposition on a ruling of the Supreme Court of India in Shankar Prasad v. Union of India (1) cited by the learned Judges of the Dacca High Court in their judgment in the case of Muhammad Abdul Hague v. Fall Quaker Chowdhury 15. For the above reasons I am of the opinion that, so far at least as the post before us is concerned, President’s Order/7' No. 28 of 1962 is valid. 16. No other argument advanced by the petitioners has any force. I would, therefore, hold that the disqualification imposed by Article 126(2) of the Constitution attaches only to those' Judges who held office on or after the commencing day and has no retrospective application. The parties to bear their own costs of the present proceedings. Abdul Aziz Khan, C. J.-I agree. Muhammad Aqua Ali, J.-I agree. Muhammad Dad Khan, J-I agree. Ina mullah Khan, J.-I agree. Waheeduddin Ahmed. J.-] agree. WWW.

Question: What is case 1997 CLC 707 about?
Answer: Case 1997 CLC 707 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1997-01-13. The case involved KHANI ZAMAN AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU ANDKASHMIR GOVERNMENT MUZAFFARABADAND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(6) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - 8.42 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S.5 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR REHABILITATION ACT, 1974 - S. 2(D) ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPSTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(6) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1997/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1997_707.html 1/8 28/10/2025, 00:37 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1997/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1997_707.htm|. The case was heard by SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, CJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: In case 1997 CLC 707, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(6) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - 8.42 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S.5 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR REHABILITATION ACT, 1974 - S. 2(D) ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPSTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(6) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1997/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1997_707.html 1/8 28/10/2025, 00:37 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1997/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1997_707.htm|. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1997-01-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1997 CLC 707 were: SARDAR RAFIQUE MAHMOOD KHAN, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANTS. SYED NAZIR HUSSAIN SHAH KAZMI, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, CJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: The parties in case 1997 CLC 707 were: KHANI ZAMAN AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU ANDKASHMIR GOVERNMENT MUZAFFARABADAND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1997 CLC 707.
Answer: This appeal has been directed against the judgment of the High Court, dated 7-4-1996, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants, here, was dismissed. 2. Previously, this appeal was heard by the Bench consisting of Mr. Justice Bashar at Ahmad Shaikh and Mr. Justice Muhammad Yunus Surah, but a difference of opinion has arisen between them and, thus, this appeal has been placed before me for hearing and disposal as envisaged by the relevant provisions contained in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974. 3. The brief factors of the case are that the evacuee land measuring 22 Canals, 6 Marla's, situated in village Plagal Band, Muzaffarabad, was allotted to the appellants as ‘local destitute'. Previous to that, the land in dispute was allotted to one Muhammad Salwar son of Qatar Ali by the Rehabilitation Commissioner on 12-12-1968. Hidayatullah, the father of the present appellants, challenged the allotment made MN favor of Muhammad Salwar by way of revision petition before the Custodian who, vide his judgment dated 1-4-1972, set aide his allotment and remanded the case to A.R.C. with the direction that he should make a thorough probe about the entitlement of contesting parties and one Muhammad Hussain who was also a claimant, to the allotment of the land in question. Consequently, the A.R.C. issued a notice to said Muhammad Hussain, but he did not turn up and, thus after recording the statements of the appellant he made allotment in their favor. It may be stated here that when the Custodian remanded the case for inquiry vide his judgment dated 1-4- 1972, the appellants were not party to the proceedings before him. From the perusal of the record it transpires that after remand of the case by the Custodian, Hidayatullah, the father of the appellants, made an application before the A.R.C. that as he was in the possession of the land in dispute, the same may be allotted to him as an' old tenant’. On this application, a report was sent for from the ' Atari Halley' who reported that the allotment of Muhammad Salwar, the previous allottee, had been cancelled by the Custodian and that Hidayatullah, applicant, was entitled to the allotment as he was in possession of the same; however, -the Atari also mentioned in his report that Hidayatullah also owned some immovable property in the village. Subsequently, Hidayatullah, the father of the appellant, made another application before the A.R.C. that as on the spot the land was cultivated by his sons, the appellants, it may be allotted to them. Consequently, the A.R.C. of the time, vide his order dated 5-1-1982, observed that although in the P lifetime of their father, the appellants, herein, were not entitled to the allotment b- yet he allotted the land to the appellants on the grounds that they were in possession of the land and being a barren land, it had no utility for any other claimant. Sultan Mahmood, respondent, challenged the allotment of the appellants by filing a review petition before the Custodian alleging that he being a refugee was entitled to the allotment of the land in question and that the appellants' father owned more than 72 Canals of land and, thus, they were not f entitled to the allotment of any evacuee land as destitute. The learned Custodian, vide his judgment dated 27-6-1992, accepted the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood observing that the order of the allotment of the appellants was violative of law because the appellants did not satisfy the conditions precedent for the allotment as contained in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Rehabilitation (Amendment) Act, 1974 (hereinafter shall be called the amending Act): the Custodian observed that the appellants were not members of a separate ' family] because their father was alive and owned more than 72 Canals of the /If /I land. Thus, the learned Custodian cancelled the? allotment of the appellants at, well as their certificate of proprietary rights. He directed that the land in question might be allotted to any other deserving person. The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the order of the Custodian but the same was dismissed by the High Court. It is against the judgment of the High Court that the present appeal has been preferred. 4. have heard the arguments and gone through the file. Vardar Cacique Mahmood Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the Custodian has committed an error in holding that the appellants were "included in the family of their father and were not entitled to the allotment merely because their father owned more than 72 Canals of land. He has further argued that the order of allotment in favor of the appellants could not be disturbed because it Was made after thorough inquiry by the A.R.C. in pursuance of the order of the Custodian. The learned counsel has farther submitted that the appellants not only got their statements recorded before the A.R.C. to the effect that they were members of a separate family and were not included in the family of their father, but they also swore an affidavit to the effect that they had no other source of adequate come, as envisaged in sub-clause (d) of section 2 of the amending Act. The learned counsel has further submitted that there was no rebuttal of the aforesaid facts and, thus, the allotment order in favor of the appellants and the proprietary rights order in their favor did not suffer from any legal infirmity. The learned counsel has also argued that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood was hopelessly time-barred and should have been dismissed on this sole ground. 5. In reply, Syed Nazi Hussein Shah Nazi, Advocate, the learned counsel for the respondents, has controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants. He has argued that in view of the amending Act, it cannot be said that the appellants whose father was alive and owned more than 72 Canals of land, could be regarded as a ‘destitute’ with the meaning of the relevant law, or they constituted a separate family from the family of the father and, thus, were entitled to allotment as destitute. The learned counsel has also controverted the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellants that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood entailed dismissal as being time-barred. He has submitted that Sultan Mahmood was not a party before the A.R.C. in allotment proceedings and, the Custodian nightly condoned the delay; and the condonation of delay cannot be disturbed in the writ jurisdiction. 6. I have given due consideration to the arguments raised at the Bar. The first question which needs resolution is whether, the review petition filed by the respondent, Sultan Mahmood, entailed dismissal because it was time-barred. It may be stated here that this point was also raised before the High Court in the writ petition but the same was repelled on the ground that the delay was condoned by the Custodian and his findings cannot be disturbed in exercise of the writ jurisdiction in the circumstances of the case. The learned counsel for the respondents has also referred to a case of this court reported as casino Ahmad Khan v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Muzaffarabad (PLD 1992 SC (AJ&K) 49), wherein it has been held that where the delay in filing an appeal, revision or review etc. has been condoned by the Custodian, such condonation order is not normally interfered with in exercise of writ jurisdiction. In the aforesaid authority, the concerned aggrieved person was also not party to the proceedings wherein the allotment was made, as in the instant case. The perusal of the judgment of the Custodian reveals that he has condoned the delay after giving due consideration to the circumstances of the case and, thus, I see no reason to differ with him. Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that review petition entailed dismissal as being time-barred is repelled. 6-A. The next question which needs resolution is whether the appellants, whose father, Hidayatullah, was alive, were included MN his family or they were as separate family. It may be stated here that the word ‘family’ has not been defined in the relevant law. It is laid down in the amending Act that a family which owns 30 Canals or more land, cannot be regarded as ‘destitute’ so as to claim the allotment of an evacuee property. The perusal of the case-law shows that word 'family' is defined by judicial authorities in the context of the relevant statute in which the same was used. Thus, no hard and fast rules can be laid down as to what would constitute a 'family'! The meaning of the word ‘family’ are to be assigned in view of the provisions of the relevant statute after ascertaining the intention of the Legislature. The mere fact that a person has married and has children itself is not sufficient to hold that he constitutes a separate ‘family’ within the meanings of the amending Act. The question as to whether one is included in the family of his father or for that matter in the family of some other person would depend on the circumstances of each case and must be interpreted with reference to the statute in which it has been used. It would be expedient here to refer the following authorities on the post:- In case reported as Going Was v. Tulip Singh (AIR 1971 Delhi 151), it has been observed as under:-- "7. The word ‘family’ has not been defined in the Act, and we feel advisedly so. The concept of what constitutes a family when a number of persons are related or are living together is not something static or capable of concise definition. What constitutes a family in a given set of circumstances or m a particular society depends upon the habits and ideas of persons constituting that society and the religious and semireligious customs of the community to which such persons may belong. In the case of Ram Per shad Singh v. Muk and Lai (AIR 1952 Pun. 189), J. L. Kanpur, J. held that in a given set up of social structure even nephews could be regarded as members of a landlord's family within the meaning of section 9(1)(E) of the Delhi and Ajmer Ferrara Rent Control Act, are MN respectful agreement with the observations in all the decisions, and we have noticed above and would hold that in a given set of circumstances and according to the particular structure of a society a family may be constituted of persons who may not in a given set of circumstances be regarded as being members of one family." In case reported as Asha Bibi v. Larissa Sahib (AIR 1957 Madras 583), has been observed as under:- The term 'family’ will be construed in the sense of 'family’ as used in section 3(A) of the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, 1913, which was intended to be used in a very large and extensive sense. The policy of that Act was to validate the creation of Wake in perpetuity in favor of persons who happened to be the members of a family according to the popular acceptance of that term. Technically the word ‘family may be taken to mean the collective body of persons who live in one house and under one head or manager; and includes within its fold a household consisting of parents, children and servants and as the case may be, lodgers or boarders. Under the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, it is intended to be used my broad and popular sense. Popularly, however, the term indicates persons descended from one common progenitor and having a common lineage. It will take in both agnates and cognates and relations by blood or marriage. The nephews of the settlor are in this sense the members of his family. Similarly daughters-in-law. the son of a half-brother or the son of a half-sister." In Syed Abdul Fatal v. S. Speed Khan (PLD 1963 Dacca 343), it is observed as under:- "14. It may be contended that the persons who may not be the children or descendants of the Waif might be members of the family. The dictionary meaning of the word ‘family’ is 'the household, or all those who live in one house under one head educing parents, children;’ servants, and descendants of a common progenitor’. Hence we find that the word 'family' is more comprehensive Thai a genus. The word ‘family’ also means all descendants of common ancestor, house and Image. So, Ina family there might be person not, related to the Waif, persons who are distant kindred who cannot be c p In case reported as Away Hassan v. Torah Hussain (AIR 1958 Patna 232), it was observed as under:-- Rh_ The expression 'family’ in section of the Partition Act must be construed in a wide sense and ought not to be restricted to persons tracing their descent from a common ancestor. There is nothing in the language or the context of section of the Partition Act to suggest that the term 'family’ was intended to be used in a very narrow and restricted sense. The principle underlying the section appears to be to captain the integrity of a body of people knit together by the tie of common residence. The expression 'family' has been defined in the Oxford Dictionary, Volume I, 1936 Edition, in these terms. A 'The body of persons who live in one house or under one head including parents, children, servants etc. The group consisting of parents and the children whether living together or not; in wide sense all those who are nearly connected by blood or affinity'." 7. It is evident from the authorities referred to above that while assigning the meaning and scope to word ‘family’, the provisions of the relevant statutes and policy intended by the Legislature to be fallowed is to be kept in mind. After the amendment in the Rehabilitation Act, certain categories of person other than refugees are entitled to the allotments of 2vacuee property subject 10 the conditions laid down MN the law; a ‘destitute’ is also entitled to seek the allotment of an evacuee land. The definition of destitute' as given in clause (d) of section 2 of the amending Act is as under: 'Destitute' means the persons who being cultivators either own no land at all or have less than 30 Kana per family and have no other adequate source of income, but would not include occupancy tenants." 8. In the instant case, it is to be seen whether a 'thorough inquiry’ was made by the A.R.C. to ascertain that the appellants were 'destitute' within the meanings of law; whether they were included in the family of their father or they were a separate family; and whether they HJ.d some other adequate source of income. From the perusal of the relevant order of the A.R.C. it appears that he has given no finding on the post whether they had any other adequate source of income; on the basis of statements of the appellants, he opined that they were not included in the family of their father but were a separate family. But all the same he expressed the view that in lifetime of their father, the appellants were not entitled to an allotment of evacuee land. However, despite that the learned A.R.C. allotted the land in question to the appellants on the grounds which are not recognized by the relevant law. It would be expedient here to reproduce the relevant paragraph from the’ order of the learned A.R.C. dated 5-1-1982:- It is apparent from the abovementioned paragraph that there is no specific finding by A.R.C. that the appellants had no other source of income as stipulated under clause (d) of section 2 of the Act. It is correct that while dealing with the facts of the case in the impugned order, he has mentioned that according to the statement of the appellants and their affidavit, they were not included in the family of their father and had no source of income but all the same no specific finding has been given with regard to the fac tum of 'adequate’ source of income in the operative PAH of the judgment. Therefore, the learned Custodian has rightly held that A.R.C. made allotment in favor of the appellants on the grounds which are not recognised by law. It may also be observed here that even if we ignore the fac tum of giving specific findings on the post, the fact remains that except the sole statements of the appellants and the affidavit, no independent witness was examined by them to prove that they had no other source of adequate income and that they were not included in the family of their father. The mere fact that the appellants are married and have children would not itself constitute them a separate family; this may be one of the factors to hold that they were not included in the family of their father. Thus, there is no conclusive proof of the fact that they were a separate family and the order of allotment in favor of the appellants was made on films grounds which are not recognised by law. 9. The learned counsel for the appellants has also submitted that the review petition should have been dismissed because the order of A.R.C. could not be vacated by the Custodian in exercise of review jurisdiction; it could be set at naught only it justice so demanded. It may be observed here that a Court of law has to administer justice according to lav/. If an order has been passed in violation of law, it cannot be said that the interest of justice would be served, if order is not disturbed. As the appellants have not proved that they were 'destitute' within the meaning of the relevant law, they cannot be heard saying that the cause of justice would be better served if the orders made in their favor remain intact. It may also be stated here that in 'Kara Girafarig Hidayatullah, the father of the appellants, who has been previously litigating with Muhammad Salwar, the previous allottee, is shown in the possession of the land in dispute. It was only in the year "Sharif} 1981 that the appellants were shown MN possession of the land. It appears that the entry in the Revenue Record was maneuvered for the first time so as to facilitate the allotment in favor of the appellants. Even otherwise, the mere fact that a person is m unlawful possession of an evacuee property, does not make him a deserving person for the allotment in derogation to the condition* laid down MN law. The learned counsel for the appellants did not controvert the proposition that while exercising the review powers under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, the Custodial has wide powers to set aside an order which is violative of law; whether the case involves merely a question of i law, a question of fact or mixed question of HW and fact. ' In the light of what has been stated above, finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with no order r s to the costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 707 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): This appeal has been directed against the judgment of the High Court, dated 7-4-1996, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants, here, was dismissed. 2. Previously, this appeal was heard by the Bench consisting of Mr. Justice Bashar at Ahmad Shaikh and Mr. Justice Muhammad Yunus Surah, but a difference of opinion has arisen between them and, thus, this appeal has been placed before me for hearing and disposal as envisaged by the relevant provisions contained in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974. 3. The brief factors of the case are that the evacuee land measuring 22 Canals, 6 Marla's, situated in village Plagal Band, Muzaffarabad, was allotted to the appellants as ‘local destitute'. Previous to that, the land in dispute was allotted to one Muhammad Salwar son of Qatar Ali by the Rehabilitation Commissioner on 12-12-1968. Hidayatullah, the father of the present appellants, challenged the allotment made MN favor of Muhammad Salwar by way of revision petition before the Custodian who, vide his judgment dated 1-4-1972, set aide his allotment and remanded the case to A.R.C. with the direction that he should make a thorough probe about the entitlement of contesting parties and one Muhammad Hussain who was also a claimant, to the allotment of the land in question. Consequently, the A.R.C. issued a notice to said Muhammad Hussain, but he did not turn up and, thus after recording the statements of the appellant he made allotment in their favor. It may be stated here that when the Custodian remanded the case for inquiry vide his judgment dated 1-4- 1972, the appellants were not party to the proceedings before him. From the perusal of the record it transpires that after remand of the case by the Custodian, Hidayatullah, the father of the appellants, made an application before the A.R.C. that as he was in the possession of the land in dispute, the same may be allotted to him as an' old tenant’. On this application, a report was sent for from the ' Atari Halley' who reported that the allotment of Muhammad Salwar, the previous allottee, had been cancelled by the Custodian and that Hidayatullah, applicant, was entitled to the allotment as he was in possession of the same; however, -the Atari also mentioned in his report that Hidayatullah also owned some immovable property in the village. Subsequently, Hidayatullah, the father of the appellant, made another application before the A.R.C. that as on the spot the land was cultivated by his sons, the appellants, it may be allotted to them. Consequently, the A.R.C. of the time, vide his order dated 5-1-1982, observed that although in the P lifetime of their father, the appellants, herein, were not entitled to the allotment b- yet he allotted the land to the appellants on the grounds that they were in possession of the land and being a barren land, it had no utility for any other claimant. Sultan Mahmood, respondent, challenged the allotment of the appellants by filing a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 707 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): not entitled to the allotment b- yet he allotted the land to the appellants on the grounds that they were in possession of the land and being a barren land, it had no utility for any other claimant. Sultan Mahmood, respondent, challenged the allotment of the appellants by filing a review petition before the Custodian alleging that he being a refugee was entitled to the allotment of the land in question and that the appellants' father owned more than 72 Canals of land and, thus, they were not f entitled to the allotment of any evacuee land as destitute. The learned Custodian, vide his judgment dated 27-6-1992, accepted the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood observing that the order of the allotment of the appellants was violative of law because the appellants did not satisfy the conditions precedent for the allotment as contained in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Rehabilitation (Amendment) Act, 1974 (hereinafter shall be called the amending Act): the Custodian observed that the appellants were not members of a separate ' family] because their father was alive and owned more than 72 Canals of the /If /I land. Thus, the learned Custodian cancelled the? allotment of the appellants at, well as their certificate of proprietary rights. He directed that the land in question might be allotted to any other deserving person. The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the order of the Custodian but the same was dismissed by the High Court. It is against the judgment of the High Court that the present appeal has been preferred. 4. have heard the arguments and gone through the file. Vardar Cacique Mahmood Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the Custodian has committed an error in holding that the appellants were "included in the family of their father and were not entitled to the allotment merely because their father owned more than 72 Canals of land. He has further argued that the order of allotment in favor of the appellants could not be disturbed because it Was made after thorough inquiry by the A.R.C. in pursuance of the order of the Custodian. The learned counsel has farther submitted that the appellants not only got their statements recorded before the A.R.C. to the effect that they were members of a separate family and were not included in the family of their father, but they also swore an affidavit to the effect that they had no other source of adequate come, as envisaged in sub-clause (d) of section 2 of the amending Act. The learned counsel has further submitted that there was no rebuttal of the aforesaid facts and, thus, the allotment order in favor of the appellants and the proprietary rights order in their favor did not suffer from any legal infirmity. The learned counsel has also argued that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood was hopelessly time-barred and should have been dismissed on this sole ground. 5. In reply, Syed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 707 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): in favor of the appellants and the proprietary rights order in their favor did not suffer from any legal infirmity. The learned counsel has also argued that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood was hopelessly time-barred and should have been dismissed on this sole ground. 5. In reply, Syed Nazi Hussein Shah Nazi, Advocate, the learned counsel for the respondents, has controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants. He has argued that in view of the amending Act, it cannot be said that the appellants whose father was alive and owned more than 72 Canals of land, could be regarded as a ‘destitute’ with the meaning of the relevant law, or they constituted a separate family from the family of the father and, thus, were entitled to allotment as destitute. The learned counsel has also controverted the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellants that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood entailed dismissal as being time-barred. He has submitted that Sultan Mahmood was not a party before the A.R.C. in allotment proceedings and, the Custodian nightly condoned the delay; and the condonation of delay cannot be disturbed in the writ jurisdiction. 6. I have given due consideration to the arguments raised at the Bar. The first question which needs resolution is whether, the review petition filed by the respondent, Sultan Mahmood, entailed dismissal because it was time-barred. It may be stated here that this point was also raised before the High Court in the writ petition but the same was repelled on the ground that the delay was condoned by the Custodian and his findings cannot be disturbed in exercise of the writ jurisdiction in the circumstances of the case. The learned counsel for the respondents has also referred to a case of this court reported as casino Ahmad Khan v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Muzaffarabad (PLD 1992 SC (AJ&K) 49), wherein it has been held that where the delay in filing an appeal, revision or review etc. has been condoned by the Custodian, such condonation order is not normally interfered with in exercise of writ jurisdiction. In the aforesaid authority, the concerned aggrieved person was also not party to the proceedings wherein the allotment was made, as in the instant case. The perusal of the judgment of the Custodian reveals that he has condoned the delay after giving due consideration to the circumstances of the case and, thus, I see no reason to differ with him. Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that review petition entailed dismissal as being time-barred is repelled. 6-A. The next question which needs resolution is whether the appellants, whose father, Hidayatullah, was alive, were included MN his family or they were as separate family. It may be stated here that the word ‘family’ has not been defined in the relevant law. It is laid down in the amending Act that a family which owns 30 Canals or more land, cannot be regarded as

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 707 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): were included MN his family or they were as separate family. It may be stated here that the word ‘family’ has not been defined in the relevant law. It is laid down in the amending Act that a family which owns 30 Canals or more land, cannot be regarded as ‘destitute’ so as to claim the allotment of an evacuee property. The perusal of the case-law shows that word 'family' is defined by judicial authorities in the context of the relevant statute in which the same was used. Thus, no hard and fast rules can be laid down as to what would constitute a 'family'! The meaning of the word ‘family’ are to be assigned in view of the provisions of the relevant statute after ascertaining the intention of the Legislature. The mere fact that a person has married and has children itself is not sufficient to hold that he constitutes a separate ‘family’ within the meanings of the amending Act. The question as to whether one is included in the family of his father or for that matter in the family of some other person would depend on the circumstances of each case and must be interpreted with reference to the statute in which it has been used. It would be expedient here to refer the following authorities on the post:- In case reported as Going Was v. Tulip Singh (AIR 1971 Delhi 151), it has been observed as under:-- "7. The word ‘family’ has not been defined in the Act, and we feel advisedly so. The concept of what constitutes a family when a number of persons are related or are living together is not something static or capable of concise definition. What constitutes a family in a given set of circumstances or m a particular society depends upon the habits and ideas of persons constituting that society and the religious and semireligious customs of the community to which such persons may belong. In the case of Ram Per shad Singh v. Muk and Lai (AIR 1952 Pun. 189), J. L. Kanpur, J. held that in a given set up of social structure even nephews could be regarded as members of a landlord's family within the meaning of section 9(1)(E) of the Delhi and Ajmer Ferrara Rent Control Act, are MN respectful agreement with the observations in all the decisions, and we have noticed above and would hold that in a given set of circumstances and according to the particular structure of a society a family may be constituted of persons who may not in a given set of circumstances be regarded as being members of one family." In case reported as Asha Bibi v. Larissa Sahib (AIR 1957 Madras 583), has been observed as under:- The term 'family’ will be construed in the sense of 'family’ as used in section 3(A) of the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, 1913, which was intended to be used in a very large and extensive sense. The policy of that Act was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 707 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): 1957 Madras 583), has been observed as under:- The term 'family’ will be construed in the sense of 'family’ as used in section 3(A) of the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, 1913, which was intended to be used in a very large and extensive sense. The policy of that Act was to validate the creation of Wake in perpetuity in favor of persons who happened to be the members of a family according to the popular acceptance of that term. Technically the word ‘family may be taken to mean the collective body of persons who live in one house and under one head or manager; and includes within its fold a household consisting of parents, children and servants and as the case may be, lodgers or boarders. Under the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, it is intended to be used my broad and popular sense. Popularly, however, the term indicates persons descended from one common progenitor and having a common lineage. It will take in both agnates and cognates and relations by blood or marriage. The nephews of the settlor are in this sense the members of his family. Similarly daughters-in-law. the son of a half-brother or the son of a half-sister." In Syed Abdul Fatal v. S. Speed Khan (PLD 1963 Dacca 343), it is observed as under:- "14. It may be contended that the persons who may not be the children or descendants of the Waif might be members of the family. The dictionary meaning of the word ‘family’ is 'the household, or all those who live in one house under one head educing parents, children;’ servants, and descendants of a common progenitor’. Hence we find that the word 'family' is more comprehensive Thai a genus. The word ‘family’ also means all descendants of common ancestor, house and Image. So, Ina family there might be person not, related to the Waif, persons who are distant kindred who cannot be c p In case reported as Away Hassan v. Torah Hussain (AIR 1958 Patna 232), it was observed as under:-- Rh_ The expression 'family’ in section of the Partition Act must be construed in a wide sense and ought not to be restricted to persons tracing their descent from a common ancestor. There is nothing in the language or the context of section of the Partition Act to suggest that the term 'family’ was intended to be used in a very narrow and restricted sense. The principle underlying the section appears to be to captain the integrity of a body of people knit together by the tie of common residence. The expression 'family' has been defined in the Oxford Dictionary, Volume I, 1936 Edition, in these terms. A 'The body of persons who live in one house or under one head including parents, children, servants etc. The group consisting of parents and the children whether living together or not; in wide sense all those who are nearly connected by blood or affinity'." 7. It is evident from the authorities referred to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 707 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): persons who live in one house or under one head including parents, children, servants etc. The group consisting of parents and the children whether living together or not; in wide sense all those who are nearly connected by blood or affinity'." 7. It is evident from the authorities referred to above that while assigning the meaning and scope to word ‘family’, the provisions of the relevant statutes and policy intended by the Legislature to be fallowed is to be kept in mind. After the amendment in the Rehabilitation Act, certain categories of person other than refugees are entitled to the allotments of 2vacuee property subject 10 the conditions laid down MN the law; a ‘destitute’ is also entitled to seek the allotment of an evacuee land. The definition of destitute' as given in clause (d) of section 2 of the amending Act is as under: 'Destitute' means the persons who being cultivators either own no land at all or have less than 30 Kana per family and have no other adequate source of income, but would not include occupancy tenants." 8. In the instant case, it is to be seen whether a 'thorough inquiry’ was made by the A.R.C. to ascertain that the appellants were 'destitute' within the meanings of law; whether they were included in the family of their father or they were a separate family; and whether they HJ.d some other adequate source of income. From the perusal of the relevant order of the A.R.C. it appears that he has given no finding on the post whether they had any other adequate source of income; on the basis of statements of the appellants, he opined that they were not included in the family of their father but were a separate family. But all the same he expressed the view that in lifetime of their father, the appellants were not entitled to an allotment of evacuee land. However, despite that the learned A.R.C. allotted the land in question to the appellants on the grounds which are not recognized by the relevant law. It would be expedient here to reproduce the relevant paragraph from the’ order of the learned A.R.C. dated 5-1-1982:- It is apparent from the abovementioned paragraph that there is no specific finding by A.R.C. that the appellants had no other source of income as stipulated under clause (d) of section 2 of the Act. It is correct that while dealing with the facts of the case in the impugned order, he has mentioned that according to the statement of the appellants and their affidavit, they were not included in the family of their father and had no source of income but all the same no specific finding has been given with regard to the fac tum of 'adequate’ source of income in the operative PAH of the judgment. Therefore, the learned Custodian has rightly held that A.R.C. made allotment in favor of the appellants on the grounds which are not recognised by law. It may also be

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 707 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): has been given with regard to the fac tum of 'adequate’ source of income in the operative PAH of the judgment. Therefore, the learned Custodian has rightly held that A.R.C. made allotment in favor of the appellants on the grounds which are not recognised by law. It may also be observed here that even if we ignore the fac tum of giving specific findings on the post, the fact remains that except the sole statements of the appellants and the affidavit, no independent witness was examined by them to prove that they had no other source of adequate income and that they were not included in the family of their father. The mere fact that the appellants are married and have children would not itself constitute them a separate family; this may be one of the factors to hold that they were not included in the family of their father. Thus, there is no conclusive proof of the fact that they were a separate family and the order of allotment in favor of the appellants was made on films grounds which are not recognised by law. 9. The learned counsel for the appellants has also submitted that the review petition should have been dismissed because the order of A.R.C. could not be vacated by the Custodian in exercise of review jurisdiction; it could be set at naught only it justice so demanded. It may be observed here that a Court of law has to administer justice according to lav/. If an order has been passed in violation of law, it cannot be said that the interest of justice would be served, if order is not disturbed. As the appellants have not proved that they were 'destitute' within the meaning of the relevant law, they cannot be heard saying that the cause of justice would be better served if the orders made in their favor remain intact. It may also be stated here that in 'Kara Girafarig Hidayatullah, the father of the appellants, who has been previously litigating with Muhammad Salwar, the previous allottee, is shown in the possession of the land in dispute. It was only in the year "Sharif} 1981 that the appellants were shown MN possession of the land. It appears that the entry in the Revenue Record was maneuvered for the first time so as to facilitate the allotment in favor of the appellants. Even otherwise, the mere fact that a person is m unlawful possession of an evacuee property, does not make him a deserving person for the allotment in derogation to the condition* laid down MN law. The learned counsel for the appellants did not controvert the proposition that while exercising the review powers under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, the Custodial has wide powers to set aside an order which is violative of law; whether the case involves merely a question of i law, a question of fact or mixed question of HW and fact. '

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 707?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 707 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): subsection (6) of section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, the Custodial has wide powers to set aside an order which is violative of law; whether the case involves merely a question of i law, a question of fact or mixed question of HW and fact. ' In the light of what has been stated above, finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with no order r s to the costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 1997 CLC 490 about?
Answer: Case 1997 CLC 490 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1996-11-28. The case involved RAJA ALI GOHAR AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY MUZAFFARABADAND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. AND 22 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44. The case was heard by KHAWAJA MUHAMMAD SAEED, ACTG, C.J.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1997 CLC 490?
Answer: In case 1997 CLC 490, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. AND 22 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1996-11-28.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1997 CLC 490?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1997 CLC 490 were: SYED MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE SHAH FOR PETITIONERS. FAROOQUE HUSSAIN KASHMIRI FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 2.. The judges presiding were: KHAWAJA MUHAMMAD SAEED, ACTG, C.J.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1997 CLC 490?
Answer: The parties in case 1997 CLC 490 were: RAJA ALI GOHAR AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY MUZAFFARABADAND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1997 CLC 490.
Answer: Through this Constitutional petition addressed under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974, the petitioners have sought the indulgence of this Court for declaring the order dated September 20, 1993, of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, Muzaffarabad as illegal and of no legal effect, whereby he has declared the land under Survey No.728, measuring 16 Canals and 12 Marla's, situated in Village Danna, Thesis Muzaffarabad as an evacuee property. Admitted facts are that the father of the petitioners through a suit filed in the Court of Custodian on May 20, 1981, sought a declaration that he is owner of the land measuring 16 Canals and 12 Marla's comprising Survey No.728, situate m village Danna, Thesis Muzaffarabad. The entries recorded in the revenue record showing non-Muslims' as owners of the property, were against the true facts as such ineffective and operative against his right of ownership. The suit was entrusted for inquiry to the Deputy Custodian, Muzaffarabad who after necessary proceedings decreed the suit of the father of the petitioners vide his order and decree dated May 23, 1992, and send the same for confirmation to respondent No.l in his capacity as Custodian. The learned Custodian declined to confirm the decree. Hence the present petition. This writ petition was admitted for regular hearing vide a detailed order passed by this Court on November 8, 1993. The respondents despite service failed to tum-up in the Court as such were proceeded ex parte. Various adjournments, on request, for arguments were allowed to the learned counsel for the petitioners. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmiri, learned counsel for the Custodian and the Rehabilitation Authorities, appeared before the Court. An objection was taken by the learned counsel for the petitioners that without getting set aside the ex parte order recorded against the respondents, he cannot defend the impugned order. The objection was turned down by the Court on the ground that the Civil Procedure Code is applicable in the writ jurisdiction under which the defendant can join the proceedings onward at any stage of the proceedings without getting vacated the previously passed ex parte order. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmiri, the learned counsel for the respondents Nos.] and 2 was allowed to argue the case on behalf of the respondents and defend the order under challenge. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant record. Syed Muhammad Kiddie Shah, learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the land in dispute has never been treated and declared as an evacuee property by the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Authorities. The mere entry in the revenue record of non-petitioners Nos. to 7, against the true facts of the not sufficient to declare the landed property in dispute as an evacuee property. He further argued that in the light of the relevant rammed which was attached with the application filed under section 22 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act XII of 1957 (hereafter to be referred as Act) specifically the claim of ownership was pleaded and correctness of the entry incorporated in the revenue record of respondents Nos.3 to 7, was challenged. The Rehabilitation Department filed evasive written statement whereby the plea raised in this behalf by the petitioners was not denied specifically nor any record in support of the entry was produced before the trial Court. In these circumstances, the learned Deputy Custodian in his detailed order after proper appraisal of evidence, had rightly decreed the suit of the plaintiff The learned Custodian without any contrary proof has relied on the disputed entry recorded in the revenue record to pass the order impugned in this petition. The learned counsel farther argued that the learned Custodian was not justified to ignore the bar contained in section 3 of the Act. He relied on PLD 1964 SC 74. In this case the judgment of the High Court of West Pakistan Karachi Bench was assailed before the Supreme Court whereby while issuing a writ of certiorari the High Court had quashed the order of the learned Custodian dated September 17, 1960, and restored the order of the learned Deputy Custodian dated 10-10-1956. In this case the entries were recorded in the revenue record in the names of three non-Muslim brothers on the basis of a registered sale-deed dated 21-4-1947. While interpreting section 3 of the Act MN the light of the entries recorded in the revenue record, the learned Court at page-78 of the judgment observed as under: The property in dispute, it seems, was undeveloped land which was never brought under the plow. It is conceded that it was never allotted. to any refugee or other person by the Rehabilitation Department or by the Custodian- Mr. Sheikh contended before us. that after the mutation in favor of the vendees had been cancelled in 1952, and the entry in the record of rights showed the property to be that of Anagram Visual, the repetition of that entry must be regarded as evidencing the ‘treatment’ of the property as evacuee property. But, it must be observed that with the passing of the orders of confirmation in 1956, the effect of the entry in question was wiped out, in law. Merely because the vendees were negligent MN having the entry corrected and the Revenue Officers themselves omitted to change the entry so as to conform to the orders passed*by the Deputy Custodian, it could not be said that the property was being 'treated' as evacuee property within the meaning of the section." The learned counsel for the Custodian, on the other hand, has argued m that the entries of the evacuees were recorded for the first time in the Revenue Record m the year 1950. As the non-Muslim had migrated to India during the war of liberation of 1947, therefore, they are not in a position to defend the entry recorded in their favor in the revenue record. According to the learned counsel, the. Record therefore, was rightly. Relied upon by the learned Custodian. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have thoroughly examined the record attached with the petition. For the proper perception of the point involved and to determine whether section 3 of the Act in fact operates as a complete bar, it appears imperative to have a reference of the same in the language in which TT is couched. Section 3 of the Act reads as follows " Section 3. Property not to be treated as evacuee property on or after January 1957.--(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January, 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or, as the case may be as evacuee property, on or after the said date. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply- (a) to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before the date mentioned therein for treating such persons as evacuee or such property as evacuee property; or (b) to any property’ which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February, 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian." From the bare reading of this section, it is clear if any property was not treated as evacuee property up to December 31, 1956, by the Custodian. Or Rehabilitation Authorities, the same cannot be declared as evacuee property later on. Up to this time the petitioners have not been held as unauthorized occupants’ of the land nor any step is proved to have been taken by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Authorities for the recovery of any dues from them in respect of the land in dispute. For the first TME MN 1981 the father of the petitioners moved an application under section 22 of the Act whereby he challenged the correctness of the entries on the ground that the same were recorded in the names of non-Muslim Nos.3 to 7 contrary to the true facts. This fact was not even specifically denied in the written statement by the Rehabilitation Authorities. As said earlier, under section 3 of the Act, it is settled position of law that person or property not declared or treated as evacuee, person or property, as the case may be, before January 1, 1957, cannot be declared or treated as such afterward. The learned counsel for the petitioners in this behalf relied on PLD 1964 Lahore 274. The question for consideration before the Full Bench of the Lahore High Court was about the scope and true import of section 3 of the Act XII of 1957; that whether it has taken away the competence of the Custodian to declare any person or property as evacuee, who or which was not related as evacuee immediately before the IST of January, 1957, or it is still open to him to declare or treat any person or property as evacuee ignoring the bar contained in this section. The learned Judges after survey of the case-law observed as under: "6. The history of the legislation farther shows that in 19S6 there was a' departure in the policy of the State in respect of evacuee legislation. By Ordinance No. XX of 1956 the provisions of 'intending evacuees' contained in Chapter 6 were omitted from the statute. Under section 3 of this Ordinance it was provided as under:. 'Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, no person or property not treated as evacuee or evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or as the Cass may be, evacuee property, on or after the said date." Thus, under this legislation the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Authorities were permitted or given time to treat a person or property as evacuee within a month and thirteen days of the commencement of this legislation. In effect after the IST of January, 1957 this power, without any reservation, was taken away. "' Mr. Justice Wahiduddin, J. who wrote this judgment on behalf of the Full Bench while relying on a case titled ‘Perusal v. Central Government-of Pakistan’ PLD 1963 SC 127, observed: "It seems to me that there is a vast difference between the two notions, namely, the vesting of the property and the treatment of a property. In the first case, by fiction of law the property generally vests in the Custodian, to enable him to take possession or to take other steps for the protection of specified properties. In the other, some overt act in respect of a particular property is implied. The use of the words 'not treated’ clearly suggests that mere vesting of the property generally in the Custodian under section 7 of Act XII of 1957 is not treatment of a particular person or property as evacuee or evacuee property. I am, therefore, of the option that neither the vesting of the property in the Custodian nor the holding of the property on behalf of the Custodian has any material bearing on the interpretation of this subsection." The learned counsel also relied on PLD 1957 SC (PAK.) 63 Ina case titled 'Samurai v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property’. In the case too, it is held that no property can be held or treated as evacuee property after January* 1, 1957. In the light of the above, it becomes clear that the learned Custodian and Rehabilitation Authorities were permitted under law, the time up to January 1, 1957, to take necessary step to declare or treat by their conduct any property or person, as the case may be, as evacuee property or person. After, this date the powers in this regard were taken away. In the present case, admittedly no step was taken by the Custodian or any Rehabilitation Authority to declare or treat the property in dispute as evacuee property. While accepting its writ petition with cost, the order of the learned Custodian dated September 20, 1993 1s declared without lawful authority and as such of no legal consequence. The order of the Deputy Custodian passed on May 23, 1992 is restored. Petition accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 490?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 490 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-11-28): Through this Constitutional petition addressed under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974, the petitioners have sought the indulgence of this Court for declaring the order dated September 20, 1993, of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, Muzaffarabad as illegal and of no legal effect, whereby he has declared the land under Survey No.728, measuring 16 Canals and 12 Marla's, situated in Village Danna, Thesis Muzaffarabad as an evacuee property. Admitted facts are that the father of the petitioners through a suit filed in the Court of Custodian on May 20, 1981, sought a declaration that he is owner of the land measuring 16 Canals and 12 Marla's comprising Survey No.728, situate m village Danna, Thesis Muzaffarabad. The entries recorded in the revenue record showing non-Muslims' as owners of the property, were against the true facts as such ineffective and operative against his right of ownership. The suit was entrusted for inquiry to the Deputy Custodian, Muzaffarabad who after necessary proceedings decreed the suit of the father of the petitioners vide his order and decree dated May 23, 1992, and send the same for confirmation to respondent No.l in his capacity as Custodian. The learned Custodian declined to confirm the decree. Hence the present petition. This writ petition was admitted for regular hearing vide a detailed order passed by this Court on November 8, 1993. The respondents despite service failed to tum-up in the Court as such were proceeded ex parte. Various adjournments, on request, for arguments were allowed to the learned counsel for the petitioners. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmiri, learned counsel for the Custodian and the Rehabilitation Authorities, appeared before the Court. An objection was taken by the learned counsel for the petitioners that without getting set aside the ex parte order recorded against the respondents, he cannot defend the impugned order. The objection was turned down by the Court on the ground that the Civil Procedure Code is applicable in the writ jurisdiction under which the defendant can join the proceedings onward at any stage of the proceedings without getting vacated the previously passed ex parte order. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmiri, the learned counsel for the respondents Nos.] and 2 was allowed to argue the case on behalf of the respondents and defend the order under challenge. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant record. Syed Muhammad Kiddie Shah, learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the land in dispute has never been treated and declared as an evacuee property by the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Authorities. The mere entry in the revenue record of non-petitioners Nos. to 7, against the true facts of the not sufficient to declare the landed property in dispute as an evacuee property. He further argued that in the light of the relevant rammed which was attached with the application filed under section 22 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act XII of 1957 (hereafter to be referred as Act) specifically the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 490?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 490 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-11-28): to declare the landed property in dispute as an evacuee property. He further argued that in the light of the relevant rammed which was attached with the application filed under section 22 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act XII of 1957 (hereafter to be referred as Act) specifically the claim of ownership was pleaded and correctness of the entry incorporated in the revenue record of respondents Nos.3 to 7, was challenged. The Rehabilitation Department filed evasive written statement whereby the plea raised in this behalf by the petitioners was not denied specifically nor any record in support of the entry was produced before the trial Court. In these circumstances, the learned Deputy Custodian in his detailed order after proper appraisal of evidence, had rightly decreed the suit of the plaintiff The learned Custodian without any contrary proof has relied on the disputed entry recorded in the revenue record to pass the order impugned in this petition. The learned counsel farther argued that the learned Custodian was not justified to ignore the bar contained in section 3 of the Act. He relied on PLD 1964 SC 74. In this case the judgment of the High Court of West Pakistan Karachi Bench was assailed before the Supreme Court whereby while issuing a writ of certiorari the High Court had quashed the order of the learned Custodian dated September 17, 1960, and restored the order of the learned Deputy Custodian dated 10-10-1956. In this case the entries were recorded in the revenue record in the names of three non-Muslim brothers on the basis of a registered sale-deed dated 21-4-1947. While interpreting section 3 of the Act MN the light of the entries recorded in the revenue record, the learned Court at page-78 of the judgment observed as under: The property in dispute, it seems, was undeveloped land which was never brought under the plow. It is conceded that it was never allotted. to any refugee or other person by the Rehabilitation Department or by the Custodian- Mr. Sheikh contended before us. that after the mutation in favor of the vendees had been cancelled in 1952, and the entry in the record of rights showed the property to be that of Anagram Visual, the repetition of that entry must be regarded as evidencing the ‘treatment’ of the property as evacuee property. But, it must be observed that with the passing of the orders of confirmation in 1956, the effect of the entry in question was wiped out, in law. Merely because the vendees were negligent MN having the entry corrected and the Revenue Officers themselves omitted to change the entry so as to conform to the orders passed*by the Deputy Custodian, it could not be said that the property was being 'treated' as evacuee property within the meaning of the section." The learned counsel for the Custodian, on the other hand, has argued m that the entries of the evacuees were recorded for the first time in the Revenue Record m the year

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 490?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 490 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-11-28): not be said that the property was being 'treated' as evacuee property within the meaning of the section." The learned counsel for the Custodian, on the other hand, has argued m that the entries of the evacuees were recorded for the first time in the Revenue Record m the year 1950. As the non-Muslim had migrated to India during the war of liberation of 1947, therefore, they are not in a position to defend the entry recorded in their favor in the revenue record. According to the learned counsel, the. Record therefore, was rightly. Relied upon by the learned Custodian. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have thoroughly examined the record attached with the petition. For the proper perception of the point involved and to determine whether section 3 of the Act in fact operates as a complete bar, it appears imperative to have a reference of the same in the language in which TT is couched. Section 3 of the Act reads as follows " Section 3. Property not to be treated as evacuee property on or after January 1957.--(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January, 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or, as the case may be as evacuee property, on or after the said date. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply- (a) to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before the date mentioned therein for treating such persons as evacuee or such property as evacuee property; or (b) to any property’ which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February, 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian." From the bare reading of this section, it is clear if any property was not treated as evacuee property up to December 31, 1956, by the Custodian. Or Rehabilitation Authorities, the same cannot be declared as evacuee property later on. Up to this time the petitioners have not been held as unauthorized occupants’ of the land nor any step is proved to have been taken by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Authorities for the recovery of any dues from them in respect of the land in dispute. For the first TME MN 1981 the father of the petitioners moved an application under section 22 of the Act whereby he challenged the correctness of the entries on the ground that the same were recorded in the names of non-Muslim Nos.3 to 7 contrary to the true facts. This fact was not even specifically denied in the written statement by the Rehabilitation Authorities. As said earlier, under section 3 of the Act, it is settled position of law that person or property not declared or treated as evacuee, person or property, as the case may

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 490?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 490 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-11-28): the true facts. This fact was not even specifically denied in the written statement by the Rehabilitation Authorities. As said earlier, under section 3 of the Act, it is settled position of law that person or property not declared or treated as evacuee, person or property, as the case may be, before January 1, 1957, cannot be declared or treated as such afterward. The learned counsel for the petitioners in this behalf relied on PLD 1964 Lahore 274. The question for consideration before the Full Bench of the Lahore High Court was about the scope and true import of section 3 of the Act XII of 1957; that whether it has taken away the competence of the Custodian to declare any person or property as evacuee, who or which was not related as evacuee immediately before the IST of January, 1957, or it is still open to him to declare or treat any person or property as evacuee ignoring the bar contained in this section. The learned Judges after survey of the case-law observed as under: "6. The history of the legislation farther shows that in 19S6 there was a' departure in the policy of the State in respect of evacuee legislation. By Ordinance No. XX of 1956 the provisions of 'intending evacuees' contained in Chapter 6 were omitted from the statute. Under section 3 of this Ordinance it was provided as under:. 'Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, no person or property not treated as evacuee or evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or as the Cass may be, evacuee property, on or after the said date." Thus, under this legislation the Custodian or the Rehabilitation Authorities were permitted or given time to treat a person or property as evacuee within a month and thirteen days of the commencement of this legislation. In effect after the IST of January, 1957 this power, without any reservation, was taken away. "' Mr. Justice Wahiduddin, J. who wrote this judgment on behalf of the Full Bench while relying on a case titled ‘Perusal v. Central Government-of Pakistan’ PLD 1963 SC 127, observed: "It seems to me that there is a vast difference between the two notions, namely, the vesting of the property and the treatment of a property. In the first case, by fiction of law the property generally vests in the Custodian, to enable him to take possession or to take other steps for the protection of specified properties. In the other, some overt act in respect of a particular property is implied. The use of the words 'not treated’ clearly suggests that mere vesting of the property generally in the Custodian under section 7 of Act XII of 1957 is not treatment of a particular person or property as evacuee or evacuee property. I am, therefore, of the option that neither the vesting of the property in the Custodian nor the holding of the property on behalf of the Custodian has

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 CLC 490?
Answer: From case 1997 CLC 490 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1996-11-28): under section 7 of Act XII of 1957 is not treatment of a particular person or property as evacuee or evacuee property. I am, therefore, of the option that neither the vesting of the property in the Custodian nor the holding of the property on behalf of the Custodian has any material bearing on the interpretation of this subsection." The learned counsel also relied on PLD 1957 SC (PAK.) 63 Ina case titled 'Samurai v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property’. In the case too, it is held that no property can be held or treated as evacuee property after January* 1, 1957. In the light of the above, it becomes clear that the learned Custodian and Rehabilitation Authorities were permitted under law, the time up to January 1, 1957, to take necessary step to declare or treat by their conduct any property or person, as the case may be, as evacuee property or person. After, this date the powers in this regard were taken away. In the present case, admittedly no step was taken by the Custodian or any Rehabilitation Authority to declare or treat the property in dispute as evacuee property. While accepting its writ petition with cost, the order of the learned Custodian dated September 20, 1993 1s declared without lawful authority and as such of no legal consequence. The order of the Deputy Custodian passed on May 23, 1992 is restored. Petition accepted.

Question: What is case 1997 SCMR 530 about?
Answer: Case 1997 SCMR 530 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1995-11-19. The case involved EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, LAHORE AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS SARDAR BALBEER SINGH JAGGI AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include LIMITATION ACT (LX OF 1908) - S. 12 SUPREME COURT RULES, 1980, O.XIIT - R:3 EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (WANAGEMENT AND. DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.8 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1997/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_1997_530.html 1/3 28/10/2025, 00:37 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1997/SCMRV/html_txt/SCMR_1997_530.htm!. The case was heard by SAIDUZZAMAN SIDDIQUI, SH. RIAZ AHMAD AND MUKHTAR AHMED JUNEJO,JJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1997 SCMR 530?
Answer: In case 1997 SCMR 530, the court applied the following statutes: LIMITATION ACT (LX OF 1908) - S. 12 SUPREME COURT RULES, 1980, O.XIIT - R:3 EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (WANAGEMENT AND. DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.8 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1997/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_1997_530.html 1/3 28/10/2025, 00:37 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1997/SCMRV/html_txt/SCMR_1997_530.htm!. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1995-11-19.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1997 SCMR 530?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1997 SCMR 530 were: KHAWAJA SAEED UL HASSAN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR PETITIONERS. BASHIR ANSARI, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SAIDUZZAMAN SIDDIQUI, SH. RIAZ AHMAD AND MUKHTAR AHMED JUNEJO,JJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1997 SCMR 530?
Answer: The parties in case 1997 SCMR 530 were: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, LAHORE AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS SARDAR BALBEER SINGH JAGGI AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1997 SCMR 530.
Answer: SAIDUZZAMAN SIDDIQUI, J.-The petitioners are seeking leave to appeal against the judgment of learned Judge in Chambers of Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench, dated 19-12-1994 whereby the learned Judge while accepting the writ petition filed by the respondent No.1 declared the auction of property attached to charitable and religious trust by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board as without lawful authority and of no legal effect. - / A caveat has been filed in the above petition on behalf of the respondents and the learned counsel for the creators has raised two preliminary objections to the maintainability of the above petition. It is firstly contended by the learned counsel that the petition filed before this Court is barred by time by 3 days. The second objection of the learned counsel for the creators is that the petitioners while submitting petition before this Court failed to annex the paper book of the High Court as required under Order 13, Rule 3, sub-rule (in) of Supreme Court Rules, 1980. We would first deal with the preliminary objections raised by the learned counsel for the creators. The first objection relates to the maintainability of the petition on the ground that it is barred by time. The admitted position in the case is that the writ petition was heard by the learned Judge in Chambers of Lahore High Court on 2-11-1994 and judgment was reserved. The judgment was announced on 19-12-1994 but before announcement of the judgment the petitioners had applied for certified copy of the judgment on 7-11-1994. The copy of the judgment was made ready by the office of the High Court on 5-1-1995 and TT was delivered to the petitioners on 8-1-1995. The petition was presented before this Court on 9-3-1995. Under section 12 of the Limitation Act, the period spent in obtaining a certified copy of the judgment appealed against is to be excluded. In the present case, the period from 19-12-1994 (the date on which judgment was announced) to 8-1-1995 (the date of delivery of the certified copy of the judgment to TNB\ petitioners) is to be excluded for the purpose of computation of the period of limitation prescribed for filing of petition before this Court. It is not disputed mat the period of limitation prescribed under the law for filing a petition before this Court is 60 days. If 60 days are counted from 20-12-1994 (the date of announcement of judgment TS to be excluded under section 12 of the Limitation Act) 60 days would expire on 17-2-1995. If the period spent by the petitioners in obtaining certified copy of the judgment appealed against is excluded then\ the petition presented WW. before this Court on 9-3-1995 was within time. We, therefore, do not find any merit in the contention of the respondents that the petition filed before this Court was barred by limitation. The second preliminary objection raised by the respondents is that the petitioners while filing petition before this Court have not complied with the provisions of Order 13, Rule 3, sub-rule (i) of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980. No such objection was raised by the office when the petition was presented before this Court. In any case, this objection appears to be more technical in nature and for this reason alone, the petitioners cannot be non-suited if they otherwise have a case on merits. We, therefore, Overrule this. objection of respondents also. On merits, the learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the observation of the learned Judge in Chambers that without a declaration under section 8 of Act XVII of 1975 the trust property could not be put to auction, TS the result of misappropriation of law. It is contended by the learned counsel for' the petitioners that the question of determining the evacuee trust nature of the property would only arise if someone objected to the nature of the property. In the present case it was nobody's case, that the property was not an evacuee trust property and ASL such the question of declaring it as an evacuee property under section 8 Of Act XVIII of 1975 did not arise. It is, accordingly, contended that as the property was an evacuee trust property, and it vested in the Evacuee-Trust Board, its auction could to be objected to solely on the ground that the trust property could not be disposed of through auction. The contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners require examination and we, accordingly, grant leave FOA appeal to consider the same.'. Leave granted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 SCMR 530?
Answer: From case 1997 SCMR 530 (SUPREME COURT, 1995-11-19): SAIDUZZAMAN SIDDIQUI, J.-The petitioners are seeking leave to appeal against the judgment of learned Judge in Chambers of Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench, dated 19-12-1994 whereby the learned Judge while accepting the writ petition filed by the respondent No.1 declared the auction of property attached to charitable and religious trust by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board as without lawful authority and of no legal effect. - / A caveat has been filed in the above petition on behalf of the respondents and the learned counsel for the creators has raised two preliminary objections to the maintainability of the above petition. It is firstly contended by the learned counsel that the petition filed before this Court is barred by time by 3 days. The second objection of the learned counsel for the creators is that the petitioners while submitting petition before this Court failed to annex the paper book of the High Court as required under Order 13, Rule 3, sub-rule (in) of Supreme Court Rules, 1980. We would first deal with the preliminary objections raised by the learned counsel for the creators. The first objection relates to the maintainability of the petition on the ground that it is barred by time. The admitted position in the case is that the writ petition was heard by the learned Judge in Chambers of Lahore High Court on 2-11-1994 and judgment was reserved. The judgment was announced on 19-12-1994 but before announcement of the judgment the petitioners had applied for certified copy of the judgment on 7-11-1994. The copy of the judgment was made ready by the office of the High Court on 5-1-1995 and TT was delivered to the petitioners on 8-1-1995. The petition was presented before this Court on 9-3-1995. Under section 12 of the Limitation Act, the period spent in obtaining a certified copy of the judgment appealed against is to be excluded. In the present case, the period from 19-12-1994 (the date on which judgment was announced) to 8-1-1995 (the date of delivery of the certified copy of the judgment to TNB\ petitioners) is to be excluded for the purpose of computation of the period of limitation prescribed for filing of petition before this Court. It is not disputed mat the period of limitation prescribed under the law for filing a petition before this Court is 60 days. If 60 days are counted from 20-12-1994 (the date of announcement of judgment TS to be excluded under section 12 of the Limitation Act) 60 days would expire on 17-2-1995. If the period spent by the petitioners in obtaining certified copy of the judgment appealed against is excluded then\ the petition presented WW. before this Court on 9-3-1995 was within time. We, therefore, do not find any merit in the contention of the respondents that the petition filed before this Court was barred by limitation. The second preliminary objection raised by the respondents is that the petitioners while filing petition before this Court have not complied with the provisions of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1997 SCMR 530?
Answer: From case 1997 SCMR 530 (SUPREME COURT, 1995-11-19): time. We, therefore, do not find any merit in the contention of the respondents that the petition filed before this Court was barred by limitation. The second preliminary objection raised by the respondents is that the petitioners while filing petition before this Court have not complied with the provisions of Order 13, Rule 3, sub-rule (i) of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980. No such objection was raised by the office when the petition was presented before this Court. In any case, this objection appears to be more technical in nature and for this reason alone, the petitioners cannot be non-suited if they otherwise have a case on merits. We, therefore, Overrule this. objection of respondents also. On merits, the learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the observation of the learned Judge in Chambers that without a declaration under section 8 of Act XVII of 1975 the trust property could not be put to auction, TS the result of misappropriation of law. It is contended by the learned counsel for' the petitioners that the question of determining the evacuee trust nature of the property would only arise if someone objected to the nature of the property. In the present case it was nobody's case, that the property was not an evacuee trust property and ASL such the question of declaring it as an evacuee property under section 8 Of Act XVIII of 1975 did not arise. It is, accordingly, contended that as the property was an evacuee trust property, and it vested in the Evacuee-Trust Board, its auction could to be objected to solely on the ground that the trust property could not be disposed of through auction. The contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners require examination and we, accordingly, grant leave FOA appeal to consider the same.'. Leave granted.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR on 1997-01-13. The case involved KHANI ZAMAN AND ANOTHER VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR GOVERNMENT,MUZAFFARABAD AND ANOTHER. The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J..

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR and decided on 1997-01-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANTS: SARDAR RAFIQUE MAHMOOD KHAN, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENTS: SYED NAZIR HUSSAIN SHAH KAZMI, ADVOCATE.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J..

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: KHANI ZAMAN AND ANOTHER VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR GOVERNMENT,MUZAFFARABAD AND ANOTHER. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: SARDAK SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J. - This appeal has be,,, Jato* ' »e of the High Coen dated 7-4-1996, whereby the writ petition Hied by the appellants, harm, was dismissed. Previously, this appeal was heard by the Bench fisting of Mu Justice Bashan, Ahmad Shark and Mr. Justice Moham Yunnan Sarah, but a difference of opinion has arisen between them and, thus, this app has been placed before me for harem and disposal as envisaged by t l’team proves. contained in the Sad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act. 1974. q The- brief facts of the case are that the evacuee land measure 22 canals 6 nun las. Noted in tillage Plagal Band, Muzaffarabad. was allotted to the appellants as local destitute. Previous to that, the land in “e UA. allowed m one Muhammad CARSAT son of Qatar Ah HY the Kebab,tat,on t'onnnissione, on 12-12-1968. Hidayatullah, the father OT the preset appellants. Changed the allotment made in favor of Muhammad Santa, by way of revision petition before the Custodian who, vide his judgment dated 1-4-1972, set aside his allotment and remanded'the case to A.R.C with the direction that he should make a thorough probe about the entitlement of contesting parties and one Muhammad Hussain who was also a claimant, to the allotment of the land in question. Consequently, the A.R.C. issued a notice to said Muhammad Hussain, but he did not turn up and, thus, after recording the statements of the appellants he made allotment in their favor. It may be stated here that when the Custodian remanded the case for equity vide his judgment dated 1-4-1972, the appellants were not party to the proceedings before him. From the perusal of the record it transpires that after remand of the case by the Custodian, Hidayatullah, the father of the appellants, made an application before the A.R.C. that as he was in the possession of the land in dispute, the same may be allotted to him as an ‘old tenant’. On this application, a report was sent for from the ‘Atari Halley' who reported that the allotment of Muhammad Salwar, the previous allottee, HUD been cancelled by the Custodian and that. Hidayatullah. applicant, was entitled to the allotment as he was in possession of the same: however, the Atari also mentioned in his report that Hidayatullah also owned some immovable property in the village. Subsequently. Hidayatullah. the father of the appellant, made another application before the A.R.C. that as on the spot the land was cultivated by his sons, the appellants, it may be allotted to them. Consequently, the A.R.C. of the time, vide his order dated 5-1-1982, observed that although in the lifetime of their father, the appellants, herein, were not entitled to the allotment, yet he allotted the land to the appellants on the grounds that they were in possession of the land and being a barren land. it. had no utility for any other claimant. Sultan Mahmood. respondent, challenged the allotment of the appellants by film a review petition before the Custodian alleging that he BMG a refugee was entitled to the allotment of the land in question and that the appellants’ father owned more than 72 canals of land and, thus, they were not entitled to the allotment of any evacuee'land as destitute. The learned Custodian, vide his judgment dated 27-6-1992, accepted the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood observing that the order of the allotment of the appellants was violative of law because the appellants did not satisfy the conditions precedent for the allotment as contained in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Rehabilitation. He directed that the land in question might be allotted to any other deserving person. The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the order of the Custodian but the same was dismissed by the High Court. It is against the judgment of the High Court that the present appeal has been preferred. 4. have heard the arguments and gone through the file. Vardar Cacique Mali mood Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the Custodian has committed an error i holding that the appellants were included in the family of their father and were not entitled to the allotment merely because their father owned more than 72 canals of land. He has further argued that the order of allotment in favor of the appellants could not be disturbed because IL was made after thorough inquiry by the A.R.C in pursuance of the order of the Custodian. The learned counsel has further submitted that the appellants not only got the statements recorded before the A.R.C. to the effect that they were members of a separate family and were not included in the family of their father, but they also swore an affidavit to the effect that they had no other source of adequate income, as envisaged in sub-clause (d) of section 2 of the Amending Act. The learned counsel has further submitted that there was no rebuttal of the aforesaid facts and, thus, the allotment order in favor of the appellants and the proprietary nights order in their favor did not suffer from any legal infirmity. The learned counsel has also argued that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood was hopelessly time-barred and should have been dismissed on this sole ground. 5. In reply. Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi. Advocate, the learned counsel for the respondents, has controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants. He has argued that in view of the Amending Act. it cannot be said that the appellants, whose father was alive and owned more than 72 canals of land, could be regarded as a ‘destitute within the meaning of the relevant law, or they constituted a separate family from the family of their father and, thus, were entitled to allotment as destitute. The learned counsel has also controverted the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellants that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood entailed dismissal as being time-barred. He has submitted that Sultan Mahmood was not a party before the A.R.C. in allotment proceedings and. thus, the Custodian rightly condoned the delay: and the condonation of delay cannot be disturbed in the writ jurisdiction. 6. have given due consideration to the arguments raised at the Bar The first question which needs resolution is whether, the review petition filed by the respondent. Sultan Mahmood. entailed dismissal because it was time-barred. It may be. Stated were that this point was also raised before the high Court in the writ petition hut. the same was repelled on tin ground that the delay was condoned by the Custodian and his findings cannot be disturbed TN exercise of the writ jurisdiction in the circumstance? of the case The learned counsel for the respondents, has also'referred to i case OT this ( out reported as Bashir Ahmad Khan v. Custodian of Even Property. MACIF/urban (PLD 1992 SC (AJ K) 49), wherein it has been held that where the delay in filing an appeal, revision or review etc. has been condoned by the Custodian,Mich condonation order is not normal I v interfered with in exercise of writ jurisdiction. In the aforesaid Authority, the concerned aggrieved person was also not party to the proceedings wherein the allotment was made, as in the instant case. The perusal of the judgment of the Custodian reveals that he has condoned the delay after giving due consideration to the circumstances of the case and, thus, I see no reason to differ with him Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that review petition entailed dismissal as being time-barred is repelled b he next questions which needs resolution is whether the appellants, whose father. Hidayatullah, was alive. Were included in his family, or they were a separate family. It may be stated here that the word family has not been defined in the relevant law. It is laid down in the Amending Act that a family which owns 30 canals or more land, cannot be regarded as destitute so as to claim the allotment of an evacuee property. The perusal of the case law shows that word ‘family’ is defined by Judicial Authorities in the context of the relevant statute in which the same was used. Thus no hard and fast rules can be laid down as to what would constitute a ‘family’. The meaning of the word ‘family’ are to be assigned in view of the provisions of the relevant statute after ascertain the intention of the Legislature. The mere last that a person has married and has children itself is not sufficient to hold that lie constitutes a separate ‘family’ within the meanings of the Amending Act. (lie question whether one is included in the family of his father or lot'that matter in the family of some other person would depend on the circumstances of each case and must be interpreted with reference to the Statute in wlnch.it has been used. It would be expedient here to refer tin following authorities on the point: - In case reported as Going Days v. Tulip Singh (AIR 1971 Delhi 151. in has been observed as tender:- ii he word ‘family’ has not been defined in the Act, and we fed advisedly so. The concept of what constitutes a family when a number of persons are related or are living together is not something static or capable of concise definition. What constitutes a family in a given set of circumstances or in a particular society depends upon the habits and ideas of persons constituting that society and the religious and socko- religious customs Of the community to which such persons may belong. In the case of Ram Per shad Singh v. Muk and Lai (AIR 1952 Jury. 189>. J Lumpur. -. J. held that Ina given set up of social structure even nephews could be regarded as member sofa landlord’s family with the meaning of Sec. 9(1)(E) of the Delhi and Ajmer Menard Rent Control Act, We are in respectful agreement with the ' observations in all the decisions, and we have noticed above and would hold that in a given set of circumstances and according to the particular structure of a society a family may be constituted of persons who may not in a given set of circumstances be regarded as BMG members of one family." Ln case reported as Asha Bibi v. Larissa Sahib (AIR 1957 Madras 583), it had been observed as under:- The term ‘family’ will be construed in the sense of family’ as used in S. 3(A) of the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, 1913. which was intended to be used in a very large and extensive sense. The policy of that Act was to validate the creation of wake in perpetuity in favor of persons who happened to be the members of a family according to the popular acceptance of that term. Technically, that word.‘family’ may he taken to mean the collective body of persons who live in one house and under one head or manager and includes within its fold a household consisting of parents, children and servants and as the case may be lodgers or boarders. Under the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, it is intended to be used in abroad and popular sense. Popularly however the term indicates persons descended from one common progenitor and having a common lineage. It will take in both agnates and cognates and relations by blood or marriage. The nephews of the settlor are in this sense the members of his family. Similarly daughters-in-law, the son of a half-brother or the son of a half-sister. #f In SACD Abdul Fatal u. S. Speed Khan (PLD 1963 Dacca 343). it was observed as under: 14 It may be contended that the persons who may not be the children or descendants of the waif might be members of the family The dictionary meaning of the word family is the household, or all those who live in one house under one head including parents, children; servants; the descendants of a common progenitor’ Hence we find that the word family is more comprehensive than a genus. The word ‘family also means all descendants of common ancestor, house and lineage. So m a family there might be persons not related to the waif persons who are distant kindred who cannot be called descendants. So if the provision is made for the maintenance of the family which includes persons other than the children and descendants of the waif it, will be valid, but in the present case the heirs of the descendants of the waif have been made beneficiaries who may be not at all the descendants of the waif or members of his family. In case reported as Muhammad Adam Khan u. Hamid Shah (AIR 1947 All 1371, it has been observed as under:- "6. If, however, it is found that the document in dispute constituted a WAAF all-ul-aulad, it will have to be considered whether the provisions of Act 6 (VI) of 1913 which validated such a WAAF had been complied with. It has been argued that by the said Act it was made lawful for a person profess mg the Mussulman faith to create a WAAF which in all other respects was in accordance with the provisions of the Mussulman Law for the maintenance and support wholly or partially of his family, children or descendants; and that no WAAF could be created in favor of the nephews as they did not come within the descriptions of the family, children or descendants. The matter is however, concluded by a Bench decision of this Court in 52 ALL. 363. where it was held that the word ‘family’ in S. 3(A), Mussulman WAAF Validating Act was not restricted to only those persons residing’ in the house of the settlor for whose maintenance he was mainly responsible, but that the word was intended to be used in its broad popular sense; persons descended Mm one common progenitor and having a common Image, e.g. nephews of the settlor and their descendants, were included in the term, respective of whether they lived in the settlor s house, "i whether the settlor was responsible for their maintenance am mm full agreement with the view that is expressed and do not IMD any force in this argument." (underlining is mine) In case reported as Airy Has a v. Torah Hussain (AIR 1908 Patna 232). it was observed as under:- til The expression -family’ in S. of the Partition Act must be construed in a wide sense and ought not to be restricted to Persons tracing their descent from a common ancestor. There is "thing in the language or the context of S. of the Partition Act t" suggest that the term -family- was intended to be used in a very “arrow and restricted sense. The principle underlying the section appears to be to maintain the integrity of a body of people knit together by the tie of common residence. The expression ‘family-has been defined in the Oxford Dictionary, Volume I, 1936 I'- Dion. in these terms: I he body of persons who live in one house or unda one head including parents, children, servants etc. The group consisting of parents and their children whether living together or not; in wider sense all those who. Are nearly connected by blood or affinity’. it is evident from the Authorities referred to above that while assigning the meaning and scope to word ‘family’ the provisions of the re event statutes and policy intended by the Legislature to be followed is to be kept in mind. After the amendment in the Rehabilitation Act. certain categories of persons other than refugees are entitled to the allotments of evacuee property subject to the conditions laid down in the law: a destitute’ is also entitled to seek the allotment of an evacuee land. The definition of destitute as given in clause (d» of section 2 of the Amending Act is as under:,)ES,itutes' means e persons who being cultivators either own no land at all or have less than 30 canals per family and have, NER Ade(Rate source of income, but would no, include occupancy tenants." 8, IIL‘ mutant case, it is to be seen whether a ’thorough inquiry w image by the A.R.C. to ascertain that the appellants wet ‘destitute' within the meanings of ],1w; whether they were included in the family of their father or they were a separate family; and whether they had some other adequate source of income. From the perusal of the relevant order of the A.R.C, it appears that he has given no finding on the point whether they had any other adequate source of income; on the basis of statements of the appellants, he opined that they were not included in the family of their father but were a separate family. But all the same he expressed the view that in lifetime of their father, the appellants were not entitled to an allotment of evacuee land. However, despite that the learned A.R.C. allotted the land in question to the appellants oil the grounds which are not recognized by the relevant law. It would be expedient here to reproduce the relevant paragraph from the order of the learned A.R.C. dated 5-1-1QRS5!-- It is apparent from the above-mentioned paragraph that there is no specific finding by A.R.C. that the appellants had no other source of income as stipulated under clause (d) of section 2 of the Act. It is correct that while dealing with the facts of the case in the impugned order, he has mentioned that according to the statement of the appellants and their affidavit, they were not included in the family of the father and had no source of income but all the same no specific finding has been given’ with regard to the fac tum of ‘adequate’ source of income in the operative part of the judgment Therefore, the learned Custodian has rightly held that A.R.C. made allotment in favor of the appellants on the grounds which are not recognised by law. It may also be observed here that even if we ignore the fac tum of giving specific findings on the post, the fact remains that except the sole statements of the appellants and their affidavit, no independent -witness was examined by them to prove that they had no other source of adequate come and that they were not included in the family of their father. The mere fact that the appellants are married and have children would not itself constitute them a separate family; this may be one of the factors to hold that they were not included in the family of their lather. Thus, there is no conclusive proof of the fact that they were a Separate family and the order of allotment in favor of the appellants were made on flimsy grounds which are not recognised by law. 9. The learned counsel for the appellants has also submitted that the review petition should have been dismissed because the order of A.R.C. could not be vacated BYR the Custodian in exercise of review jurisdiction; it could be set at naught only if justice so demanded. It may be observed here that a Court of law has to administer justice according to law. If an order has been passed in violation of law, it cannot be said that the interest of justice would be saved, if such order is not disturbed. As the appellants have not proved that they were ‘destitute’ within the meaning of the relevant law. they cannot be heard saying that the cause of justice would be better served if the orders made i their favor remain tact. It may also be stated here that in Kasia Girafarig Hidayatullah, the father of the appellants, who has been previously litigating with Muhammad Salwar, the previous allottee, is shown in tire possession of the land in dispute. It was only in the year Khan’ 1981 that the appellants were shown in possession of the land. It appears that the entry in the revenue record was maneuvered for the first time so as to facilitate the allotment in favor of the appellants. Even otherwise, the mete fact that a person is in unlawful possession of an evacuee property, does not make him a deserving person for the allotment in derogation to the conditions laid down in law. The learned counsel for the appellants did not controvert the proposition that while exercising the review powers under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. 1957.'the Custodian has wide powers to set aside an Vida which is violative of law; whether the case involves merely a question of law, a question of fact or mixed question of law and fact. In the light of what has been stated above, finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with no order as to the costs.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): SARDAK SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J. - This appeal has be,,, Jato* ' »e of the High Coen dated 7-4-1996, whereby the writ petition Hied by the appellants, harm, was dismissed. Previously, this appeal was heard by the Bench fisting of Mu Justice Bashan, Ahmad Shark and Mr. Justice Moham Yunnan Sarah, but a difference of opinion has arisen between them and, thus, this app has been placed before me for harem and disposal as envisaged by t l’team proves. contained in the Sad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act. 1974. q The- brief facts of the case are that the evacuee land measure 22 canals 6 nun las. Noted in tillage Plagal Band, Muzaffarabad. was allotted to the appellants as local destitute. Previous to that, the land in “e UA. allowed m one Muhammad CARSAT son of Qatar Ah HY the Kebab,tat,on t'onnnissione, on 12-12-1968. Hidayatullah, the father OT the preset appellants. Changed the allotment made in favor of Muhammad Santa, by way of revision petition before the Custodian who, vide his judgment dated 1-4-1972, set aside his allotment and remanded'the case to A.R.C with the direction that he should make a thorough probe about the entitlement of contesting parties and one Muhammad Hussain who was also a claimant, to the allotment of the land in question. Consequently, the A.R.C. issued a notice to said Muhammad Hussain, but he did not turn up and, thus, after recording the statements of the appellants he made allotment in their favor. It may be stated here that when the Custodian remanded the case for equity vide his judgment dated 1-4-1972, the appellants were not party to the proceedings before him. From the perusal of the record it transpires that after remand of the case by the Custodian, Hidayatullah, the father of the appellants, made an application before the A.R.C. that as he was in the possession of the land in dispute, the same may be allotted to him as an ‘old tenant’. On this application, a report was sent for from the ‘Atari Halley' who reported that the allotment of Muhammad Salwar, the previous allottee, HUD been cancelled by the Custodian and that. Hidayatullah. applicant, was entitled to the allotment as he was in possession of the same: however, the Atari also mentioned in his report that Hidayatullah also owned some immovable property in the village. Subsequently. Hidayatullah. the father of the appellant, made another application before the A.R.C. that as on the spot the land was cultivated by his sons, the appellants, it may be allotted to them. Consequently, the A.R.C. of the time, vide his order dated 5-1-1982, observed that although in the lifetime of their father, the appellants, herein, were not entitled to the allotment, yet he allotted the land to the appellants on the grounds that they were in possession of the land and being a barren land. it. had no utility for any other claimant. Sultan Mahmood. respondent, challenged the allotment of the appellants by film a review

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): not entitled to the allotment, yet he allotted the land to the appellants on the grounds that they were in possession of the land and being a barren land. it. had no utility for any other claimant. Sultan Mahmood. respondent, challenged the allotment of the appellants by film a review petition before the Custodian alleging that he BMG a refugee was entitled to the allotment of the land in question and that the appellants’ father owned more than 72 canals of land and, thus, they were not entitled to the allotment of any evacuee'land as destitute. The learned Custodian, vide his judgment dated 27-6-1992, accepted the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood observing that the order of the allotment of the appellants was violative of law because the appellants did not satisfy the conditions precedent for the allotment as contained in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Rehabilitation. He directed that the land in question might be allotted to any other deserving person. The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the order of the Custodian but the same was dismissed by the High Court. It is against the judgment of the High Court that the present appeal has been preferred. 4. have heard the arguments and gone through the file. Vardar Cacique Mali mood Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the Custodian has committed an error i holding that the appellants were included in the family of their father and were not entitled to the allotment merely because their father owned more than 72 canals of land. He has further argued that the order of allotment in favor of the appellants could not be disturbed because IL was made after thorough inquiry by the A.R.C in pursuance of the order of the Custodian. The learned counsel has further submitted that the appellants not only got the statements recorded before the A.R.C. to the effect that they were members of a separate family and were not included in the family of their father, but they also swore an affidavit to the effect that they had no other source of adequate income, as envisaged in sub-clause (d) of section 2 of the Amending Act. The learned counsel has further submitted that there was no rebuttal of the aforesaid facts and, thus, the allotment order in favor of the appellants and the proprietary nights order in their favor did not suffer from any legal infirmity. The learned counsel has also argued that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood was hopelessly time-barred and should have been dismissed on this sole ground. 5. In reply. Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi. Advocate, the learned counsel for the respondents, has controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants. He has argued that in view of the Amending Act. it cannot be said that the appellants, whose father was alive and owned more than 72 canals of land, could be regarded as a ‘destitute within the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): respondents, has controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants. He has argued that in view of the Amending Act. it cannot be said that the appellants, whose father was alive and owned more than 72 canals of land, could be regarded as a ‘destitute within the meaning of the relevant law, or they constituted a separate family from the family of their father and, thus, were entitled to allotment as destitute. The learned counsel has also controverted the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellants that the review petition filed by Sultan Mahmood entailed dismissal as being time-barred. He has submitted that Sultan Mahmood was not a party before the A.R.C. in allotment proceedings and. thus, the Custodian rightly condoned the delay: and the condonation of delay cannot be disturbed in the writ jurisdiction. 6. have given due consideration to the arguments raised at the Bar The first question which needs resolution is whether, the review petition filed by the respondent. Sultan Mahmood. entailed dismissal because it was time-barred. It may be. Stated were that this point was also raised before the high Court in the writ petition hut. the same was repelled on tin ground that the delay was condoned by the Custodian and his findings cannot be disturbed TN exercise of the writ jurisdiction in the circumstance? of the case The learned counsel for the respondents, has also'referred to i case OT this ( out reported as Bashir Ahmad Khan v. Custodian of Even Property. MACIF/urban (PLD 1992 SC (AJ K) 49), wherein it has been held that where the delay in filing an appeal, revision or review etc. has been condoned by the Custodian,Mich condonation order is not normal I v interfered with in exercise of writ jurisdiction. In the aforesaid Authority, the concerned aggrieved person was also not party to the proceedings wherein the allotment was made, as in the instant case. The perusal of the judgment of the Custodian reveals that he has condoned the delay after giving due consideration to the circumstances of the case and, thus, I see no reason to differ with him Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that review petition entailed dismissal as being time-barred is repelled b he next questions which needs resolution is whether the appellants, whose father. Hidayatullah, was alive. Were included in his family, or they were a separate family. It may be stated here that the word family has not been defined in the relevant law. It is laid down in the Amending Act that a family which owns 30 canals or more land, cannot be regarded as destitute so as to claim the allotment of an evacuee property. The perusal of the case law shows that word ‘family’ is defined by Judicial Authorities in the context of the relevant statute in which the same was used. Thus no hard and fast rules can be laid down as to what would constitute a ‘family’. The meaning

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): an evacuee property. The perusal of the case law shows that word ‘family’ is defined by Judicial Authorities in the context of the relevant statute in which the same was used. Thus no hard and fast rules can be laid down as to what would constitute a ‘family’. The meaning of the word ‘family’ are to be assigned in view of the provisions of the relevant statute after ascertain the intention of the Legislature. The mere last that a person has married and has children itself is not sufficient to hold that lie constitutes a separate ‘family’ within the meanings of the Amending Act. (lie question whether one is included in the family of his father or lot'that matter in the family of some other person would depend on the circumstances of each case and must be interpreted with reference to the Statute in wlnch.it has been used. It would be expedient here to refer tin following authorities on the point: - In case reported as Going Days v. Tulip Singh (AIR 1971 Delhi 151. in has been observed as tender:- ii he word ‘family’ has not been defined in the Act, and we fed advisedly so. The concept of what constitutes a family when a number of persons are related or are living together is not something static or capable of concise definition. What constitutes a family in a given set of circumstances or in a particular society depends upon the habits and ideas of persons constituting that society and the religious and socko- religious customs Of the community to which such persons may belong. In the case of Ram Per shad Singh v. Muk and Lai (AIR 1952 Jury. 189>. J Lumpur. -. J. held that Ina given set up of social structure even nephews could be regarded as member sofa landlord’s family with the meaning of Sec. 9(1)(E) of the Delhi and Ajmer Menard Rent Control Act, We are in respectful agreement with the ' observations in all the decisions, and we have noticed above and would hold that in a given set of circumstances and according to the particular structure of a society a family may be constituted of persons who may not in a given set of circumstances be regarded as BMG members of one family." Ln case reported as Asha Bibi v. Larissa Sahib (AIR 1957 Madras 583), it had been observed as under:- The term ‘family’ will be construed in the sense of family’ as used in S. 3(A) of the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, 1913. which was intended to be used in a very large and extensive sense. The policy of that Act was to validate the creation of wake in perpetuity in favor of persons who happened to be the members of a family according to the popular acceptance of that term. Technically, that word.‘family’ may he taken to mean the collective body of persons who live in one house and under one head or manager and includes within its fold

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): in favor of persons who happened to be the members of a family according to the popular acceptance of that term. Technically, that word.‘family’ may he taken to mean the collective body of persons who live in one house and under one head or manager and includes within its fold a household consisting of parents, children and servants and as the case may be lodgers or boarders. Under the Mussulman Wake Validating Act, it is intended to be used in abroad and popular sense. Popularly however the term indicates persons descended from one common progenitor and having a common lineage. It will take in both agnates and cognates and relations by blood or marriage. The nephews of the settlor are in this sense the members of his family. Similarly daughters-in-law, the son of a half-brother or the son of a half-sister. #f In SACD Abdul Fatal u. S. Speed Khan (PLD 1963 Dacca 343). it was observed as under: 14 It may be contended that the persons who may not be the children or descendants of the waif might be members of the family The dictionary meaning of the word family is the household, or all those who live in one house under one head including parents, children; servants; the descendants of a common progenitor’ Hence we find that the word family is more comprehensive than a genus. The word ‘family also means all descendants of common ancestor, house and lineage. So m a family there might be persons not related to the waif persons who are distant kindred who cannot be called descendants. So if the provision is made for the maintenance of the family which includes persons other than the children and descendants of the waif it, will be valid, but in the present case the heirs of the descendants of the waif have been made beneficiaries who may be not at all the descendants of the waif or members of his family. In case reported as Muhammad Adam Khan u. Hamid Shah (AIR 1947 All 1371, it has been observed as under:- "6. If, however, it is found that the document in dispute constituted a WAAF all-ul-aulad, it will have to be considered whether the provisions of Act 6 (VI) of 1913 which validated such a WAAF had been complied with. It has been argued that by the said Act it was made lawful for a person profess mg the Mussulman faith to create a WAAF which in all other respects was in accordance with the provisions of the Mussulman Law for the maintenance and support wholly or partially of his family, children or descendants; and that no WAAF could be created in favor of the nephews as they did not come within the descriptions of the family, children or descendants. The matter is however, concluded by a Bench decision of this Court in 52 ALL. 363. where it was held that the word ‘family’ in S. 3(A), Mussulman WAAF Validating Act was not restricted to only

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): as they did not come within the descriptions of the family, children or descendants. The matter is however, concluded by a Bench decision of this Court in 52 ALL. 363. where it was held that the word ‘family’ in S. 3(A), Mussulman WAAF Validating Act was not restricted to only those persons residing’ in the house of the settlor for whose maintenance he was mainly responsible, but that the word was intended to be used in its broad popular sense; persons descended Mm one common progenitor and having a common Image, e.g. nephews of the settlor and their descendants, were included in the term, respective of whether they lived in the settlor s house, "i whether the settlor was responsible for their maintenance am mm full agreement with the view that is expressed and do not IMD any force in this argument." (underlining is mine) In case reported as Airy Has a v. Torah Hussain (AIR 1908 Patna 232). it was observed as under:- til The expression -family’ in S. of the Partition Act must be construed in a wide sense and ought not to be restricted to Persons tracing their descent from a common ancestor. There is "thing in the language or the context of S. of the Partition Act t" suggest that the term -family- was intended to be used in a very “arrow and restricted sense. The principle underlying the section appears to be to maintain the integrity of a body of people knit together by the tie of common residence. The expression ‘family-has been defined in the Oxford Dictionary, Volume I, 1936 I'- Dion. in these terms: I he body of persons who live in one house or unda one head including parents, children, servants etc. The group consisting of parents and their children whether living together or not; in wider sense all those who. Are nearly connected by blood or affinity’. it is evident from the Authorities referred to above that while assigning the meaning and scope to word ‘family’ the provisions of the re event statutes and policy intended by the Legislature to be followed is to be kept in mind. After the amendment in the Rehabilitation Act. certain categories of persons other than refugees are entitled to the allotments of evacuee property subject to the conditions laid down in the law: a destitute’ is also entitled to seek the allotment of an evacuee land. The definition of destitute as given in clause (d» of section 2 of the Amending Act is as under:,)ES,itutes' means e persons who being cultivators either own no land at all or have less than 30 canals per family and have, NER Ade(Rate source of income, but would no, include occupancy tenants." 8, IIL‘ mutant case, it is to be seen whether a ’thorough inquiry w image by the A.R.C. to ascertain that the appellants wet ‘destitute' within the meanings of ],1w; whether they were included in the family of their father or they were a separate family; and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): include occupancy tenants." 8, IIL‘ mutant case, it is to be seen whether a ’thorough inquiry w image by the A.R.C. to ascertain that the appellants wet ‘destitute' within the meanings of ],1w; whether they were included in the family of their father or they were a separate family; and whether they had some other adequate source of income. From the perusal of the relevant order of the A.R.C, it appears that he has given no finding on the point whether they had any other adequate source of income; on the basis of statements of the appellants, he opined that they were not included in the family of their father but were a separate family. But all the same he expressed the view that in lifetime of their father, the appellants were not entitled to an allotment of evacuee land. However, despite that the learned A.R.C. allotted the land in question to the appellants oil the grounds which are not recognized by the relevant law. It would be expedient here to reproduce the relevant paragraph from the order of the learned A.R.C. dated 5-1-1QRS5!-- It is apparent from the above-mentioned paragraph that there is no specific finding by A.R.C. that the appellants had no other source of income as stipulated under clause (d) of section 2 of the Act. It is correct that while dealing with the facts of the case in the impugned order, he has mentioned that according to the statement of the appellants and their affidavit, they were not included in the family of the father and had no source of income but all the same no specific finding has been given’ with regard to the fac tum of ‘adequate’ source of income in the operative part of the judgment Therefore, the learned Custodian has rightly held that A.R.C. made allotment in favor of the appellants on the grounds which are not recognised by law. It may also be observed here that even if we ignore the fac tum of giving specific findings on the post, the fact remains that except the sole statements of the appellants and their affidavit, no independent -witness was examined by them to prove that they had no other source of adequate come and that they were not included in the family of their father. The mere fact that the appellants are married and have children would not itself constitute them a separate family; this may be one of the factors to hold that they were not included in the family of their lather. Thus, there is no conclusive proof of the fact that they were a Separate family and the order of allotment in favor of the appellants were made on flimsy grounds which are not recognised by law. 9. The learned counsel for the appellants has also submitted that the review petition should have been dismissed because the order of A.R.C. could not be vacated BYR the Custodian in exercise of review jurisdiction; it could be set at naught only

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OF AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1997-01-13): flimsy grounds which are not recognised by law. 9. The learned counsel for the appellants has also submitted that the review petition should have been dismissed because the order of A.R.C. could not be vacated BYR the Custodian in exercise of review jurisdiction; it could be set at naught only if justice so demanded. It may be observed here that a Court of law has to administer justice according to law. If an order has been passed in violation of law, it cannot be said that the interest of justice would be saved, if such order is not disturbed. As the appellants have not proved that they were ‘destitute’ within the meaning of the relevant law. they cannot be heard saying that the cause of justice would be better served if the orders made i their favor remain tact. It may also be stated here that in Kasia Girafarig Hidayatullah, the father of the appellants, who has been previously litigating with Muhammad Salwar, the previous allottee, is shown in tire possession of the land in dispute. It was only in the year Khan’ 1981 that the appellants were shown in possession of the land. It appears that the entry in the revenue record was maneuvered for the first time so as to facilitate the allotment in favor of the appellants. Even otherwise, the mete fact that a person is in unlawful possession of an evacuee property, does not make him a deserving person for the allotment in derogation to the conditions laid down in law. The learned counsel for the appellants did not controvert the proposition that while exercising the review powers under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. 1957.'the Custodian has wide powers to set aside an Vida which is violative of law; whether the case involves merely a question of law, a question of fact or mixed question of law and fact. In the light of what has been stated above, finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with no order as to the costs.

Question: What is case 1963 PLD 450 about?
Answer: Case 1963 PLD 450 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1963-02-15. The case involved AHMAD KHAN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. AND 43 (4) WRIT CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN,1962 - ARTICLE 98. The case was heard by QADEERUDDIN AHMED AND H. T. RAYMOND.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1963 PLD 450?
Answer: In case 1963 PLD 450, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. AND 43 (4) WRIT CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN,1962 - ARTICLE 98. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1963-02-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1963 PLD 450?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1963 PLD 450 were: DINGOMAL FOR PETITIONERS. SAEED A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.N. A. FAROOQI FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. 3-A AND 3-B.. The judges presiding were: QADEERUDDIN AHMED AND H. T. RAYMOND.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1963 PLD 450?
Answer: The parties in case 1963 PLD 450 were: AHMAD KHAN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1963 PLD 450.
Answer: Judgment Raymond, J.-This writ petition is directed in the main against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi dated 22- 3-1960, setting aside the order of the Additional Custodian dated 16-11-1955 and upholding the previous order of the Assistant Custodian dated 24-2-1955. The main contention of the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioners is that the order of the Custodian of 22-3-1960 is illegal and without jurisdiction BMG in contravention of the express and clear provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. In order to appreciate this contention of the learned Advocate and decide it, it is necessary to set out a few relevant facts. 2. The petitioner No. Ahmad Khan is the son of one Khaliqdino and the petitioners Nos. and 3 are two names of the said Khaliqdino who is now dead. In the year 1916 this Khaliqdino BMG in need of money raised a loan of Rs. 3,000 on behalf of himself and his two names from one Murat Singh Harshen Singh of Hyderabad and executed a Deed of Sale in favor of the said Murat Singh Harshen Singh in respect of the agricultural lands measuring 185.8 acres situated NM Del AMN, Talk Tando Allahyar, District Hyderabad. Although the document evidencing this transaction purported to be a Sale Deed, the petitioners’ contention is that it was in fact a mortgage transaction under which Khaliqdino and after his death the petitioners remained in possession of the mortgaged lands which were to be redeemed on repayment of the loan of Rs. 3,000. Soon after Partition the said Murat Singh Harshen Singh, the mortgagee of the aforesaid lands, migrated to India leaving the petitioners in possession of the said lands which they continued to cultivate and maintain themselves on its produce. On 2-7-1952 the petitioners presented an application to the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, praying for a declaration that they were the owners in possession of the said agricultural lands and that the document dated 12-4-1916 executed by the petitioners’ father on behalf of himself and the petitioners Nos. and 3 was in fact a mortgage. This application was dismissed by the Assistant Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, by his order dated 24-2-1955. The petitioners then preferred an appeal against this order to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) Evacuee Property, Federal Capital, Hyderabad and Khairpur Divisions, Karachi, which appeal was accepted by the Additional Custodian by his order dated 16-11-1955 in which he set aside the previous order of the Assistant Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, and declared that the appellants -petitioners were the owners of the above-mentioned lands and the transaction of sale in favor of Murat Singh Harshen Singh was merely a mortgage. The petitioners then submitted an application under section 17 of Ordinance XV of 1949 to the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, praying for a certificate granting them permission to get the lands mutated in their names in the Record-of Rights. On 18-5-1956 the Deputy Custodian, Hyderabad granted this application on the petitioners’ depositing Rs. 3,000 in his office in the account of the respondent. This order went on to say that- “on payment of the above sum the mortgage shall STA; d redeemed and the applicants will be entitled to get mutation effected in their names in the revenue record.” The petitioners deposited this sum of Rs. 3,000 and received a certificate from the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, dated 8-6-1956 acknowledging the receipt of the mortgaged amount of Rs. 3,000 due to Murat SMG Harshen Singh and granting permission for mutation of the Record-of Rights in the names of the petitioners. Pursuance to this certificate the lands in question were mutated in the names of these petitioners. 3. It appears that some three years later in 1959 the Rehabilitation Authorities moved the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi for a review of the order of the Additional Custodian dated 16-11-1955 and on 8-8-1959 this officer accepted this revision application, set aside the order of the Additional Custodian dated 16 11-1955 and declared the lands in dispute as evacuee property. A revision petition against this order of 8-8-1959 was presented by the applicants to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, who in his order dated 22-3-1960 while setting aside the order of the Additional Custodian of 8-8- 1959 for the reason that the Additional Custodian had no power to review his previous order proceed in exercise of his own so moth revisional powers conferred upon him by subsection (4) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 to set aside the Additional Custodian’s order dated 16-11-1955, uphold the Assistant Custodian’s order dated 24-2- 1955 and dismiss the petitioners’ revision application. It is this last order of 22-3-1960 which is the impugned order in this matter. 4. Appearing on behalf of the petitioners Mr. Diagonal advanced a short argument that the revisional powers of the Custodian under section 43 (4) of Act XII of 1957 are limited by section 3 'of the same Act and, therefore, the Custodian ha’d no jurisdiction to pass his order of 22-3-1960. Mr. Diagonal posted out that the language of section 3 creates a bar to the exercise of the revisional powers of the Custodian in this case and this contention, he said, is emphasized and accentuated by the opening words of section 3 namely: “notwithstanding anything contained in this Act”. By reason of this section, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or as evacuee property on or after the said date. The petitioners have three orders all prior to 1-1-1957 and dated respectively 16-11- 1955, 18-5-1956 and 8-6-1956, declaring the lands in question as non-evacuee. In view of these three orders Mr. Diagonal argued that the door was finally shut, barred and bolted against the Custodian who had no power to re-open this matter after 1-1-1957 and declare these lands as evacuee property. "5. On the other hand, ITT was contended by Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh appearing on behalf of the Custodian that the order of the Additional Custodian dated 16-11-1955 was procured as a result of fraud. The petitioners had produced certain receipts before this Additional Custodian showing that they had been paying revenue for this land and on the basis of these receipts the Additional Custodian came to the conclusion that this land had been in their possession throughout. But, it later transpired, that these receipts did not relate to the land in dispute but to some other land so that the Additional Custodian had been misled into passing his order of 16-11-1955. The correct position only came to light when this matter was before the Custodian, and therefore, the Custodian was fully empowered in the exercise of his so auto revisional powers under section 43 (4) of the Act to set aside the order dated 16-11-1955 of the Additional Custodian. Mr. Shaikh referred us to the judgment of Muir, C. J. Lahore as he then was, reported in P LD 1950 LAH. at page 745 (Sic). 6. In reply to this contention of the Custodian Advocate Mr. Diagonal made two further submissions : (1) he invited our attention to a ruling of a Division Bench of this High Court reported in P LD 1961 Keir. at page 589 which, he said, is on all fours with the facts of this case and (ii) he contended that if an order procured by fraud be a nullity, the fraud alleged must first be proved and the order in question then set aside. But, by reason of the bar contained in section 3, the Custodian has no jurisdiction at all to inquire into the fraud alleged and to reach a conclusion whether the fraud has been in fact proved. 7. Dealing with the first of these final two submissions made by the learned counsel on behalf of the petitioners we have ourselves examined the case relied upon by him and reported in PLD 1961 Keir. at page 589. We have laboriously considered the facts of the reported case, and we find that although the respondent No. in this reported case Mr. Abdul Chalk Abdul Razz had moved the then Custodian of Evacuee Property for the setting aside of the orders of confirmation of the sale in favor of the Hindu purchasers in the exercise of his power of so moth revision under section 43 of Act XII of 1957 on the ground that these were obtained by fraud and that the sale in their favor was a bogus transaction, yet, this allegation of fraud does not appear to have been stressed in the arguments before that Division Bench, and we find no reference to it in the lengthy judgment delivered in that matter. Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh who appeared in this reported case also for the Custodian and, therefore, has in his possession the files relating to this matter from the Custodian’s office, formed us that this allegation of fraud in this reported case was not even pressed before the Custodian.' In these circumstances then, we are unable to derive any assistance from this reported case when deciding the present matter. Nor as contended by Mr. Diagonal can we take this reported case as an authority for the proposition that the bar contained in section 3 is absolute so as even to shut out an inquiry into an order obtained before 1-1-1957 concerning the non-evacuee character of property even where such an order has been said to have been procured by fraud. 8. There remains for consideration the last post urged by Mr. Diagonal that even if it is admitted that the order or orders prior to 1-1-1957 declaring the property in question as nonevacuee are a nullity having been obtained by fraud, yet, this alleged fraud has first to be proved, the previous order or orders declared null and void and in order to do this the Custodian will of necessity have to embark upon an equity which by reason of the language of section 3, he is prohibited from dog. While consider mg this argument, it is of importance to remember that the Custodian was not only seized of this matter when passing his order of 22-3- 1960, but that he had been moved through a Revision Petition filed before him by the petitioners themselves. The petitioners had presented this Revision Petition against the order of the Additional Custodian dated 8th August 1959 reviewing so moth his previous order dated 16th November 1955 and setting it aside. It was while deal mg with this Revision Petition of the petitioners that the Custodian alighted upon the fraud that had been practiced by them when securing the order in their favor of 16-11- 1955 and the Custodian having come across this fraud while legally seized of this matter declared the order of 16-11-1955 to have been based on insufficient evidence and, therefore, he set it aside in exercise of the powers conferred upon him by subsection (4) of section 43 of Act XII of 1957. We cannot bring ourselves to believe that the Custodian having, in these circumstances, come across this fraud was, by reason of section 3, rendered powerless in the matter and unable to take any action upon this discovery made by him. No doubt section 3 says that- “no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the IST day of January 1957, shall be treated as such after the said date.” But in our view, this “previous treatment” must be a lawful and legal treatment and not one based on fraud or deception. In his book on Fraud and Mistake (7th Edition) at page 3 Kerr says that- “Fraud vitiates everything, even judgments and orders of the Court.” Therefore, this previous treatment, if based on fraud, is bad and vitiated and, therefore, it must be reversed or set aside when it comes to light in circumstances such as those of the present case. We may add here that the petitioners’ learned counsel did not dispute or deny that such a fraud had occurred : all he contended was that the Custodian by reason of section 3 had no power or jurisdiction to inquire into it or to declare it as such. 9. Besides, there is a further consideration that weighs with us m dealing with this argument. It is this : the petitioners have come to this Court in its writ jurisdiction seeking equitable relief Now, it is well-known that : “He who seeks equity must do equity,” and that any Court administer mg equitable relief is bound to proceed on this maxim. The petitioners in practicing this fraud cannot be said to have done equity ; nor can they be said to have come to this Court with clean hands. Consequently, as a result of their own conduct they have plainly debarred themselves from obtaining any equitable relief from this Court. 10. The result, therefore, is that this writ petition is dismissed with costs. “_' Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 450?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 450 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-15): Judgment Raymond, J.-This writ petition is directed in the main against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi dated 22- 3-1960, setting aside the order of the Additional Custodian dated 16-11-1955 and upholding the previous order of the Assistant Custodian dated 24-2-1955. The main contention of the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioners is that the order of the Custodian of 22-3-1960 is illegal and without jurisdiction BMG in contravention of the express and clear provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. In order to appreciate this contention of the learned Advocate and decide it, it is necessary to set out a few relevant facts. 2. The petitioner No. Ahmad Khan is the son of one Khaliqdino and the petitioners Nos. and 3 are two names of the said Khaliqdino who is now dead. In the year 1916 this Khaliqdino BMG in need of money raised a loan of Rs. 3,000 on behalf of himself and his two names from one Murat Singh Harshen Singh of Hyderabad and executed a Deed of Sale in favor of the said Murat Singh Harshen Singh in respect of the agricultural lands measuring 185.8 acres situated NM Del AMN, Talk Tando Allahyar, District Hyderabad. Although the document evidencing this transaction purported to be a Sale Deed, the petitioners’ contention is that it was in fact a mortgage transaction under which Khaliqdino and after his death the petitioners remained in possession of the mortgaged lands which were to be redeemed on repayment of the loan of Rs. 3,000. Soon after Partition the said Murat Singh Harshen Singh, the mortgagee of the aforesaid lands, migrated to India leaving the petitioners in possession of the said lands which they continued to cultivate and maintain themselves on its produce. On 2-7-1952 the petitioners presented an application to the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, praying for a declaration that they were the owners in possession of the said agricultural lands and that the document dated 12-4-1916 executed by the petitioners’ father on behalf of himself and the petitioners Nos. and 3 was in fact a mortgage. This application was dismissed by the Assistant Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, by his order dated 24-2-1955. The petitioners then preferred an appeal against this order to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) Evacuee Property, Federal Capital, Hyderabad and Khairpur Divisions, Karachi, which appeal was accepted by the Additional Custodian by his order dated 16-11-1955 in which he set aside the previous order of the Assistant Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, and declared that the appellants -petitioners were the owners of the above-mentioned lands and the transaction of sale in favor of Murat Singh Harshen Singh was merely a mortgage. The petitioners then submitted an application under section 17 of Ordinance XV of 1949 to the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, praying for a certificate granting them permission to get the lands mutated in their names in the Record-of Rights. On 18-5-1956 the Deputy Custodian,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 450?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 450 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-15): Singh was merely a mortgage. The petitioners then submitted an application under section 17 of Ordinance XV of 1949 to the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, praying for a certificate granting them permission to get the lands mutated in their names in the Record-of Rights. On 18-5-1956 the Deputy Custodian, Hyderabad granted this application on the petitioners’ depositing Rs. 3,000 in his office in the account of the respondent. This order went on to say that- “on payment of the above sum the mortgage shall STA; d redeemed and the applicants will be entitled to get mutation effected in their names in the revenue record.” The petitioners deposited this sum of Rs. 3,000 and received a certificate from the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, dated 8-6-1956 acknowledging the receipt of the mortgaged amount of Rs. 3,000 due to Murat SMG Harshen Singh and granting permission for mutation of the Record-of Rights in the names of the petitioners. Pursuance to this certificate the lands in question were mutated in the names of these petitioners. 3. It appears that some three years later in 1959 the Rehabilitation Authorities moved the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi for a review of the order of the Additional Custodian dated 16-11-1955 and on 8-8-1959 this officer accepted this revision application, set aside the order of the Additional Custodian dated 16 11-1955 and declared the lands in dispute as evacuee property. A revision petition against this order of 8-8-1959 was presented by the applicants to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, who in his order dated 22-3-1960 while setting aside the order of the Additional Custodian of 8-8- 1959 for the reason that the Additional Custodian had no power to review his previous order proceed in exercise of his own so moth revisional powers conferred upon him by subsection (4) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 to set aside the Additional Custodian’s order dated 16-11-1955, uphold the Assistant Custodian’s order dated 24-2- 1955 and dismiss the petitioners’ revision application. It is this last order of 22-3-1960 which is the impugned order in this matter. 4. Appearing on behalf of the petitioners Mr. Diagonal advanced a short argument that the revisional powers of the Custodian under section 43 (4) of Act XII of 1957 are limited by section 3 'of the same Act and, therefore, the Custodian ha’d no jurisdiction to pass his order of 22-3-1960. Mr. Diagonal posted out that the language of section 3 creates a bar to the exercise of the revisional powers of the Custodian in this case and this contention, he said, is emphasized and accentuated by the opening words of section 3 namely: “notwithstanding anything contained in this Act”. By reason of this section, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or as evacuee property on or after the said date. The petitioners have three orders all prior

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 450?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 450 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-15): in this Act”. By reason of this section, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or as evacuee property on or after the said date. The petitioners have three orders all prior to 1-1-1957 and dated respectively 16-11- 1955, 18-5-1956 and 8-6-1956, declaring the lands in question as non-evacuee. In view of these three orders Mr. Diagonal argued that the door was finally shut, barred and bolted against the Custodian who had no power to re-open this matter after 1-1-1957 and declare these lands as evacuee property. "5. On the other hand, ITT was contended by Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh appearing on behalf of the Custodian that the order of the Additional Custodian dated 16-11-1955 was procured as a result of fraud. The petitioners had produced certain receipts before this Additional Custodian showing that they had been paying revenue for this land and on the basis of these receipts the Additional Custodian came to the conclusion that this land had been in their possession throughout. But, it later transpired, that these receipts did not relate to the land in dispute but to some other land so that the Additional Custodian had been misled into passing his order of 16-11-1955. The correct position only came to light when this matter was before the Custodian, and therefore, the Custodian was fully empowered in the exercise of his so auto revisional powers under section 43 (4) of the Act to set aside the order dated 16-11-1955 of the Additional Custodian. Mr. Shaikh referred us to the judgment of Muir, C. J. Lahore as he then was, reported in P LD 1950 LAH. at page 745 (Sic). 6. In reply to this contention of the Custodian Advocate Mr. Diagonal made two further submissions : (1) he invited our attention to a ruling of a Division Bench of this High Court reported in P LD 1961 Keir. at page 589 which, he said, is on all fours with the facts of this case and (ii) he contended that if an order procured by fraud be a nullity, the fraud alleged must first be proved and the order in question then set aside. But, by reason of the bar contained in section 3, the Custodian has no jurisdiction at all to inquire into the fraud alleged and to reach a conclusion whether the fraud has been in fact proved. 7. Dealing with the first of these final two submissions made by the learned counsel on behalf of the petitioners we have ourselves examined the case relied upon by him and reported in PLD 1961 Keir. at page 589. We have laboriously considered the facts of the reported case, and we find that although the respondent No. in this reported case Mr. Abdul Chalk Abdul Razz had moved the then Custodian of Evacuee Property for the setting aside of the orders of confirmation of the sale in favor of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 450?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 450 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-15): We have laboriously considered the facts of the reported case, and we find that although the respondent No. in this reported case Mr. Abdul Chalk Abdul Razz had moved the then Custodian of Evacuee Property for the setting aside of the orders of confirmation of the sale in favor of the Hindu purchasers in the exercise of his power of so moth revision under section 43 of Act XII of 1957 on the ground that these were obtained by fraud and that the sale in their favor was a bogus transaction, yet, this allegation of fraud does not appear to have been stressed in the arguments before that Division Bench, and we find no reference to it in the lengthy judgment delivered in that matter. Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh who appeared in this reported case also for the Custodian and, therefore, has in his possession the files relating to this matter from the Custodian’s office, formed us that this allegation of fraud in this reported case was not even pressed before the Custodian.' In these circumstances then, we are unable to derive any assistance from this reported case when deciding the present matter. Nor as contended by Mr. Diagonal can we take this reported case as an authority for the proposition that the bar contained in section 3 is absolute so as even to shut out an inquiry into an order obtained before 1-1-1957 concerning the non-evacuee character of property even where such an order has been said to have been procured by fraud. 8. There remains for consideration the last post urged by Mr. Diagonal that even if it is admitted that the order or orders prior to 1-1-1957 declaring the property in question as nonevacuee are a nullity having been obtained by fraud, yet, this alleged fraud has first to be proved, the previous order or orders declared null and void and in order to do this the Custodian will of necessity have to embark upon an equity which by reason of the language of section 3, he is prohibited from dog. While consider mg this argument, it is of importance to remember that the Custodian was not only seized of this matter when passing his order of 22-3- 1960, but that he had been moved through a Revision Petition filed before him by the petitioners themselves. The petitioners had presented this Revision Petition against the order of the Additional Custodian dated 8th August 1959 reviewing so moth his previous order dated 16th November 1955 and setting it aside. It was while deal mg with this Revision Petition of the petitioners that the Custodian alighted upon the fraud that had been practiced by them when securing the order in their favor of 16-11- 1955 and the Custodian having come across this fraud while legally seized of this matter declared the order of 16-11-1955 to have been based on insufficient evidence and, therefore, he set it aside in exercise of the powers conferred upon him by subsection (4) of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 450?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 450 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-15): in their favor of 16-11- 1955 and the Custodian having come across this fraud while legally seized of this matter declared the order of 16-11-1955 to have been based on insufficient evidence and, therefore, he set it aside in exercise of the powers conferred upon him by subsection (4) of section 43 of Act XII of 1957. We cannot bring ourselves to believe that the Custodian having, in these circumstances, come across this fraud was, by reason of section 3, rendered powerless in the matter and unable to take any action upon this discovery made by him. No doubt section 3 says that- “no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the IST day of January 1957, shall be treated as such after the said date.” But in our view, this “previous treatment” must be a lawful and legal treatment and not one based on fraud or deception. In his book on Fraud and Mistake (7th Edition) at page 3 Kerr says that- “Fraud vitiates everything, even judgments and orders of the Court.” Therefore, this previous treatment, if based on fraud, is bad and vitiated and, therefore, it must be reversed or set aside when it comes to light in circumstances such as those of the present case. We may add here that the petitioners’ learned counsel did not dispute or deny that such a fraud had occurred : all he contended was that the Custodian by reason of section 3 had no power or jurisdiction to inquire into it or to declare it as such. 9. Besides, there is a further consideration that weighs with us m dealing with this argument. It is this : the petitioners have come to this Court in its writ jurisdiction seeking equitable relief Now, it is well-known that : “He who seeks equity must do equity,” and that any Court administer mg equitable relief is bound to proceed on this maxim. The petitioners in practicing this fraud cannot be said to have done equity ; nor can they be said to have come to this Court with clean hands. Consequently, as a result of their own conduct they have plainly debarred themselves from obtaining any equitable relief from this Court. 10. The result, therefore, is that this writ petition is dismissed with costs. “_' Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1963 PLD 551 about?
Answer: Case 1963 PLD 551 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1963-02-12. The case involved MUHAMMAD AYUB KHAN APPLICANT VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include HANDWRITING ADVOCATE SUMMONS LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S.5 WRIT CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 98 JURISDICTION. The case was heard by QADEERUDDIN AHMAD AND H. T. RAYMOND.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: In case 1963 PLD 551, the court applied the following statutes: HANDWRITING ADVOCATE SUMMONS LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S.5 WRIT CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1956) - ARTICLE 170 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 98 JURISDICTION. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1963-02-12.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1963 PLD 551 were: S. M. SOHAIL FOR PETITIONER. SAYEED A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. 2.DINGOMAL FOR RESPONDENT NO. 3.. The judges presiding were: QADEERUDDIN AHMAD AND H. T. RAYMOND.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: The parties in case 1963 PLD 551 were: MUHAMMAD AYUB KHAN APPLICANT VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1963 PLD 551.
Answer: Qadeeruddin Ahmad, J.-Our learned brothers, Wahiduddin Ahmad and A. S. Baroque, JJ. admitted this writ petition on the 10th of May 1961 after a report from the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated the 5th of April 1961, containing the departmental explanations, was received. 2. The gist of the petitioner’s case is that bungalow No. 14-A, situated in Tamil Colony, Hyderabad of the Cosmopolitan Co- operative Housing Society, Ltd. was allotted to his son by the Rent Controller in May 1948 (Annexure A) and that the family is since then in occupation of it. In December 1959, the house was provisionally transferred to the petitioner (Annexure A-]), but it was declared to be a non-evacuee property (Annexures H, I and J) in violation of the principles of natural justice, against law and as 'a result of fraud, by orders which can be shown to be illegal on the face of the record. ‘ 3. According to the contents of the petition and the documents annexed to it, the history of the litigation begins in 1951 when an occupant of house No. 13 of the Colony applied to the Deputy Custodian for fixation of its rent. Disputes relating to the evacuee character of the houses of the Colony were apparently coming up again and again before the department, therefore, he directed that the whole question be examined and determined “once for all’ (first para, of Annexure B). The inquiry was accordingly made by Khan Muhammad Yahoo, Assistant Custodian in 1951. Late Mr. Dharmas Advocate, who was at that time the President of the Co-operative Society and hub and of MST. Chaturthi respondent No. who claims to be the owner of Bungalow No. 14-A, wrote to the Assistant Custodian that all the “tenant-owners” of the houses of the Society which were about 76 in number had migrated to India excepting for the “tenant-owners” of houses Nos. 20, 53 and 59, who were still nationals of Pakistan, but he argued before that officer, on the basis of an alleged agreement between the Society and its members, that the houses belonged to the Society and not to its members and that as such they were non-evacuee property. Neither the agreement nor the bye-laws of the Society were produced before the Assistant Custodian, who found that the Society was the lessee of the piece of land on which the Colony stood and that its members who had constructed the houses were the sub-lessees of the plots of lands which were sub-let to them by the Society but owners of the houses which they had constructed on them. He, therefore, held on the 29th of May 1951 (Annexure B) that “the houses of these Hindu members who have migrated to India are evacuee properties and, therefore, rent can now be fixed by the Custodian. The occupants of such buildings be asked to pay the rents to the Custodian.” 4. The order was submitted to the Custodian at Karachi and was approved by him on the 11th of June 1951 (Annexure 2I17 B) as follows : “I agree. Those who have not paid all the installments have certain rights which vest in the Custodian. It appears that the Society is itself evacuee property.” The reason why confirmation was made in this form is explained by the contents of the Assistant Custodian’s order which shows that Mr. Dharmas had contended that there were members who had not paid the dues to the Society, which suggested that the defaulters could not be the owners. This argument was plausible because non-payment of dues could be a bar in the compilation of the proprietary rights of those members a d the interest which had been created could be forfeited, but it was not kept MN view by the Assistant Custodian in his above quoted conclusion. The Custodian, therefore, rectified the omission by posting out that the right of the defaulters which remained in the society vested in the Custodian because the Society itself was an evacuee and its property was evacuee property. The over-all result of this order was that all the houses of the Colony including house No. 14-A and the entire property of the Society were held to be evacuee property on the grounds that the “tenant-owners” of these houses as well as the Society were evacuees. 5. The Society went in appeal under section 36 of Ordinance XV of 1949, but it was dismissed (Annexure C) on the ground that the order was not appealable, though an application under section 18 of the Ordinance could be made. No action was taken by the Society for about a year and half’ On the 18th of December 1952 (See paragraph 2 of Annexure D-2) an application (Annexure D) was moved by it through Mr. Dharmas for declaration : “(a) that the Society aforesaid and its properties are not evacuee property, (b) that the interest, right and title in the Society is not affected by the provisions of the Ordinance.” As the application was barred by time, a request was made that the delay be condoned. It was heard by Mr. Iraq Hussain Siddiqui, Assistant Custodian, who did not find any justification for condoning the delay and who, while dismissing the application, pointed out that “the property clammed by the Cosmopolitan Co-operative Society shall remain as evacuee properly’ (Annexure D-2). The Society preferred a revision petition against this order which was dismissed by the Custodian on the 3rd of August 1953 (Annexure E). 6. In 1954, the evacuee character of house No. 34 of the Colony was in question MN a civil suit; therefore, a reference was made by the Civil Court to the Custodian’s Department for its decision. The question was decided by Mr. Walk Muhammad Khan, Assistant Custodian, who referred to the previous orders (Annexures B, C, D-2 and E) and decided on the 11th of January 1955 (Annexure F) that “the property in question stands as evacuee property.”.7. No attempt was, thereafter, made by the Society to claim the houses of the Colony to be its property or to move the Custodian’s Department for a reconsideration of the decisions that were made against TT. 8. After 7 years of the first decision by which all the houses situated in the Colony excepting three were declared to be evacuee property (vide Annexure B), MST. Chaturthi, respondent No. 3, applied to an Assistant Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, on the 7th of June 1958, that the rent of the house, which was paid by its tenant to the Custodian, be refunded to her. This is the first time, according to the record of this petition, when she claimed to be the owner of house No. 14-A. Her Advocate was formed by a letter of the Assistant Custodian, dated the 7th of August 1958, that the question of refund did not arise, as it was an evacuee property. That letter is not before us, but it appears from paragraph 10 other subsequent application (Annexure G) that the Assistant Custodian gave the reason to be that the property belonged to the Co-operative Society which was itself an evacuee. This gave an opportunity to her to press the distinction between the property of the Society and the property of its members. It was not simple to make use of this distinction because the reference in the letter to the previously held evacuee character of the Society informed her of the previous proceedings which could be discovered if they were not already known to her. She took no action for ten months and an application under section 22 of Act (XJJ of 1957) became barred by time from the date of this letter also. 9. There were two obstacles in her way. One of them was the question of limitation and the other was the commencement of her title to the bungalow, because her husband, Mr. Dharmas, Advocate, had given in writing to the Assistant Custodian in 1951 that all “tenant-owners”, except those of houses Nos. 20, 53 and 57 had migrated to India. If the date from which the rent was paid by the tenants to the Custodian was disclosed in the application, the application would have been hopelessly time-barred on the face of TT, because the tenants of the Colony were ordered (Annexure B) in 1951 to pay rent to the Custodian. Mr. So hail contended before us that the tenant of bungalow No. 14, 1e. the petitioner’s son had paid rent to the Custodian from an earlier date and produced rent receipts granted by the Custodian, which dated from 1948, but Mr. Diagonal objected to their production ; therefore, we do not take that date into consideration, but we must point out that the date and the manner of commencement of her title to the bungalow were also not disclosed in the application. She stated in paragraphs 2, and 8 of the application as follows : “(2) That the applicant is a non-evacuee and her status as well as that of her property had been declared both by the Deputy Custodian, Hyderabad and on appeal by the Additional Custodian E. P. Karachi. Reference is invited to the order in Appeal No. of 1954. (4) The bungalow No. 14-A is the exclusive property of the applicant and is under no charge or obligation of the Society 1e. that all dues were paid up to the Society before the partition of the country, the plot money was paid to the Municipality and the Society has no claim or interest in the aforesaid property. The property does not belong to the Pioneer Cosmopolitan Colony. (8) Opponent has been habitual defaulter and was evading payment of rent. Suddenly it came to the notice of the applicant that opponent No. in collusion with some underlying of the Custodian’s Department had credited a small amount of rent with a view to defeat the rights of the applicant.” 10. There is every reason to believe that the tenant who was imp leaded as a party to the application would have objected to the maintainability of the application and disclosed the true facts, but his address was given in the application to be- “Bungalow No. 14. West Cosmopolitan Society” and notes“14-A, Tamil Colony. The order (Annexure H) by which Mr. Houri, Deputy Custodian, decided the application, in her favor says that- “due notice was given to the respondents, the Rehabilitation Authorities and the same was also got published in “Aftab” Hyderabad, dated 19-9-1959 in order to call objections from other persons interested, but none has appeared nor raised any objections.” Mr. So hail has described “Aftab” as a “nondescript paper’ and the notice published in TT is not before us. We find from the order, however, that the application was heard ex parte, Mr. Dharmas appeared as a witness for his wife, and the application was accepted, as follows : “I have gone through the evidence adduced by the applicant and am of opinion that the bungalow No. 14 belonging to the applicant is a non-evacuee property, and accordingly it is declared as such subject to the approval of the Additional Custodian (Judy.) Karachi to whom the entire record is submitted herewith.” 11. This declaration relating to bungalow No. 14 and not bungalow No. 14-A appears to be the result of a wrong address of the tenant and perhaps a wrong reference to the house in the notice published in “Aftab”. With this defect in the order, it was submitted to Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad, Additional Custodian, Karachi, who displayed an insight by making the following order : “In this case the question of limitation has not been properly gone MTO. On 7-8-58, A. C. formed applicants’ Advocate that the disputed property had been treated as evacuee property. But the application under section 22 was not filed until 5-6-59. The question is : Why this delay ? It should be ascertained when applicants received A. C’s. letter dated 7-8-59 and why the delay, if any. The case is sent back for a finding on the point of limitation after permitting applicant to adduce further evidence,” 12. On remand, the case was not heard by Mr. Houri but by Mr. Ir shad Ali Khan, who was also an Additional Custodian (Judy.) The application BMG the same as before, the address of the tenant remained unchanged. The order of Mr. Khan shows that a notice was published in “Aftab” of 19-9-59, and that nobody appeared before him. This date indicates that the proceedings were held without issuing fresh notices at all and this action is explainable by the fact that Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad had ordered the hearing to take place on remand “after permitting applicant to adduce further evidence.”’ Miss Sheila, Advocate, appeared on behalf of her mother who was the applicant and did not produce more evidence except an affidavit of the applicant herself along with an order of the Custodian dated the 24th of March 1960, which is not before us. Mr. Khan concluded the proceedings by holding “I am satisfied that the property bearing C. S. No. 14-A, Ami Colony, is a non-evacuee property of the applicant. This order is subject to the approval of the Custodian, Karachi.” 13. The body of the order shows that facts were misrepresented before Mr. Khan ; for he has said that “Mr. Dharmas examined himself on behalf of his wife, the applicant, and also produced a certified copy of the property register in respect of the property in dispute showing that the bungalow in dispute was transferred in the name of the applicant by the Resolution of the Society. The evidence of Mr. Dharmas shows that the property in question was purchased by him and consideration was paid by him. All these facts support the contention of the applicant that she is the owner of the property as undoubtedly she is the wife of Mr. Dharmas. As regards the point of limitation in respect of the application, there is nothing on the record to show when was the property in dispute treated as evacuee property. It is contended by the applicant that the cause of action arose since the day when the occupant refused to pay its rent to the applicant, but when the applicant immediately moved the Assistant Custodian for a declaration and demanded the money deposited by the applicant. I very much doubt if any regular order is passed by any appropriate Custodian with regards to the status of the property owing to the fact that it has not so far been allotted to any person and the possession is still with the tenant who are made a respondent but - as not come forward to challenge the allegations of the applicant. In the circumstances narrated above, the only presumption that can be drawn is that the property in question is in the regular possession of the applicant and is non-evacuee property. In fact the question of limitation does not arise because the property has never been treated as evacuee property or any step has even been taken to treat (it) as such. If any person occupying a premise unintentionally or by a mischief deposits the rent of the house with the Custodian, it will not divest the owner of its proprietary rights.” 14. Mr. So hail has suggested that copies of the property register and “it is said that all the registers (of the Society) have been lost.” At that time Mr. Dharmas had informed the Deputy Custodian that all the “tenant-owners” of the Society had migrated to India excepting those who were the ‘“tenant-owners” of houses Nos 20, 53 and 59. This means that the owner of bungalow No. 14-A had also migrated from Pakistan. We do not know who was the “tenant-owner” of this bungalow at that time, but it appears that the wife of Mr. Dharmas was not that person, for, as contended by Mr. Diagonal in a different light, Mr. Dharmas was not a man who could describe his own wife to be a migrant. She could not be the owner MN 1951 because it is clear from the order of Mr. Khan (Annexure I), which is based on the evidence of Mr. Dharmas, that Mr. Dharmas had purchased the property and paid its consideration. The true facts appear to be that neither she nor Mr. Dharma Was was owner of the bungalow in 1951. At that time the owner was somebody who had migrated to India and was declared to be an evacuee (Annexure B), but his identity has been concealed by the husband and the wife. The stands taken by them are contradictory, for the evidence of Mr. Dharmas was that the property was purchased by him and the consideration was paid by him, boo paragraph 2 of the affidavit of his wife mm these proceedings is as follows : “That before the Partition full purchase price of this plot was paid and the entire construction on the plot was raised by me at my own expense.” We cannot believe either of them in this respect. 15. But it is unnecessary in these proceedings to go into the question of the ownership of the bungalow. We have set out the above facts to disclose the unreliability of the proceedings. Suppression of facts is disclosed by the following observation of Mr. Khan: - “I very much doubt if any regular order it's passed by any appropriate Custodian with regard to the status of the property owing to the fact that it has NOT so far been allotted to any person. In the circumstances narrated above, the only presumption that can be drawn is that the property is in the regular possession of the occupant and is a non-evacuee property.” The true facts, as against this observation, are that such orders (Annexures B, D-2 and E) had been made, and the bungalow was provisionally transferred to the petitioner (vide Annexure A-!) about a year and a half before the date of the order. 16. The order of Mr. Khan was submitted to the Custodian who on the 25th of June 1960 confirmed it as follows : “The delay in the submission of the application by the petitioner, Mrs. Chaturthi, is hereby condoned, and the order dated the 6th April 1960 passed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property is hereby confirmed.” We may point out with utmost respect that a self-contradiction has crept into this order, because Mr. Khan had held, in spite of the order of Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad who had remanded the case “‘for a finding on the post of limitation’, that- “the question of limitation does not arise”, which decision of Mr. Khan could not be confirmed with simultaneous condonation of “the delay”. This order too was also made in the absence of the tenant. 17. Mr. Diagonal and Miss Sheila, Advocates, pressed on us to believe that the tenant had been served but had renamed absent. We, therefore, called upon the parties to submit their respective affidavits. The petitioner’s son, Hamid Ahmad Khan submitted an affidavit stating that no notice was at any time received by or served on the petitioner or the tenant or any other member of the family of the petitioner. Miss Sheila, Advocate, informed us that service was effected on the tenant to her knowledge, but she did not submit her own affidavit and caused to be submitted the affidavits of Mr. Din Muhammad, Advocate, who worked as her Assistant and of Main BUX who is a clerk m the firm of “Messes Dharmas Mulch and Co. Advocates.” The latter has stated in paragraphs 3 and of his affidavit as follows: “(3) That Mr. DN Muhammad took the notice to the Reader of Deputy Custodian, Hyderabad Mr. Muhammad Radio who directed peon Baby of the office of D. C. Hyderabad to accompany me for service. (4) That I then took peon Baby to Bungalow No. 14-A. Cosmopolitan Colony where petitioner was present whom I already knew. Notice was given to him by Baby and informed him about the pending proceedings and notice of hearing m connection thereof” As two affidavits were contradictory we directed Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh, counsel for respondents Nos. and 2 to produce the original record, which he did. It shows that the Additional Custodian (Judy) Karachi and Hyderabad, had returned the summons unserved with the following remarks : “Summons for service on Muhammad Sharif Khan received under the above cited reference returned herewith in original with an endorsement thereon containing the address of Mr. Muhammad Sharif Khan. Muhammad Sharif Khan being mm service in the Defense Forces, has since been transferred to Dacca. His address is as under : Major Muhammad Sharif Ahmad Khan, G. S. O. () H. Q. 14 DW. (6 Branch) Dacca.” Mr. Diagonal stated that, according to his information, the. endorsement, which is at the back of the summons, was in the hand of Mr. Hamid Ahmad Khan, the son of the petitioner who has submitted the aforesaid affidavit. We immediately made inquiries from him who denied the allegation, and we are satisfied by comparing the endorsement at the back of the summons with the signature of Hamid Ahmad Khan on his affidavit that the two cannot be in the handwriting of one person. 18. We. may add here that the groundless charge of perjury made on behalf of MST. Chaturthi against Mr. Hamid Ahmad Khan in the circumstances that straight forwardness was wanting on her own side, caused us annoyance. Mr. Diagonal executed himself on the around that he had acted on formations given to him. This threw a diffused reflection on Miss Sheila, Advocate, daughter of MST. Chaturthi who was assisting him in the absence of her mother. We deem it proper to mention that an Advocate does not discharge his duty with due regard of the responsibility of his high office if he uses derogatory instructions which can be verified by him to be false, by ordinary exercise of care. It is necessary for maintain an atmosphere of mutual trust between the Court and an Advocate that the Advocate should not even state his inferences as facts. As the Court has a right to listen to a counsel with confidence, their trust is not respected if he makes grossly exaggerated, misleading or irresponsible statements. Nobody stands to GA'n by this and least of all the client of such a counsel, when counsel is found out. 19, All of the above stated basic facts are contained in the writ petition or are inferable from it. MST. Chaturthi has not replied to the petition parawise, nor has she specifically or generally denied the allegations made in it. Her plea is less of traverse than of confession and avoidance. Her defense is that the “trouble” about the bungalow “arose in 1958” when the tenant “went and deposited rent in the Custodian’s Department, Hyderabad without” her knowledge ; that the house did not belong to the Society ; that it was declared to be a nonevacuee property by the order (Annexure H) of Mr. Houri on her last application, which declaration, was repeated by Mr. Khan (Annexure [) and confirmed by the Custodian (Annexure J). Her reply to the allegations of the petitioner is contamed in paragraph 11 of her affidavit, which is as follows : “That the various statements made in paragraphs 3 to 10 of the petition) are all misconceived and relate to other properties of the Society where the tenants of the society had built houses but had not paid ground rents, It has no reference to my property.” 20. With the help of the facts and inferences set out above in the paragraphs which precede the last paragraph, we are in a position now to comment on her defenses. It is wrong that the trouble arose in 19:8. It had arisen in 1951, if not earlier, and her husband was the central figure in it. The tenants were ordered in 1951 to deposit rent with the Custodian, and we believe that the tenant of this bungalow so deposited the rent from 1951. It is true that the house did not belong to the Society, but the stand of her own husband was to the contrary, and was overruled in 1951. She commenced litigation in disregard of the previous proceedings and obtained orders (Annexures H, I and J) in ex parte proceedings. Their validity is in question ; therefore, their mere existence is no defense unless she can show that the previous orders (Announces B, D- 2 and E) with which these latter orders (Annexures H, I and J) are in conflict were validly reviewed, revised, over-ruled or set aside, or that the previous orders did not relate to the bungalow TN question. 21. It is clear that the previous orders were not reviewed, revised, over-ruled or set aside. They were neither brought to the notice of the authorities who made the latter orders nor are they mentioned in the latter orders. Mr. Dharmas drew a curtain MN front of t hem by stating as her witness that “advertently or advertently’ the tenant “got the property treated as evacuee property’ by depositing rent with the Custodian’s Department (Annexure H). 22. She has attempted in these proceedings to justify the omission to recognize the previous proceedings as well as to nullify their effect by her defense that they are irrelevant. This has raised the question : Do the previous orders (Annexures B, D-2 and E) relate to bungalow No. 14-A ? The answer is that they obviously do, because they deal with all the houses of the Colony. Mr. Diagonal attempted to argue that the first order in particular (Annexure B) and therefore, the subsequent orders (Annexures D-2 and E) related to the houses of those members of the society who had failed to pay the ground rent, but this is proved to be clearly wrong when the concluding portion of the Assistant Custodian’s Order (Annexure B) is read with the order of the Custodian which concluded it. This has been exp lamed earlier in paragraph 4. 23. Mr. Diagonal blamed the petitioner for suppressing facts and in support of his contention produced copies of two orders which we have taken on record, because Mr. So hail did not object to their production, and have marked them as ‘K’ and ‘L\ There is no reference to these orders in the writ petition. The order ‘K’ was made by Mr. Houri before deciding the application (Annexure G) of MST. Chaturthi An term stay was granted by this order on the ground that the Custodian’s Department had declared MST. Chaturthi to be a non-evacuee person and all her property which had been taken over by that department to be non-evacuee property. The other order, ‘L’, was made by the Custodian dismissing a review application, of the petitioner and his son, against the order of the Custodian (Annexure J) by which bungalow No. 14-A was confirmed to be a non-evacuee property. We shall presently comment on these orders but should firstly post out that the charge of Mr. Diagonal that the petitioner had suppressed these orders was not well-founded because MST. Chaturthi too has made no mention of these orders in the affidavit submitted by her in reply to the writ petition. 24. The order ‘K’ does not advance the case of MST. Chaturthi because there is no allegation of the petitioner that she is an evacuee person. The order itself gives prominence to the fact that she was formerly treated as an evacuee and paragraph 2 of application (Annexure G), which has been reproduced above by us mm paragraph 9, shows that the shadow of evacuee character was not removed from her up to 1954. The order EK’ read with paragraph 2 of her application raises in our minds the question as to whether the person who was the owner of bungalow No. 14-A in 1951 had been declared to be a non-evacuee or not when he transferred it to Mr. Dharmas and whether MST. Chaturthi herself was an evacuee or a non-evacuee when the bungalow, according to the evidence of Mr. Dharmas to which reference has been made in the quotation reproduced by us in paragraph 13 above, was transferred to her by a resolution of the Society. There are no registered transfer deeds before us to remove from our minds objections to the validity of the transfers. Mr. So hail repeatedly criticized the omission of MST. Chaturthi in not disclosing the dates of the transfers but Mr. Gomal and Miss Sheila Advocates, gave no reply to this criticism. We would, however not try to find an answer to it because it does not directly arise from the petition. 25. The order ‘L’ has been used by Mr. Diagonal to support his contention that the petitioner and his son had notice of the order of the Custodian (Annexure J) by which bungalow No. 14-A was confirmed to be a non-evacuee property and which order is alleged by the petitioner to have been made without notice. We desired to see the relevant original record for ascertaining facts, and it has been produced by Mr. Speed A. Shaikh, Advocate. It shows that the review application was presented by the petitioner and his son on the 23rd of July 1960, against the order of the Custodian (Annexure J). A certified copy of the order J which was sought to be reviewed, was attached to the application. There 1s nothing on that record to show as to how the petitioner and his son came to know of the order J. The report on the summons is that it was not served on the son as he was at that time in Dacca. Mr. Speed A. Shaikh suggested that from the endorsement which is at the back of the summons one could infer that it was made by an inmate of the house and that the same person who made the endorsement could have given information of it to the petitioner as well as to his son. Moreover, as the endorsement can be taken to have been made by an inmate of the house, the Custodian could have treated it, according to counsel, to the sufficient service on the son and could have proceeded ex parte to make the order (Annexure J) without specifically saying so. If these conjectures are correct then the tenant can be legally taken to have been duly informed of the proceedings and can be said to have intentionally abs tamed from participating in them. Mr. Diagonal took advantage of these possibilities for contending that the order ‘L’ proves that the order J was not made without notice but that the petitioner has suppressed the order ‘L’ and alleged in his writ petition that the Custodian’s Order (Annexure J) was made without notice. 26. We think that the contentions of both counsel are erroneous ; firstly, because the order ‘L? itself shows that the review application was not dismissed because the service was held to be good, but on the ground that, no interest of justice was found likely to be served by reviewing it ; secondly, because service of the summons on an inmate of a house at Hyderabad could not be a good service on the party who was at that time in the ordinary course of his employment residing in a house at Dacca ; thirdly, the question of notice from the Custodian’s Department to the petitioner does not arise, because the petitioner was not a party to those proceedings. 27. Mr. Diagonal did not attempt to meet the contention of Mr. So hail that all the three orders (Annexures H, I and J) which are in favor of MST. Chaturthi suffer from defects that are patent on the face of the record. Mr. So hail has argued that the first order Annexure H) was made without notice to the tenant and in disregard of the provisions of limitation. We have seen that the address of the tenant given in the application of MST. Chaturthi (Annexure G) was wrong, and we believe that publication of notice in “Aftab” was not calculated to give notice of the proceedings to the tenant. The objection of limitation to the maintainability of the application was so patent that Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad noticed it by looking at the record, although no proceedings took place before him. As to the second order (Annexure I) Mr. So hail posted out that it was made without issuing notice to the tenant as well as on the assumption of wrong facts as explained by us in paragraph 15 above. In the last order, J, there is self-contradiction as noted by us above in paragraph 16. Mr. So hail has further argued that delay could be condoned by the Custodian under section 5 of the Limitation Act only, therefore, he could do so, he was “satisfied” that there was ‘sufficient cause for MST. Chaturthi not making the application (Annexure J) within the period of limitation, but the Custodian could not be satisfied of the sufficiency of the cause of delay because the order which he has confirmed (Annexure J) postulates that there was no question of limitation and because the order of Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad in which the existence of the objection of limitation was pointed out had also left for further inquiry the determination of the commencement of the period of limitation and the cause of delay. We know from the record now that the period of limitation had actually commenced on the date of the first order which is the 29th of May 1951, (Annexure A-I) but no date of commencement was determined by the Custodian. He therefore, did not know the quantum of delay. It was impossible for him to consider the sufficiency of the cause of unknown delay. We agree that where the quantum of delay is not known and t therefore, the sufficiency or otherwise of the reasons for the delay cannot be Judged, there is no possibility of exercising the discretion to condone the delay. 28. Mr. Gomal resisted the writ petition as a whole by advancing three legal arguments. He argued firstly, that the petition could not succeed because the last order made against the petitioner was the order, ‘L’ by which the review application of the petitioner and his son was dismissed by the Custodian, but it has not been challenged by the petitioner, secondly, that this Court has no jurisdiction to grant the petition on the grounds which have been taken by and on behalf of the petitioner because they did not include the ground of abs née of jurisdiction or failure to exercise jurisdiction ; and thirdly, that the petitioner has no interest in bungalow No. 14-A, therefore, has no locus standi to come to this Court with this petition. He has no interest because the provisional transfer order (Annexure A-!) was issued in his favor illegally and is disregard of the provisions of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 as posted out by the Custodian in the order ‘L\ 29. The first contention can be disposed of shortly, because Mr. Diagonal has cited no law in support of it and Mr. So hail has rightly pointed out that the order ‘L’ has no independent existence. It would automatically lose its force if the order (Annexure J), against which the review application was dismissed, is held to be illegal. In support of this proposition he was able to cite an authority which is a judgment by Haikus and Baroque, JJ. in Muhammad Ismail v. Rehabilitation Commissioner The learned Judges have observed in it as follows “Now, in the first instance, if the orders passed by the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner were without jurisdiction, and we set them aside, the subsequent orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner, which were only in confirmation of those orders, automatically fall. In the second place, the petitioner should be deemed to be attacking the orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner in revision also. He had attached copies of those orders along with the petition.” The last part of the above observation is not applicable to the facts of this case because in this case neither the petitioner nor MST. Chaturthi have referred to the order ‘L’ in their written submissions to this Court ; but as explained earlier, it suffers from more than one invalidating illegalities. As in our view the order ‘J’ itself is valid, we attach no importance to the review application and to the order ‘L’ by which the application was dismissed. 30. In support of the second contention Mr. Diagonal explained that the law as it was before the present Constitution and not Article 98 of the present Constitution is applicable. We agree with him in this view. Taking his stand on the concept of certiorari, he contended that such a writ could not be issued unless the tribunal, whose order is questioned, did not have the jurisdiction to give that order, or had refused to exercise a jurisdiction which it possessed. He supported this contention by citing the judgments in Santosh Kumar Shah v. District Magistrate of Jaipur (2) ; Vardar Her Muhammad v. Rao Bashir Ali Khan (3) ; Deal Singh College Trust Society v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property (1) and m MST. Mahmood Begum v. Chief Settlement Commissioner In these judgments, these are observations which are helpful to counsel. As against them, Mr. So hail has cited three judgments. In Grind lay's Bark Ltd. v. Murrey Brewery Co. Ltd. Muhammad Muir, C. J. and Aitcheson J. have pointed out at page 754 “in law a judgment or order, however, high or independent the tribunal deliver mg or making it and however, exclusive its jurisdiction, is a nullity if it is proved that it was obtained by fraud.” At page 755 the learned Judges have explained that as “fraud vitiates all proceedings” it is immaterial whether it is alleged before a Judge or otherwise “the issue whether the judgment was obtained by fraud properly comes before tiny’, for it is the duty of the Court that has basin of the case in appropriate cases “to recall so moth an order procured by fraud” and remove its vicious result. In Paul Had v. Government of West Pakistan Kay ani and Muhammad Sharif, JJ. have held at page 360 that “certiorari will be appropriate to quash the decision of a tribunal which has assumed a jurisdiction that it does not possess, or where bias by interest or want of good faith is alleged, or where there is a breach of the rules of natural justice or where there is fraud and perjury.” In Froze Din v. Government of West Pakistan (5) another Division Bench of this Court has referred at page 317 to misrepresentation and suppression of facts, and observed at page 318, as follows : “We think, therefore, that this is a case where the acquisition proceedings are vitiated by perjury and fraud, and liable to be quashed on that ground.” They have quoted with approval the passage which we have reproduced above from Paul Had's case. 31. The above two sets of the statements of law brought to our notice by the opposing counsel are not reconcilable if the expression “Jurisdiction” is accepted to include “assumption and exercise of jurisdiction’, because no authority can be said to have exercised its jurisdiction if it was prevented from knowing the true facts, if it took for a material fact what was not MN law that fact; if it proceeded act in ( grave and obvious disregard of a material provision of law ; if it exercised a discretion without the existence of the situation in which it could be exercised ; if it violated the principles of natural justice when the law had not permitted it to do so, and if it gave reasons for its conclusions which (1) PLD 1962 LAH. 352 (356, 357) (2) PLD 1962 LAH. 911 (915) (3) PLD 1954 LAH. 745 (4) PLD 1956 LAH. 358 could not, in those circumstances, rationally lead to them. This is not an exhaustive list of those stances in which defective exercise of jurisdiction may be successfully pleaded, but it is sufficiently elaborate for this case. In partial e-:r. Intron and support of it we refer to English decisions in R. v. Recorder of Leicester, Ex Parte Wood R. v. Birmingham Compensation, Appeal tribunal (2) ; Rex v. Nat Bell Liquors Limited (3) Associated Provincial Picture Houses Limited v. Wednesbury Corporation (4) Ex parte Brad laugh (5) ; and The Queen v. Kay We need not be exhaustive, because the judgments cited by Mr. Diagonal are not of a higher authority than the authority of the judgments cited by Mr. So hail, and we find ourselves in agreement with the latter. "32. The third argument of Mr. Diagonal was met by Mr. So hail when he posted out, without giving attention to the argument itself} that the petitioner is in any event an occupant of bungalow No. 14-A from 1948 and as such entitled that it should be transferred to him under the Schedule to the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958./ We note the fact stated by Mr. So hail that other members of the family who could also claim this right have abstained from dog so in favor of the petitioner and here refer to the discussion in Rex v. Richmond Confirming Authority The Earl of Reading, C. J. who delivered the judgment with the concurrence of Darling and Salter, JJ. has held in it, overruling the contentions of Sir John Simon, that a rival licensee “had an interest in objecting to the license granted to another person) in the sense that he was the owner or licensee of property in the borough which he thought would be affected adversely by the grant of,” the impugned license and thus entitled to contend before the Court that it was granted by usurpation of jurisdiction. He referred to the proposition expressed by Blackburn, C. J. in Forster v. Forster (8) that “although the Court will listen to a person who is a stranger, and who interferes to post out that some other Court has exceeded its jurisdiction, whereby some wrong or grievance has been sustained, yet that it is not ex debit Justitia, but a matter upon which the Court may properly exercise its discretion, as distinguished from the case of a party aggrieved, who is entitled to relief ex debit Justitia, if he suffers from the usurpation of jurisdiction by another Court”. (pp. 254-255, 1921-1 K B) and observed : “The question whether a person has a particular interest in the subject-matter as distinguished from the interest which the (1) (1947) AER 928 (2) (1952) 2 AE R 100 (3) (1922) 2 AC 128 (151,153,155) (4) (1948) K B 223 (5) 3 Q B 1878 509 (512-513) (6) (1873) 8 Q B 324 (7) 1921) 1A C 248 (8) (1863) B S 187,199 public has must always be a f>f degree. Of course, it may be that a pp.ROR’ o slight that Court will not act upon it, but ;« substantial the Court is bound to issue the writ when it appears on the face of the order that there has been a wrongful exercise of jurisdiction in the sense of an excess of jurisdiction. The first post taken by Sir John Simon therefore fails.” (Ibid 255-56) In this case we find that the petitioner has the locus standi to bring this petition. 33. In conclusion of all that has been said above, we accept the petition, and quash the main and basic orders which are the orders of the Additional Custodian (Judy.) dated 6-4- 60 and the order of the Custodian dated 25-6-1960 the Annexures “T’ and “J” to the petition. Respondent No. will pay the costs of the petitioner. Petition accepted

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): Qadeeruddin Ahmad, J.-Our learned brothers, Wahiduddin Ahmad and A. S. Baroque, JJ. admitted this writ petition on the 10th of May 1961 after a report from the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated the 5th of April 1961, containing the departmental explanations, was received. 2. The gist of the petitioner’s case is that bungalow No. 14-A, situated in Tamil Colony, Hyderabad of the Cosmopolitan Co- operative Housing Society, Ltd. was allotted to his son by the Rent Controller in May 1948 (Annexure A) and that the family is since then in occupation of it. In December 1959, the house was provisionally transferred to the petitioner (Annexure A-]), but it was declared to be a non-evacuee property (Annexures H, I and J) in violation of the principles of natural justice, against law and as 'a result of fraud, by orders which can be shown to be illegal on the face of the record. ‘ 3. According to the contents of the petition and the documents annexed to it, the history of the litigation begins in 1951 when an occupant of house No. 13 of the Colony applied to the Deputy Custodian for fixation of its rent. Disputes relating to the evacuee character of the houses of the Colony were apparently coming up again and again before the department, therefore, he directed that the whole question be examined and determined “once for all’ (first para, of Annexure B). The inquiry was accordingly made by Khan Muhammad Yahoo, Assistant Custodian in 1951. Late Mr. Dharmas Advocate, who was at that time the President of the Co-operative Society and hub and of MST. Chaturthi respondent No. who claims to be the owner of Bungalow No. 14-A, wrote to the Assistant Custodian that all the “tenant-owners” of the houses of the Society which were about 76 in number had migrated to India excepting for the “tenant-owners” of houses Nos. 20, 53 and 59, who were still nationals of Pakistan, but he argued before that officer, on the basis of an alleged agreement between the Society and its members, that the houses belonged to the Society and not to its members and that as such they were non-evacuee property. Neither the agreement nor the bye-laws of the Society were produced before the Assistant Custodian, who found that the Society was the lessee of the piece of land on which the Colony stood and that its members who had constructed the houses were the sub-lessees of the plots of lands which were sub-let to them by the Society but owners of the houses which they had constructed on them. He, therefore, held on the 29th of May 1951 (Annexure B) that “the houses of these Hindu members who have migrated to India are evacuee properties and, therefore, rent can now be fixed by the Custodian. The occupants of such buildings be asked to pay the rents to the Custodian.” 4. The order was submitted to the Custodian at Karachi and was approved by him on the 11th

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): who have migrated to India are evacuee properties and, therefore, rent can now be fixed by the Custodian. The occupants of such buildings be asked to pay the rents to the Custodian.” 4. The order was submitted to the Custodian at Karachi and was approved by him on the 11th of June 1951 (Annexure 2I17 B) as follows : “I agree. Those who have not paid all the installments have certain rights which vest in the Custodian. It appears that the Society is itself evacuee property.” The reason why confirmation was made in this form is explained by the contents of the Assistant Custodian’s order which shows that Mr. Dharmas had contended that there were members who had not paid the dues to the Society, which suggested that the defaulters could not be the owners. This argument was plausible because non-payment of dues could be a bar in the compilation of the proprietary rights of those members a d the interest which had been created could be forfeited, but it was not kept MN view by the Assistant Custodian in his above quoted conclusion. The Custodian, therefore, rectified the omission by posting out that the right of the defaulters which remained in the society vested in the Custodian because the Society itself was an evacuee and its property was evacuee property. The over-all result of this order was that all the houses of the Colony including house No. 14-A and the entire property of the Society were held to be evacuee property on the grounds that the “tenant-owners” of these houses as well as the Society were evacuees. 5. The Society went in appeal under section 36 of Ordinance XV of 1949, but it was dismissed (Annexure C) on the ground that the order was not appealable, though an application under section 18 of the Ordinance could be made. No action was taken by the Society for about a year and half’ On the 18th of December 1952 (See paragraph 2 of Annexure D-2) an application (Annexure D) was moved by it through Mr. Dharmas for declaration : “(a) that the Society aforesaid and its properties are not evacuee property, (b) that the interest, right and title in the Society is not affected by the provisions of the Ordinance.” As the application was barred by time, a request was made that the delay be condoned. It was heard by Mr. Iraq Hussain Siddiqui, Assistant Custodian, who did not find any justification for condoning the delay and who, while dismissing the application, pointed out that “the property clammed by the Cosmopolitan Co-operative Society shall remain as evacuee properly’ (Annexure D-2). The Society preferred a revision petition against this order which was dismissed by the Custodian on the 3rd of August 1953 (Annexure E). 6. In 1954, the evacuee character of house No. 34 of the Colony was in question MN a civil suit; therefore, a reference was made by the Civil Court to the Custodian’s Department for its decision. The question

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): dismissed by the Custodian on the 3rd of August 1953 (Annexure E). 6. In 1954, the evacuee character of house No. 34 of the Colony was in question MN a civil suit; therefore, a reference was made by the Civil Court to the Custodian’s Department for its decision. The question was decided by Mr. Walk Muhammad Khan, Assistant Custodian, who referred to the previous orders (Annexures B, C, D-2 and E) and decided on the 11th of January 1955 (Annexure F) that “the property in question stands as evacuee property.”.7. No attempt was, thereafter, made by the Society to claim the houses of the Colony to be its property or to move the Custodian’s Department for a reconsideration of the decisions that were made against TT. 8. After 7 years of the first decision by which all the houses situated in the Colony excepting three were declared to be evacuee property (vide Annexure B), MST. Chaturthi, respondent No. 3, applied to an Assistant Custodian, Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, on the 7th of June 1958, that the rent of the house, which was paid by its tenant to the Custodian, be refunded to her. This is the first time, according to the record of this petition, when she claimed to be the owner of house No. 14-A. Her Advocate was formed by a letter of the Assistant Custodian, dated the 7th of August 1958, that the question of refund did not arise, as it was an evacuee property. That letter is not before us, but it appears from paragraph 10 other subsequent application (Annexure G) that the Assistant Custodian gave the reason to be that the property belonged to the Co-operative Society which was itself an evacuee. This gave an opportunity to her to press the distinction between the property of the Society and the property of its members. It was not simple to make use of this distinction because the reference in the letter to the previously held evacuee character of the Society informed her of the previous proceedings which could be discovered if they were not already known to her. She took no action for ten months and an application under section 22 of Act (XJJ of 1957) became barred by time from the date of this letter also. 9. There were two obstacles in her way. One of them was the question of limitation and the other was the commencement of her title to the bungalow, because her husband, Mr. Dharmas, Advocate, had given in writing to the Assistant Custodian in 1951 that all “tenant-owners”, except those of houses Nos. 20, 53 and 57 had migrated to India. If the date from which the rent was paid by the tenants to the Custodian was disclosed in the application, the application would have been hopelessly time-barred on the face of TT, because the tenants of the Colony were ordered (Annexure B) in 1951 to pay rent to the Custodian. Mr. So hail contended before us that the tenant of bungalow

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): tenants to the Custodian was disclosed in the application, the application would have been hopelessly time-barred on the face of TT, because the tenants of the Colony were ordered (Annexure B) in 1951 to pay rent to the Custodian. Mr. So hail contended before us that the tenant of bungalow No. 14, 1e. the petitioner’s son had paid rent to the Custodian from an earlier date and produced rent receipts granted by the Custodian, which dated from 1948, but Mr. Diagonal objected to their production ; therefore, we do not take that date into consideration, but we must point out that the date and the manner of commencement of her title to the bungalow were also not disclosed in the application. She stated in paragraphs 2, and 8 of the application as follows : “(2) That the applicant is a non-evacuee and her status as well as that of her property had been declared both by the Deputy Custodian, Hyderabad and on appeal by the Additional Custodian E. P. Karachi. Reference is invited to the order in Appeal No. of 1954. (4) The bungalow No. 14-A is the exclusive property of the applicant and is under no charge or obligation of the Society 1e. that all dues were paid up to the Society before the partition of the country, the plot money was paid to the Municipality and the Society has no claim or interest in the aforesaid property. The property does not belong to the Pioneer Cosmopolitan Colony. (8) Opponent has been habitual defaulter and was evading payment of rent. Suddenly it came to the notice of the applicant that opponent No. in collusion with some underlying of the Custodian’s Department had credited a small amount of rent with a view to defeat the rights of the applicant.” 10. There is every reason to believe that the tenant who was imp leaded as a party to the application would have objected to the maintainability of the application and disclosed the true facts, but his address was given in the application to be- “Bungalow No. 14. West Cosmopolitan Society” and notes“14-A, Tamil Colony. The order (Annexure H) by which Mr. Houri, Deputy Custodian, decided the application, in her favor says that- “due notice was given to the respondents, the Rehabilitation Authorities and the same was also got published in “Aftab” Hyderabad, dated 19-9-1959 in order to call objections from other persons interested, but none has appeared nor raised any objections.” Mr. So hail has described “Aftab” as a “nondescript paper’ and the notice published in TT is not before us. We find from the order, however, that the application was heard ex parte, Mr. Dharmas appeared as a witness for his wife, and the application was accepted, as follows : “I have gone through the evidence adduced by the applicant and am of opinion that the bungalow No. 14 belonging to the applicant is a non-evacuee property, and accordingly it is declared as such subject to the approval of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): his wife, and the application was accepted, as follows : “I have gone through the evidence adduced by the applicant and am of opinion that the bungalow No. 14 belonging to the applicant is a non-evacuee property, and accordingly it is declared as such subject to the approval of the Additional Custodian (Judy.) Karachi to whom the entire record is submitted herewith.” 11. This declaration relating to bungalow No. 14 and not bungalow No. 14-A appears to be the result of a wrong address of the tenant and perhaps a wrong reference to the house in the notice published in “Aftab”. With this defect in the order, it was submitted to Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad, Additional Custodian, Karachi, who displayed an insight by making the following order : “In this case the question of limitation has not been properly gone MTO. On 7-8-58, A. C. formed applicants’ Advocate that the disputed property had been treated as evacuee property. But the application under section 22 was not filed until 5-6-59. The question is : Why this delay ? It should be ascertained when applicants received A. C’s. letter dated 7-8-59 and why the delay, if any. The case is sent back for a finding on the point of limitation after permitting applicant to adduce further evidence,” 12. On remand, the case was not heard by Mr. Houri but by Mr. Ir shad Ali Khan, who was also an Additional Custodian (Judy.) The application BMG the same as before, the address of the tenant remained unchanged. The order of Mr. Khan shows that a notice was published in “Aftab” of 19-9-59, and that nobody appeared before him. This date indicates that the proceedings were held without issuing fresh notices at all and this action is explainable by the fact that Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad had ordered the hearing to take place on remand “after permitting applicant to adduce further evidence.”’ Miss Sheila, Advocate, appeared on behalf of her mother who was the applicant and did not produce more evidence except an affidavit of the applicant herself along with an order of the Custodian dated the 24th of March 1960, which is not before us. Mr. Khan concluded the proceedings by holding “I am satisfied that the property bearing C. S. No. 14-A, Ami Colony, is a non-evacuee property of the applicant. This order is subject to the approval of the Custodian, Karachi.” 13. The body of the order shows that facts were misrepresented before Mr. Khan ; for he has said that “Mr. Dharmas examined himself on behalf of his wife, the applicant, and also produced a certified copy of the property register in respect of the property in dispute showing that the bungalow in dispute was transferred in the name of the applicant by the Resolution of the Society. The evidence of Mr. Dharmas shows that the property in question was purchased by him and consideration was paid by him. All these facts support the contention of the applicant that she

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): the bungalow in dispute was transferred in the name of the applicant by the Resolution of the Society. The evidence of Mr. Dharmas shows that the property in question was purchased by him and consideration was paid by him. All these facts support the contention of the applicant that she is the owner of the property as undoubtedly she is the wife of Mr. Dharmas. As regards the point of limitation in respect of the application, there is nothing on the record to show when was the property in dispute treated as evacuee property. It is contended by the applicant that the cause of action arose since the day when the occupant refused to pay its rent to the applicant, but when the applicant immediately moved the Assistant Custodian for a declaration and demanded the money deposited by the applicant. I very much doubt if any regular order is passed by any appropriate Custodian with regards to the status of the property owing to the fact that it has not so far been allotted to any person and the possession is still with the tenant who are made a respondent but - as not come forward to challenge the allegations of the applicant. In the circumstances narrated above, the only presumption that can be drawn is that the property in question is in the regular possession of the applicant and is non-evacuee property. In fact the question of limitation does not arise because the property has never been treated as evacuee property or any step has even been taken to treat (it) as such. If any person occupying a premise unintentionally or by a mischief deposits the rent of the house with the Custodian, it will not divest the owner of its proprietary rights.” 14. Mr. So hail has suggested that copies of the property register and “it is said that all the registers (of the Society) have been lost.” At that time Mr. Dharmas had informed the Deputy Custodian that all the “tenant-owners” of the Society had migrated to India excepting those who were the ‘“tenant-owners” of houses Nos 20, 53 and 59. This means that the owner of bungalow No. 14-A had also migrated from Pakistan. We do not know who was the “tenant-owner” of this bungalow at that time, but it appears that the wife of Mr. Dharmas was not that person, for, as contended by Mr. Diagonal in a different light, Mr. Dharmas was not a man who could describe his own wife to be a migrant. She could not be the owner MN 1951 because it is clear from the order of Mr. Khan (Annexure I), which is based on the evidence of Mr. Dharmas, that Mr. Dharmas had purchased the property and paid its consideration. The true facts appear to be that neither she nor Mr. Dharma Was was owner of the bungalow in 1951. At that time the owner was somebody who had migrated to India and was declared to be an evacuee

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): that Mr. Dharmas had purchased the property and paid its consideration. The true facts appear to be that neither she nor Mr. Dharma Was was owner of the bungalow in 1951. At that time the owner was somebody who had migrated to India and was declared to be an evacuee (Annexure B), but his identity has been concealed by the husband and the wife. The stands taken by them are contradictory, for the evidence of Mr. Dharmas was that the property was purchased by him and the consideration was paid by him, boo paragraph 2 of the affidavit of his wife mm these proceedings is as follows : “That before the Partition full purchase price of this plot was paid and the entire construction on the plot was raised by me at my own expense.” We cannot believe either of them in this respect. 15. But it is unnecessary in these proceedings to go into the question of the ownership of the bungalow. We have set out the above facts to disclose the unreliability of the proceedings. Suppression of facts is disclosed by the following observation of Mr. Khan: - “I very much doubt if any regular order it's passed by any appropriate Custodian with regard to the status of the property owing to the fact that it has NOT so far been allotted to any person. In the circumstances narrated above, the only presumption that can be drawn is that the property is in the regular possession of the occupant and is a non-evacuee property.” The true facts, as against this observation, are that such orders (Annexures B, D-2 and E) had been made, and the bungalow was provisionally transferred to the petitioner (vide Annexure A-!) about a year and a half before the date of the order. 16. The order of Mr. Khan was submitted to the Custodian who on the 25th of June 1960 confirmed it as follows : “The delay in the submission of the application by the petitioner, Mrs. Chaturthi, is hereby condoned, and the order dated the 6th April 1960 passed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property is hereby confirmed.” We may point out with utmost respect that a self-contradiction has crept into this order, because Mr. Khan had held, in spite of the order of Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad who had remanded the case “‘for a finding on the post of limitation’, that- “the question of limitation does not arise”, which decision of Mr. Khan could not be confirmed with simultaneous condonation of “the delay”. This order too was also made in the absence of the tenant. 17. Mr. Diagonal and Miss Sheila, Advocates, pressed on us to believe that the tenant had been served but had renamed absent. We, therefore, called upon the parties to submit their respective affidavits. The petitioner’s son, Hamid Ahmad Khan submitted an affidavit stating that no notice was at any time received by or served on the petitioner or the tenant or any other member of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): had been served but had renamed absent. We, therefore, called upon the parties to submit their respective affidavits. The petitioner’s son, Hamid Ahmad Khan submitted an affidavit stating that no notice was at any time received by or served on the petitioner or the tenant or any other member of the family of the petitioner. Miss Sheila, Advocate, informed us that service was effected on the tenant to her knowledge, but she did not submit her own affidavit and caused to be submitted the affidavits of Mr. Din Muhammad, Advocate, who worked as her Assistant and of Main BUX who is a clerk m the firm of “Messes Dharmas Mulch and Co. Advocates.” The latter has stated in paragraphs 3 and of his affidavit as follows: “(3) That Mr. DN Muhammad took the notice to the Reader of Deputy Custodian, Hyderabad Mr. Muhammad Radio who directed peon Baby of the office of D. C. Hyderabad to accompany me for service. (4) That I then took peon Baby to Bungalow No. 14-A. Cosmopolitan Colony where petitioner was present whom I already knew. Notice was given to him by Baby and informed him about the pending proceedings and notice of hearing m connection thereof” As two affidavits were contradictory we directed Mr. Saeed A. Shaikh, counsel for respondents Nos. and 2 to produce the original record, which he did. It shows that the Additional Custodian (Judy) Karachi and Hyderabad, had returned the summons unserved with the following remarks : “Summons for service on Muhammad Sharif Khan received under the above cited reference returned herewith in original with an endorsement thereon containing the address of Mr. Muhammad Sharif Khan. Muhammad Sharif Khan being mm service in the Defense Forces, has since been transferred to Dacca. His address is as under : Major Muhammad Sharif Ahmad Khan, G. S. O. () H. Q. 14 DW. (6 Branch) Dacca.” Mr. Diagonal stated that, according to his information, the. endorsement, which is at the back of the summons, was in the hand of Mr. Hamid Ahmad Khan, the son of the petitioner who has submitted the aforesaid affidavit. We immediately made inquiries from him who denied the allegation, and we are satisfied by comparing the endorsement at the back of the summons with the signature of Hamid Ahmad Khan on his affidavit that the two cannot be in the handwriting of one person. 18. We. may add here that the groundless charge of perjury made on behalf of MST. Chaturthi against Mr. Hamid Ahmad Khan in the circumstances that straight forwardness was wanting on her own side, caused us annoyance. Mr. Diagonal executed himself on the around that he had acted on formations given to him. This threw a diffused reflection on Miss Sheila, Advocate, daughter of MST. Chaturthi who was assisting him in the absence of her mother. We deem it proper to mention that an Advocate does not discharge his duty with due regard of the responsibility of his high office if he uses

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): This threw a diffused reflection on Miss Sheila, Advocate, daughter of MST. Chaturthi who was assisting him in the absence of her mother. We deem it proper to mention that an Advocate does not discharge his duty with due regard of the responsibility of his high office if he uses derogatory instructions which can be verified by him to be false, by ordinary exercise of care. It is necessary for maintain an atmosphere of mutual trust between the Court and an Advocate that the Advocate should not even state his inferences as facts. As the Court has a right to listen to a counsel with confidence, their trust is not respected if he makes grossly exaggerated, misleading or irresponsible statements. Nobody stands to GA'n by this and least of all the client of such a counsel, when counsel is found out. 19, All of the above stated basic facts are contained in the writ petition or are inferable from it. MST. Chaturthi has not replied to the petition parawise, nor has she specifically or generally denied the allegations made in it. Her plea is less of traverse than of confession and avoidance. Her defense is that the “trouble” about the bungalow “arose in 1958” when the tenant “went and deposited rent in the Custodian’s Department, Hyderabad without” her knowledge ; that the house did not belong to the Society ; that it was declared to be a nonevacuee property by the order (Annexure H) of Mr. Houri on her last application, which declaration, was repeated by Mr. Khan (Annexure [) and confirmed by the Custodian (Annexure J). Her reply to the allegations of the petitioner is contamed in paragraph 11 of her affidavit, which is as follows : “That the various statements made in paragraphs 3 to 10 of the petition) are all misconceived and relate to other properties of the Society where the tenants of the society had built houses but had not paid ground rents, It has no reference to my property.” 20. With the help of the facts and inferences set out above in the paragraphs which precede the last paragraph, we are in a position now to comment on her defenses. It is wrong that the trouble arose in 19:8. It had arisen in 1951, if not earlier, and her husband was the central figure in it. The tenants were ordered in 1951 to deposit rent with the Custodian, and we believe that the tenant of this bungalow so deposited the rent from 1951. It is true that the house did not belong to the Society, but the stand of her own husband was to the contrary, and was overruled in 1951. She commenced litigation in disregard of the previous proceedings and obtained orders (Annexures H, I and J) in ex parte proceedings. Their validity is in question ; therefore, their mere existence is no defense unless she can show that the previous orders (Announces B, D- 2 and E) with which these latter orders (Annexures

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): disregard of the previous proceedings and obtained orders (Annexures H, I and J) in ex parte proceedings. Their validity is in question ; therefore, their mere existence is no defense unless she can show that the previous orders (Announces B, D- 2 and E) with which these latter orders (Annexures H, I and J) are in conflict were validly reviewed, revised, over-ruled or set aside, or that the previous orders did not relate to the bungalow TN question. 21. It is clear that the previous orders were not reviewed, revised, over-ruled or set aside. They were neither brought to the notice of the authorities who made the latter orders nor are they mentioned in the latter orders. Mr. Dharmas drew a curtain MN front of t hem by stating as her witness that “advertently or advertently’ the tenant “got the property treated as evacuee property’ by depositing rent with the Custodian’s Department (Annexure H). 22. She has attempted in these proceedings to justify the omission to recognize the previous proceedings as well as to nullify their effect by her defense that they are irrelevant. This has raised the question : Do the previous orders (Annexures B, D-2 and E) relate to bungalow No. 14-A ? The answer is that they obviously do, because they deal with all the houses of the Colony. Mr. Diagonal attempted to argue that the first order in particular (Annexure B) and therefore, the subsequent orders (Annexures D-2 and E) related to the houses of those members of the society who had failed to pay the ground rent, but this is proved to be clearly wrong when the concluding portion of the Assistant Custodian’s Order (Annexure B) is read with the order of the Custodian which concluded it. This has been exp lamed earlier in paragraph 4. 23. Mr. Diagonal blamed the petitioner for suppressing facts and in support of his contention produced copies of two orders which we have taken on record, because Mr. So hail did not object to their production, and have marked them as ‘K’ and ‘L\ There is no reference to these orders in the writ petition. The order ‘K’ was made by Mr. Houri before deciding the application (Annexure G) of MST. Chaturthi An term stay was granted by this order on the ground that the Custodian’s Department had declared MST. Chaturthi to be a non-evacuee person and all her property which had been taken over by that department to be non-evacuee property. The other order, ‘L’, was made by the Custodian dismissing a review application, of the petitioner and his son, against the order of the Custodian (Annexure J) by which bungalow No. 14-A was confirmed to be a non-evacuee property. We shall presently comment on these orders but should firstly post out that the charge of Mr. Diagonal that the petitioner had suppressed these orders was not well-founded because MST. Chaturthi too has made no mention of these orders in the affidavit submitted by her in reply to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): non-evacuee property. We shall presently comment on these orders but should firstly post out that the charge of Mr. Diagonal that the petitioner had suppressed these orders was not well-founded because MST. Chaturthi too has made no mention of these orders in the affidavit submitted by her in reply to the writ petition. 24. The order ‘K’ does not advance the case of MST. Chaturthi because there is no allegation of the petitioner that she is an evacuee person. The order itself gives prominence to the fact that she was formerly treated as an evacuee and paragraph 2 of application (Annexure G), which has been reproduced above by us mm paragraph 9, shows that the shadow of evacuee character was not removed from her up to 1954. The order EK’ read with paragraph 2 of her application raises in our minds the question as to whether the person who was the owner of bungalow No. 14-A in 1951 had been declared to be a non-evacuee or not when he transferred it to Mr. Dharmas and whether MST. Chaturthi herself was an evacuee or a non-evacuee when the bungalow, according to the evidence of Mr. Dharmas to which reference has been made in the quotation reproduced by us in paragraph 13 above, was transferred to her by a resolution of the Society. There are no registered transfer deeds before us to remove from our minds objections to the validity of the transfers. Mr. So hail repeatedly criticized the omission of MST. Chaturthi in not disclosing the dates of the transfers but Mr. Gomal and Miss Sheila Advocates, gave no reply to this criticism. We would, however not try to find an answer to it because it does not directly arise from the petition. 25. The order ‘L’ has been used by Mr. Diagonal to support his contention that the petitioner and his son had notice of the order of the Custodian (Annexure J) by which bungalow No. 14-A was confirmed to be a non-evacuee property and which order is alleged by the petitioner to have been made without notice. We desired to see the relevant original record for ascertaining facts, and it has been produced by Mr. Speed A. Shaikh, Advocate. It shows that the review application was presented by the petitioner and his son on the 23rd of July 1960, against the order of the Custodian (Annexure J). A certified copy of the order J which was sought to be reviewed, was attached to the application. There 1s nothing on that record to show as to how the petitioner and his son came to know of the order J. The report on the summons is that it was not served on the son as he was at that time in Dacca. Mr. Speed A. Shaikh suggested that from the endorsement which is at the back of the summons one could infer that it was made by an inmate of the house and that the same person who made the endorsement

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): on the son as he was at that time in Dacca. Mr. Speed A. Shaikh suggested that from the endorsement which is at the back of the summons one could infer that it was made by an inmate of the house and that the same person who made the endorsement could have given information of it to the petitioner as well as to his son. Moreover, as the endorsement can be taken to have been made by an inmate of the house, the Custodian could have treated it, according to counsel, to the sufficient service on the son and could have proceeded ex parte to make the order (Annexure J) without specifically saying so. If these conjectures are correct then the tenant can be legally taken to have been duly informed of the proceedings and can be said to have intentionally abs tamed from participating in them. Mr. Diagonal took advantage of these possibilities for contending that the order ‘L’ proves that the order J was not made without notice but that the petitioner has suppressed the order ‘L’ and alleged in his writ petition that the Custodian’s Order (Annexure J) was made without notice. 26. We think that the contentions of both counsel are erroneous ; firstly, because the order ‘L? itself shows that the review application was not dismissed because the service was held to be good, but on the ground that, no interest of justice was found likely to be served by reviewing it ; secondly, because service of the summons on an inmate of a house at Hyderabad could not be a good service on the party who was at that time in the ordinary course of his employment residing in a house at Dacca ; thirdly, the question of notice from the Custodian’s Department to the petitioner does not arise, because the petitioner was not a party to those proceedings. 27. Mr. Diagonal did not attempt to meet the contention of Mr. So hail that all the three orders (Annexures H, I and J) which are in favor of MST. Chaturthi suffer from defects that are patent on the face of the record. Mr. So hail has argued that the first order Annexure H) was made without notice to the tenant and in disregard of the provisions of limitation. We have seen that the address of the tenant given in the application of MST. Chaturthi (Annexure G) was wrong, and we believe that publication of notice in “Aftab” was not calculated to give notice of the proceedings to the tenant. The objection of limitation to the maintainability of the application was so patent that Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad noticed it by looking at the record, although no proceedings took place before him. As to the second order (Annexure I) Mr. So hail posted out that it was made without issuing notice to the tenant as well as on the assumption of wrong facts as explained by us in paragraph 15 above. In the last order,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): although no proceedings took place before him. As to the second order (Annexure I) Mr. So hail posted out that it was made without issuing notice to the tenant as well as on the assumption of wrong facts as explained by us in paragraph 15 above. In the last order, J, there is self-contradiction as noted by us above in paragraph 16. Mr. So hail has further argued that delay could be condoned by the Custodian under section 5 of the Limitation Act only, therefore, he could do so, he was “satisfied” that there was ‘sufficient cause for MST. Chaturthi not making the application (Annexure J) within the period of limitation, but the Custodian could not be satisfied of the sufficiency of the cause of delay because the order which he has confirmed (Annexure J) postulates that there was no question of limitation and because the order of Mr. Syed Riazuddin Ahmad in which the existence of the objection of limitation was pointed out had also left for further inquiry the determination of the commencement of the period of limitation and the cause of delay. We know from the record now that the period of limitation had actually commenced on the date of the first order which is the 29th of May 1951, (Annexure A-I) but no date of commencement was determined by the Custodian. He therefore, did not know the quantum of delay. It was impossible for him to consider the sufficiency of the cause of unknown delay. We agree that where the quantum of delay is not known and t therefore, the sufficiency or otherwise of the reasons for the delay cannot be Judged, there is no possibility of exercising the discretion to condone the delay. 28. Mr. Gomal resisted the writ petition as a whole by advancing three legal arguments. He argued firstly, that the petition could not succeed because the last order made against the petitioner was the order, ‘L’ by which the review application of the petitioner and his son was dismissed by the Custodian, but it has not been challenged by the petitioner, secondly, that this Court has no jurisdiction to grant the petition on the grounds which have been taken by and on behalf of the petitioner because they did not include the ground of abs née of jurisdiction or failure to exercise jurisdiction ; and thirdly, that the petitioner has no interest in bungalow No. 14-A, therefore, has no locus standi to come to this Court with this petition. He has no interest because the provisional transfer order (Annexure A-!) was issued in his favor illegally and is disregard of the provisions of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 as posted out by the Custodian in the order ‘L\ 29. The first contention can be disposed of shortly, because Mr. Diagonal has cited no law in support of it and Mr. So hail has rightly pointed out that the order ‘L’ has no independent existence. It would

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): Act, 1958 as posted out by the Custodian in the order ‘L\ 29. The first contention can be disposed of shortly, because Mr. Diagonal has cited no law in support of it and Mr. So hail has rightly pointed out that the order ‘L’ has no independent existence. It would automatically lose its force if the order (Annexure J), against which the review application was dismissed, is held to be illegal. In support of this proposition he was able to cite an authority which is a judgment by Haikus and Baroque, JJ. in Muhammad Ismail v. Rehabilitation Commissioner The learned Judges have observed in it as follows “Now, in the first instance, if the orders passed by the Additional Rehabilitation Commissioner were without jurisdiction, and we set them aside, the subsequent orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner, which were only in confirmation of those orders, automatically fall. In the second place, the petitioner should be deemed to be attacking the orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner in revision also. He had attached copies of those orders along with the petition.” The last part of the above observation is not applicable to the facts of this case because in this case neither the petitioner nor MST. Chaturthi have referred to the order ‘L’ in their written submissions to this Court ; but as explained earlier, it suffers from more than one invalidating illegalities. As in our view the order ‘J’ itself is valid, we attach no importance to the review application and to the order ‘L’ by which the application was dismissed. 30. In support of the second contention Mr. Diagonal explained that the law as it was before the present Constitution and not Article 98 of the present Constitution is applicable. We agree with him in this view. Taking his stand on the concept of certiorari, he contended that such a writ could not be issued unless the tribunal, whose order is questioned, did not have the jurisdiction to give that order, or had refused to exercise a jurisdiction which it possessed. He supported this contention by citing the judgments in Santosh Kumar Shah v. District Magistrate of Jaipur (2) ; Vardar Her Muhammad v. Rao Bashir Ali Khan (3) ; Deal Singh College Trust Society v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property (1) and m MST. Mahmood Begum v. Chief Settlement Commissioner In these judgments, these are observations which are helpful to counsel. As against them, Mr. So hail has cited three judgments. In Grind lay's Bark Ltd. v. Murrey Brewery Co. Ltd. Muhammad Muir, C. J. and Aitcheson J. have pointed out at page 754 “in law a judgment or order, however, high or independent the tribunal deliver mg or making it and however, exclusive its jurisdiction, is a nullity if it is proved that it was obtained by fraud.” At page 755 the learned Judges have explained that as “fraud vitiates all proceedings” it is immaterial whether it is alleged before a Judge or otherwise “the issue whether the judgment

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): it and however, exclusive its jurisdiction, is a nullity if it is proved that it was obtained by fraud.” At page 755 the learned Judges have explained that as “fraud vitiates all proceedings” it is immaterial whether it is alleged before a Judge or otherwise “the issue whether the judgment was obtained by fraud properly comes before tiny’, for it is the duty of the Court that has basin of the case in appropriate cases “to recall so moth an order procured by fraud” and remove its vicious result. In Paul Had v. Government of West Pakistan Kay ani and Muhammad Sharif, JJ. have held at page 360 that “certiorari will be appropriate to quash the decision of a tribunal which has assumed a jurisdiction that it does not possess, or where bias by interest or want of good faith is alleged, or where there is a breach of the rules of natural justice or where there is fraud and perjury.” In Froze Din v. Government of West Pakistan (5) another Division Bench of this Court has referred at page 317 to misrepresentation and suppression of facts, and observed at page 318, as follows : “We think, therefore, that this is a case where the acquisition proceedings are vitiated by perjury and fraud, and liable to be quashed on that ground.” They have quoted with approval the passage which we have reproduced above from Paul Had's case. 31. The above two sets of the statements of law brought to our notice by the opposing counsel are not reconcilable if the expression “Jurisdiction” is accepted to include “assumption and exercise of jurisdiction’, because no authority can be said to have exercised its jurisdiction if it was prevented from knowing the true facts, if it took for a material fact what was not MN law that fact; if it proceeded act in ( grave and obvious disregard of a material provision of law ; if it exercised a discretion without the existence of the situation in which it could be exercised ; if it violated the principles of natural justice when the law had not permitted it to do so, and if it gave reasons for its conclusions which (1) PLD 1962 LAH. 352 (356, 357) (2) PLD 1962 LAH. 911 (915) (3) PLD 1954 LAH. 745 (4) PLD 1956 LAH. 358 could not, in those circumstances, rationally lead to them. This is not an exhaustive list of those stances in which defective exercise of jurisdiction may be successfully pleaded, but it is sufficiently elaborate for this case. In partial e-:r. Intron and support of it we refer to English decisions in R. v. Recorder of Leicester, Ex Parte Wood R. v. Birmingham Compensation, Appeal tribunal (2) ; Rex v. Nat Bell Liquors Limited (3) Associated Provincial Picture Houses Limited v. Wednesbury Corporation (4) Ex parte Brad laugh (5) ; and The Queen v. Kay We need not be exhaustive, because the judgments cited by Mr. Diagonal are not of a higher

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): Birmingham Compensation, Appeal tribunal (2) ; Rex v. Nat Bell Liquors Limited (3) Associated Provincial Picture Houses Limited v. Wednesbury Corporation (4) Ex parte Brad laugh (5) ; and The Queen v. Kay We need not be exhaustive, because the judgments cited by Mr. Diagonal are not of a higher authority than the authority of the judgments cited by Mr. So hail, and we find ourselves in agreement with the latter. "32. The third argument of Mr. Diagonal was met by Mr. So hail when he posted out, without giving attention to the argument itself} that the petitioner is in any event an occupant of bungalow No. 14-A from 1948 and as such entitled that it should be transferred to him under the Schedule to the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958./ We note the fact stated by Mr. So hail that other members of the family who could also claim this right have abstained from dog so in favor of the petitioner and here refer to the discussion in Rex v. Richmond Confirming Authority The Earl of Reading, C. J. who delivered the judgment with the concurrence of Darling and Salter, JJ. has held in it, overruling the contentions of Sir John Simon, that a rival licensee “had an interest in objecting to the license granted to another person) in the sense that he was the owner or licensee of property in the borough which he thought would be affected adversely by the grant of,” the impugned license and thus entitled to contend before the Court that it was granted by usurpation of jurisdiction. He referred to the proposition expressed by Blackburn, C. J. in Forster v. Forster (8) that “although the Court will listen to a person who is a stranger, and who interferes to post out that some other Court has exceeded its jurisdiction, whereby some wrong or grievance has been sustained, yet that it is not ex debit Justitia, but a matter upon which the Court may properly exercise its discretion, as distinguished from the case of a party aggrieved, who is entitled to relief ex debit Justitia, if he suffers from the usurpation of jurisdiction by another Court”. (pp. 254-255, 1921-1 K B) and observed : “The question whether a person has a particular interest in the subject-matter as distinguished from the interest which the (1) (1947) AER 928 (2) (1952) 2 AE R 100 (3) (1922) 2 AC 128 (151,153,155) (4) (1948) K B 223 (5) 3 Q B 1878 509 (512-513) (6) (1873) 8 Q B 324 (7) 1921) 1A C 248 (8) (1863) B S 187,199 public has must always be a f>f degree. Of course, it may be that a pp.ROR’ o slight that Court will not act upon it, but ;« substantial the Court is bound to issue the writ when it appears on the face of the order that there has been a wrongful exercise of jurisdiction in the sense of an excess of jurisdiction. The first post

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 551?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 551 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1963-02-12): pp.ROR’ o slight that Court will not act upon it, but ;« substantial the Court is bound to issue the writ when it appears on the face of the order that there has been a wrongful exercise of jurisdiction in the sense of an excess of jurisdiction. The first post taken by Sir John Simon therefore fails.” (Ibid 255-56) In this case we find that the petitioner has the locus standi to bring this petition. 33. In conclusion of all that has been said above, we accept the petition, and quash the main and basic orders which are the orders of the Additional Custodian (Judy.) dated 6-4- 60 and the order of the Custodian dated 25-6-1960 the Annexures “T’ and “J” to the petition. Respondent No. will pay the costs of the petitioner. Petition accepted

Question: What is case 1963 PLD 29 about?
Answer: Case 1963 PLD 29 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1962-11-29. The case involved MST. REHMAT BAI AND ORHERS—APPELLANTS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, SOUTH ZONE, KARACHI AND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 21 REGISTRATION ACT (XVI OF 1908) - SS. 23 AND 25. The case was heard by A. R. CORNELIUS, C. J. FAZLE-AKBAR AND B. Z KAIKAUS.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: In case 1963 PLD 29, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 21 REGISTRATION ACT (XVI OF 1908) - SS. 23 AND 25. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1962-11-29.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1963 PLD 29 were: MUHAMMAD SADIQ ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY GHULAM ALI MEMON ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANTS. SAYEED A. SHAIKH ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY SHAFIQ AHMAD ATTORNEY FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.. The judges presiding were: A. R. CORNELIUS, C. J. FAZLE-AKBAR AND B. Z KAIKAUS.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: The parties in case 1963 PLD 29 were: MST. REHMAT BAI AND ORHERS—APPELLANTS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, SOUTH ZONE, KARACHI AND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1963 PLD 29.
Answer: Judgment Cornelius, C. J—This appeal by special leave granted to the appellants MST. Reheat Bai and others as successors of one Hussain, raises a question of the true construction of section 21 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. For the proper evaluation of the ground on which relief was refused to the appellants by the Custodian of Evacuee Property (Southern Zone) and Adam by a Division Bench of the West Pakistan High Court at Karachi, which was moved by a petition for a writ, it is necessary that the full terms of section 21 aforesaid should be set out in this judgment. It reads as follows — ‘21. Registration of documents and mutation of names.— (1) Where any document required to be registered under the Registration Act, 1908, or any application for mutation of names purports to create or transfer any right or interest in any property in contravention of the provisions of section 20 of this Act, no registering officer shall register the same, and no revenue officer shall sanction any mutation of names in respect thereof, unless the party presenting the document or making the application produces a certificate from the Custodian that the property is not evacuee property or that the transaction has been confirmed or that the Custodian has sanctioned the transaction. (2) If any question arises whether any document presented for registration or any application made for mutation of names purports as aforesaid the registering officer or the revenue officer, as the case may be, shall direct the party concerned to apply to the Custodian for a certificate under subsection and shall not register the document or grant the application without such certificate. (3) The Custodian may grant the certificate referred to in subsection (1) either unconditionally or on such terms and conditions as he thinks fit to impose. (4) When a certificate as is mentioned in subsection (1) has been granted by the Custodian, the document shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 23 of the Registration Act, 1908, but subject to the other provisions of that Act, be accepted for registration by the registration officer if presented within four months of the passing of this Act or the date on which the certificate is granted, and the expiration of the time prescribed for presentation of the document for the purposes of section 25 of that Act shall be computed accordingly.” “ In the Ordinance of the same name promulgated in 1949, this provision was contained in section 17 in a materially different form. Section 17 provided for the requisite of a certificate from the Custodian in the same terms as those in section 21, subsection (1) of the 1957 Act, with this difference that it contained reference to “an intending evacuee”’. The law WW. relating to “intending evacuees” was repealed when the Ordinance of 1949 was repealed by the first Ordinance of the same name issued in 1956. Subsection (2) in each of the two sections 17 of 1949 and 21 of 1957 was to the same effect and in practically the same terms, namely, that a Register mg Officer or a Revenue Officer as the case may be was obliged whenever a document of the relevant kinds was produced before him for registration or for mutation of names as the case may be, to direct the parties to obtain a certificate from the Custodian under subsection At the same time, such Officer was prohibited from register mg the document or granting the mutation without such certificate. Subsections (3) and (4) of section 21 of 1957 Act were new, that is to say they were not contained in either of the two Ordinances of the year 1956 which followed the repeal of the Ordinance of 1949. Subsection (3) permitted the Custodian to impose terms and conditions upon the grant of certificate under subsection (1) and is not relevant to the present subject. By subsection a rule of limitation was laid down, to operate notwithstanding anything contained in section 23 of the Registration Act, 1908, which provides, in negative terms, that no document of the specified kinds should be accepted for registration by a Registrar unless it is presented for registration within months of its execution. By section 25 of the Registration Act, which is also mentioned in subsection (4) aforesaid, this period of months is extensible in certain cases by a further period of four months. It is quite clear that there is a bar or disability imposed by section 23 of the Registration Act, and it is equally clear that the intention of subsection (4) of section 21 of the Act of 1957 is to overcome that bar, and make it effective, in certain cases where it would otherwise frustrate any attempt at completion of title under a deed of transfer by the statutory method of registration. This is placed beyond doubt by the fact that subsection (4) aforesaid imposes a positive duty upon the Registrar to accept the documents which it embraces, provided that a time limit is observed. There might be a case in which all the conditions of section 21 of the Act of 1957 as well as of section 23 of the Registration Act are satisfied within the primary period of months, but the main purpose of the new provision in the Act of 1957 was plainly to allow for the possibility of delay occurring in the presentation of a deed of transfer for the purpose of registration, such delay being due to the duty imposed upon the person interested, by the Ordinance of 1949 and successive Ordinances, to obtain a certificate as specified from the Custodian, coupled with a command to the Registrar not to register any such document unless it is supported by such a certificate. The possibility of delay is patent in the circumstances, but it also appears clearly from the provision in subsection (2) of section 21 of the Act of 1957 that if a document unsupported by the Custodian’s certificate were presented to the Registrar, the latter officer was to direct the party concerned to apply to the Custodian for such certificate. Of course, if the document were presented more than 4 months after its execution, and the operation of section 23 of the Registration Act 1908 were not avoided, then no question would arise of the Registrar doing anything except refusing to register the document for non-compliance with section 23, (or Ina special case, with section 25) of the Registration Act, on the post of time. Therefore, it seems play upon a proper leading of all the terms of section 21 of the Act of 1957 that it contained a rule of relaxation in respect of the periods of limitation provided by section 23 and section 25 of the Registration Act, to adapt the latter provisions to conditions brought about by the imposition from 1949 onwards of the requirement of a certificate from the Custodian as a requisite for registration. It is also clear from the fact that months from the date of the passing of the Act of 1957 were allowed for such presentation that the new and amended:.! section contemplated the presentation of documents for registration which had been delayed in presentation for great length of time, in consequence of the formal requirements newly imposed under the law relating to evacuee property. Within those four months, all documents which had been executed prior to the enactment of the Act of 1957 and whose registration had been delayed for lack of the requisite formal certificate could be presented for registration provided the formalities had been completed. There might be a case in which the Custodian’s certificate was granted on the very date when the Act of 1957 came into force, and for such a case, the period of four months could be computed equally from the date of the grant of the certificate, but the latter provision was clearly more apt in a case where the certificate was granted after the Act of 1957 came into force, and was obviously intended to apply to all such certificates however long after the enactment of the 1957 Act they might have been granted. Having made a full examination of the provisions of section 21 of the Act of 1957, we may now proceed to state the. facts of the present case. The deceased Vendée Hussain entered into an agreement of sale with the evacuee vendor Reshiram on the IST September 1947. Reshiram later immigrated to India, but appointed an attorney to act for himself: In 1949, Hussain died, and was succeeded by the present appellants as his success-sors-in- interest. They applied to the Custodian under section 17 of the Ordinance of 1949 for a certificate and this was issued to them by the then Custodian Mr. Akbar Hussain on the 14th February 1950. The next step, namely, execution of the sale-deed was much delayed, on account of non-payment of his income-tax dues by the evacuee vendor, but finally on the 27th August 1959, the Income-tax Department issued their clearance certificate after having created a charge upon certain properties of Reshiram for satisfaction of the momenta dues. This clearance certificate enabled further progress in the case, and on the 9th January 1960, the sale-deed was executed by the attorney for the vendor. On the 12th January 1960, it was duly registered and mutation of names was made in the survey register. The Custodian duly confirmed the sale on the 24th May 1950. There was, however, an allottee living in the premises named Muhammad Heifetz Bidding, the second respondent before us, and he moved against the confirmation with the result that on the 25th February 1961, the Custodian set aside the order of the 24th May 1960 confirming the sale and at the same time, granted permission to the vendees to apply for a fresh certificate under section 21 of the Act of 1957. The solitary ground upon which this action was taken was stated in the following terms —— “Mr. Zahiruddin (counsel for the vendees) concedes that the attorney was authorized to execute sale-deed in 1950, but he has done so m 1960. It is this sale-deed which has been confirmed by the Additional Custodian E. P. Karachi. Section 21 of Act XII of 1957 prescribed a limit on use of authority to an attorney to execute a sale-deed within months. The attorney has admittedly executed the sale-deed 3 years after the Act. Sale-deed thus executed is the clear contravention of section 21 of the Act and cannot therefore be confirmed”, “Mr. Zahiruddin concedes the legal position urged in the matter and has no objection to revision application being allowed”. We have endeavored with the assistance of the learned counsel of the appellants-Vendée, for the Custodian and for the allottee Muhammad Heifetz Siddiqui to discover exactly what was meant in this order by saying that section 21 of the Act of 1957 limited the use of an authority to an attorney to execute a sale-deed within four months. There is no mention of attorneys or agents in section 21, and no provision in that section nor any term used therein is relevant to the conception of action by an agent or authorized attorney. It seems to us therefore that the Custodian was clearly wrong in finding illegality in the fact of the attorney having executed the s decreed three years after the Act. In the judgment of the High Court dismissing the writ petition an attempt was made to support that finding by a form of reasoning. This was the explanation offered — “The ground taken in the Custodian’s order is that subsection of section 21 of Act XII of 1957 has no application since the document WW. was presented more than four months after the passing of the Act, and more than four months after the grant of the certificate. Therefore, the applicant was relegated to the position which obtains in. The Registration Act regarding authority of the attorney to execute a sale-deed. We can see no reason to consider that this reasoning of the Custodian is not in accordance with law”’. From the fact that the vendees lost no time in moving the High Court against the order of the Custodian, it is evident that they did not regard themselves as being bound by the concession made on a post of law by their counsel before the Custodian. Nor were they so bound. However, in the judgment of the High Court, it is stated that that concession was rightly made, and this is probably to be understood in the light of the new explanation offered by the learned Judges of the Division Bench themselves. That explanation introduces a new assumption namely, that in the Registration Act, there is a provision which limits the authority of attorneys to execute a sale-deed in point of time. Again, we have relied on for the examination of this point, sought assistance from the learned counsel representing the three parties before us, and neither they nor we ourselves could discover the least basis for this proposition advanced by the Division Bench. That being the case, there is clearly ground for a fresh appraisement of the situation in the light of the relevant law. - We think TT admits of no doubt that section 21 of the Act of 1957 was, in its terms, adapted for application to transfers of evacuee property made by deeds executed after the passing of the Act of 1957, in respect of which certificates by the Custodian had been obtained on a date prior to the pass mg of that Act. The deed in this case was executed on the 9th Janus.Ry 1960, and was presented to the Registrar on the 12th January 1960, that is within the period limited by section in 23 of the Registration Act. The duty of the Registrar was, if the deed was not supported by a certificate, to direct the party concerned to obtain such a certificate. In the absence of such a certificate he was bound to refuse to register the deed. In this case, neither of the contingencies arises. He had no need to refer the parties to the Custodian because an effective certificate from the Custodian issued as far back as the 14th February 1950 was presented along with the deed. He could not refuse to register the deed, because all the conditions of section 23 of the Registration Act, as well as of section 21 of the Act of 1957 were satisfied. In the circumstance, the deed was rightly registered, and its subsequent confirmation of the 24th May 1960, was entirely in order. We accordingly allow this appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, direct that a writ of certiorari as prayed should issue, to call up the order of the Custodian dated the 25th February 1961, and his subsequent order of the 8th April 1961 refusing to review the former order, and to quash each of the said orders. As the proceedings which have given rise to the litigation were commenced by the respondent Muhammad Heifetz Siddiqui, we direct that he should bear the costs of the proceedings in this Court. Petition acc épée d

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 29 (SUPREME COURT, 1962-11-29): Judgment Cornelius, C. J—This appeal by special leave granted to the appellants MST. Reheat Bai and others as successors of one Hussain, raises a question of the true construction of section 21 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. For the proper evaluation of the ground on which relief was refused to the appellants by the Custodian of Evacuee Property (Southern Zone) and Adam by a Division Bench of the West Pakistan High Court at Karachi, which was moved by a petition for a writ, it is necessary that the full terms of section 21 aforesaid should be set out in this judgment. It reads as follows — ‘21. Registration of documents and mutation of names.— (1) Where any document required to be registered under the Registration Act, 1908, or any application for mutation of names purports to create or transfer any right or interest in any property in contravention of the provisions of section 20 of this Act, no registering officer shall register the same, and no revenue officer shall sanction any mutation of names in respect thereof, unless the party presenting the document or making the application produces a certificate from the Custodian that the property is not evacuee property or that the transaction has been confirmed or that the Custodian has sanctioned the transaction. (2) If any question arises whether any document presented for registration or any application made for mutation of names purports as aforesaid the registering officer or the revenue officer, as the case may be, shall direct the party concerned to apply to the Custodian for a certificate under subsection and shall not register the document or grant the application without such certificate. (3) The Custodian may grant the certificate referred to in subsection (1) either unconditionally or on such terms and conditions as he thinks fit to impose. (4) When a certificate as is mentioned in subsection (1) has been granted by the Custodian, the document shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 23 of the Registration Act, 1908, but subject to the other provisions of that Act, be accepted for registration by the registration officer if presented within four months of the passing of this Act or the date on which the certificate is granted, and the expiration of the time prescribed for presentation of the document for the purposes of section 25 of that Act shall be computed accordingly.” “ In the Ordinance of the same name promulgated in 1949, this provision was contained in section 17 in a materially different form. Section 17 provided for the requisite of a certificate from the Custodian in the same terms as those in section 21, subsection (1) of the 1957 Act, with this difference that it contained reference to “an intending evacuee”’. The law WW. relating to “intending evacuees” was repealed when the Ordinance of 1949 was repealed by the first Ordinance of the same name issued in 1956. Subsection (2) in each of the two sections 17 of 1949 and 21

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 29 (SUPREME COURT, 1962-11-29): this difference that it contained reference to “an intending evacuee”’. The law WW. relating to “intending evacuees” was repealed when the Ordinance of 1949 was repealed by the first Ordinance of the same name issued in 1956. Subsection (2) in each of the two sections 17 of 1949 and 21 of 1957 was to the same effect and in practically the same terms, namely, that a Register mg Officer or a Revenue Officer as the case may be was obliged whenever a document of the relevant kinds was produced before him for registration or for mutation of names as the case may be, to direct the parties to obtain a certificate from the Custodian under subsection At the same time, such Officer was prohibited from register mg the document or granting the mutation without such certificate. Subsections (3) and (4) of section 21 of 1957 Act were new, that is to say they were not contained in either of the two Ordinances of the year 1956 which followed the repeal of the Ordinance of 1949. Subsection (3) permitted the Custodian to impose terms and conditions upon the grant of certificate under subsection (1) and is not relevant to the present subject. By subsection a rule of limitation was laid down, to operate notwithstanding anything contained in section 23 of the Registration Act, 1908, which provides, in negative terms, that no document of the specified kinds should be accepted for registration by a Registrar unless it is presented for registration within months of its execution. By section 25 of the Registration Act, which is also mentioned in subsection (4) aforesaid, this period of months is extensible in certain cases by a further period of four months. It is quite clear that there is a bar or disability imposed by section 23 of the Registration Act, and it is equally clear that the intention of subsection (4) of section 21 of the Act of 1957 is to overcome that bar, and make it effective, in certain cases where it would otherwise frustrate any attempt at completion of title under a deed of transfer by the statutory method of registration. This is placed beyond doubt by the fact that subsection (4) aforesaid imposes a positive duty upon the Registrar to accept the documents which it embraces, provided that a time limit is observed. There might be a case in which all the conditions of section 21 of the Act of 1957 as well as of section 23 of the Registration Act are satisfied within the primary period of months, but the main purpose of the new provision in the Act of 1957 was plainly to allow for the possibility of delay occurring in the presentation of a deed of transfer for the purpose of registration, such delay being due to the duty imposed upon the person interested, by the Ordinance of 1949 and successive Ordinances, to obtain a certificate as specified from the Custodian, coupled with a command to the Registrar not to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 29 (SUPREME COURT, 1962-11-29): the presentation of a deed of transfer for the purpose of registration, such delay being due to the duty imposed upon the person interested, by the Ordinance of 1949 and successive Ordinances, to obtain a certificate as specified from the Custodian, coupled with a command to the Registrar not to register any such document unless it is supported by such a certificate. The possibility of delay is patent in the circumstances, but it also appears clearly from the provision in subsection (2) of section 21 of the Act of 1957 that if a document unsupported by the Custodian’s certificate were presented to the Registrar, the latter officer was to direct the party concerned to apply to the Custodian for such certificate. Of course, if the document were presented more than 4 months after its execution, and the operation of section 23 of the Registration Act 1908 were not avoided, then no question would arise of the Registrar doing anything except refusing to register the document for non-compliance with section 23, (or Ina special case, with section 25) of the Registration Act, on the post of time. Therefore, it seems play upon a proper leading of all the terms of section 21 of the Act of 1957 that it contained a rule of relaxation in respect of the periods of limitation provided by section 23 and section 25 of the Registration Act, to adapt the latter provisions to conditions brought about by the imposition from 1949 onwards of the requirement of a certificate from the Custodian as a requisite for registration. It is also clear from the fact that months from the date of the passing of the Act of 1957 were allowed for such presentation that the new and amended:.! section contemplated the presentation of documents for registration which had been delayed in presentation for great length of time, in consequence of the formal requirements newly imposed under the law relating to evacuee property. Within those four months, all documents which had been executed prior to the enactment of the Act of 1957 and whose registration had been delayed for lack of the requisite formal certificate could be presented for registration provided the formalities had been completed. There might be a case in which the Custodian’s certificate was granted on the very date when the Act of 1957 came into force, and for such a case, the period of four months could be computed equally from the date of the grant of the certificate, but the latter provision was clearly more apt in a case where the certificate was granted after the Act of 1957 came into force, and was obviously intended to apply to all such certificates however long after the enactment of the 1957 Act they might have been granted. Having made a full examination of the provisions of section 21 of the Act of 1957, we may now proceed to state the. facts of the present case. The deceased Vendée Hussain entered into an agreement of sale

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 29 (SUPREME COURT, 1962-11-29): after the enactment of the 1957 Act they might have been granted. Having made a full examination of the provisions of section 21 of the Act of 1957, we may now proceed to state the. facts of the present case. The deceased Vendée Hussain entered into an agreement of sale with the evacuee vendor Reshiram on the IST September 1947. Reshiram later immigrated to India, but appointed an attorney to act for himself: In 1949, Hussain died, and was succeeded by the present appellants as his success-sors-in- interest. They applied to the Custodian under section 17 of the Ordinance of 1949 for a certificate and this was issued to them by the then Custodian Mr. Akbar Hussain on the 14th February 1950. The next step, namely, execution of the sale-deed was much delayed, on account of non-payment of his income-tax dues by the evacuee vendor, but finally on the 27th August 1959, the Income-tax Department issued their clearance certificate after having created a charge upon certain properties of Reshiram for satisfaction of the momenta dues. This clearance certificate enabled further progress in the case, and on the 9th January 1960, the sale-deed was executed by the attorney for the vendor. On the 12th January 1960, it was duly registered and mutation of names was made in the survey register. The Custodian duly confirmed the sale on the 24th May 1950. There was, however, an allottee living in the premises named Muhammad Heifetz Bidding, the second respondent before us, and he moved against the confirmation with the result that on the 25th February 1961, the Custodian set aside the order of the 24th May 1960 confirming the sale and at the same time, granted permission to the vendees to apply for a fresh certificate under section 21 of the Act of 1957. The solitary ground upon which this action was taken was stated in the following terms —— “Mr. Zahiruddin (counsel for the vendees) concedes that the attorney was authorized to execute sale-deed in 1950, but he has done so m 1960. It is this sale-deed which has been confirmed by the Additional Custodian E. P. Karachi. Section 21 of Act XII of 1957 prescribed a limit on use of authority to an attorney to execute a sale-deed within months. The attorney has admittedly executed the sale-deed 3 years after the Act. Sale-deed thus executed is the clear contravention of section 21 of the Act and cannot therefore be confirmed”, “Mr. Zahiruddin concedes the legal position urged in the matter and has no objection to revision application being allowed”. We have endeavored with the assistance of the learned counsel of the appellants-Vendée, for the Custodian and for the allottee Muhammad Heifetz Siddiqui to discover exactly what was meant in this order by saying that section 21 of the Act of 1957 limited the use of an authority to an attorney to execute a sale-deed within four months. There is no mention of attorneys or agents in section 21, and no provision

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 29 (SUPREME COURT, 1962-11-29): Siddiqui to discover exactly what was meant in this order by saying that section 21 of the Act of 1957 limited the use of an authority to an attorney to execute a sale-deed within four months. There is no mention of attorneys or agents in section 21, and no provision in that section nor any term used therein is relevant to the conception of action by an agent or authorized attorney. It seems to us therefore that the Custodian was clearly wrong in finding illegality in the fact of the attorney having executed the s decreed three years after the Act. In the judgment of the High Court dismissing the writ petition an attempt was made to support that finding by a form of reasoning. This was the explanation offered — “The ground taken in the Custodian’s order is that subsection of section 21 of Act XII of 1957 has no application since the document WW. was presented more than four months after the passing of the Act, and more than four months after the grant of the certificate. Therefore, the applicant was relegated to the position which obtains in. The Registration Act regarding authority of the attorney to execute a sale-deed. We can see no reason to consider that this reasoning of the Custodian is not in accordance with law”’. From the fact that the vendees lost no time in moving the High Court against the order of the Custodian, it is evident that they did not regard themselves as being bound by the concession made on a post of law by their counsel before the Custodian. Nor were they so bound. However, in the judgment of the High Court, it is stated that that concession was rightly made, and this is probably to be understood in the light of the new explanation offered by the learned Judges of the Division Bench themselves. That explanation introduces a new assumption namely, that in the Registration Act, there is a provision which limits the authority of attorneys to execute a sale-deed in point of time. Again, we have relied on for the examination of this point, sought assistance from the learned counsel representing the three parties before us, and neither they nor we ourselves could discover the least basis for this proposition advanced by the Division Bench. That being the case, there is clearly ground for a fresh appraisement of the situation in the light of the relevant law. - We think TT admits of no doubt that section 21 of the Act of 1957 was, in its terms, adapted for application to transfers of evacuee property made by deeds executed after the passing of the Act of 1957, in respect of which certificates by the Custodian had been obtained on a date prior to the pass mg of that Act. The deed in this case was executed on the 9th Janus.Ry 1960, and was presented to the Registrar on the 12th January 1960, that is within the period limited by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1963 PLD 29?
Answer: From case 1963 PLD 29 (SUPREME COURT, 1962-11-29): of which certificates by the Custodian had been obtained on a date prior to the pass mg of that Act. The deed in this case was executed on the 9th Janus.Ry 1960, and was presented to the Registrar on the 12th January 1960, that is within the period limited by section in 23 of the Registration Act. The duty of the Registrar was, if the deed was not supported by a certificate, to direct the party concerned to obtain such a certificate. In the absence of such a certificate he was bound to refuse to register the deed. In this case, neither of the contingencies arises. He had no need to refer the parties to the Custodian because an effective certificate from the Custodian issued as far back as the 14th February 1950 was presented along with the deed. He could not refuse to register the deed, because all the conditions of section 23 of the Registration Act, as well as of section 21 of the Act of 1957 were satisfied. In the circumstance, the deed was rightly registered, and its subsequent confirmation of the 24th May 1960, was entirely in order. We accordingly allow this appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, direct that a writ of certiorari as prayed should issue, to call up the order of the Custodian dated the 25th February 1961, and his subsequent order of the 8th April 1961 refusing to review the former order, and to quash each of the said orders. As the proceedings which have given rise to the litigation were commenced by the respondent Muhammad Heifetz Siddiqui, we direct that he should bear the costs of the proceedings in this Court. Petition acc épée d

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition on . The case involved . The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by JUDGE Karachi 26.12.2024.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition and decided on .

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: . The judges presiding were: JUDGE Karachi 26.12.2024.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: . This case was heard in to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: and decree dated 27.04.2007 and 18.05.2007, respectively. Aggrieved by this decision, the petitioner filed Civil Appeal No. 95 of 2007 before the Court of Additional District Judge V, Karachi Central which was also dismissed affirming the decision of Trial Court vide judgment and decree dated 21.02.2009 and 28.02.2009, respectively. Dissatisfied with the said decision, the petitioner assailed it by filing IND Appeal No. 22 of 2009 before the High Court of Sindh, Karachi that too met with the fate of dismissal through the impugned judgment. Hence, the present petition. 3. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the impugned judgment is tainted with illegality, as well as misreading and non-reading of the evidence; that physical possession of the disputed property was never handed over to the respondent No.1 by the Donor; that marginal witnesses of the Deed of Declaration Confirmation of Oral Gift were not produced before the trial court; that the essential elements required for a valid and lawful gift are absent in the present case, thereby necessitating interference with the impugned judgment. 4. We have heard the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner and, with his able assistance, examined the material available on the record. D. Perusal of the record reflects that the disputed property was originally owned by the petitioner’s father, Syed Mahmood Ali, who was married to two wives, namely, MST. Akhtar c OOO o FF © at Q 4 5 8 5 8B S 5 FH OO 6 8§ SB 6 8 OO 8. me,~ = 8 & we B BB B a 8 2 & ES OT 08 it 9 OO Q {2 = in o 2 n 7 8 3 8 B 5 8 2 F 8 3 B % ¢ 3 8 B E 3 F Fe B a 2 BB SG SSS? re &§ GG F LB s 8, S F 2g 2 52 PO a GS ¢ PP OO 3 cf. o 9 "Sf BER BH =) Hi SP FF 5 SF OO 2 o Ff ¢do BP O so WO BB B § yr &2 ff 6 a BG B me 5 P Q EO) TO. O OO O “J Se SS 6 99 it Fe) D O oO a. RS 3885 gm 3 B B BP F 8 8 GB EF GS k FY © O ch =u IH Rey BY Ss EO OO GC 23 © 5 Ry o ct o 3). Fe) MS ) Po O 8eeee GG 3 F g § 6B EE EEE GE a of FB EE EE EE MO eye Ky =F o =p a. ca 5 =) 5 OE) O O Ne) ct FH CE £8 2 o &@ B @ 8 7 § 8 ; 25 & MC &£ OF ff 58 2» GO °° SO |F Hb BP w GF 78 GS Fag F CB eg &€ § GS 5 8 BG EE Bs ~$ @. ¢ B €8 BP BE F FT o B co o BS EG See €6 § § 2 F 2 aw a BS By Be § 2 o ff F 8 Fe FR So F 8 BD Pr @® § FW WW 8 B OD Re a x Bat 9 4H - © TO 3B 56» &§— @g 2 SO o 8B ¢§ MN 9. o a we © FH OGG no Pp 8 8 an a. ER Fe) on a ct HQ © a OO Q 5 7 ms“ EO ff A FS OB FF B o 68 OE 3 5 5 RN) o I'm © a OO Q. =) eye Sg a Sr OF 5 ° OO AO Ss O c F OO OF of pH a. © re i - 3G s 5 = CQ, O FH U1 go @ 7 2 a. o Ry ; o) t+ D OO CY of "F< 8 ¢ Bo's 8 “ FS g F » EF g ZO GP ¢ i OS =e =i g GS 2 F FF 8 GP Ew EF the 8 © Z mg en ee 3 5 - § F q 2 * ct ark ® 5 w an Q o © co a ie O So FF » o) AO 2 Y UP OS 5 ie) O o) e) a. RM TO. o TO 4 \o a CO. i ct TO.)6|U6U8 a 9 OO ct ~) © CS o) OO. in by La JE) o a) ® Se OT 6 ct 5 Se SRO TE SIRT OD ® 3 OT ie Mr) ‘o) on GO KR s n OD re? @® ®fsaa8 QNE Rh sf WO ff m8 SS AR SSS RRR B 5 OO SB the: EG Sg 3 SE RBEGSTSSSE F J O48 s 8 QS OG in FY am 9% ® GS 3 Ky © ©. o GT 9 a S326 To OE 8 8 OO Best [OS @, OS BP ¢g a2 SSQASTR SG o 6 am SES (8 OG 2 ff § » ¢ 8 PSSST EE eye SO 6 5B FS Gey Np 7 =e TESS ¢3< 5 Q Ko SSVUS—E mg To a eye L888 & © S GQ 3388 o ff: 8 “> CG. U8 SEG GES Se 2 op § 2 8 E Beset JA AA 9 RN eye) eye RS so “ B&B ff g o =O 8 in EO) EP ® - OC a3 ct Rey 5 SS S LE OD OF TSG LE S5 Os OF. OS Sig O o [OT in a 9 O ct GS S9R 785 RS - 6 © n a3 GL c in OO are Arrest RES he 5 ES) sim FSS ®2 go § a 5S SS SAS Sass Fe) 5 QA Fa 88 s 5 FY 3 6 Q GGA °§ Texas to & 5B 2 Pees LP. CS 3 SESA SLRS B no 2) 5 yes 9 KE O © IP Se ls Q G lesser e283 PRP S g¢ 8 OS Q is) 9) in. 9) I@Sq EH a i) =) 9 9. a ta SAS ES o> ° o JO 8a. Go Bo St EU kg nod PSS FB 5 So GF E83 oho the RES 2g g 8 s ® EE s) Of etc GS OO OSH ™ | See Joe Fe) in =7 TS ” o) “SR EOSHL ATS © >) 4 R Were n= Pp Q o So _ GG GT 6 4 Ssa8a F x 2 2B Q. Fe of Fees ¢ 8 38 |S AE 6 KS We song_ us =) SAS a8 7 ¢ 2. SBR SR OD ETE a r. EAE ss C 2 GF B82 5 a SERS SR GR Sh OF go 5. a 5 erg's o Log 3 8 2 Bo Best key EE " GE ® BR a OG Rh OO) © C68 Seas ct as O48 s) c for) 5 © e) ch 2 6 S6recE. KE) KD Fe) areas 2 BP ¢ g 8 Reg SR ERSS 2s § 2 one OS a 5 + IB O S ~EEE S 9 ¢ ct list 6 @, Q @) ct O in 8a 85 AO o a O NM KE) gees B 8 8 5 OU a8 5S Sr SEP PG 2 6 2 p en 3 3 Ry EU. =H a) =y an OT Go EO) Rey for) NBA ss COK © or ) RO SA. SH A. =, ct EO) Sense op Ss S mph ew Ss PQRTGSTSS 3 CO 4 Fess B OE a ¢8 Ba g 5 KB WW 5 5 p. 2) o on a) Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -5- 10. Section 152 of the Principles of Mohammedan Law elaborates on the manner in which delivery of possession is to be effected in the cases of immovable property. Sub-section (3) of Section 152 specifically addresses situations where both the donor and the donee are residing in the subject property at the time the gift is made. It clarifies that in such circumstances, physical departure by the donor or formal entry by the donee is not required. Instead, the gift is considered complete upon an overt act by the donor indicating an intention to transfer possession and divest control over the property. The question that arises, therefore, is what may constitute such an overt act. A relevant example of such an overt act is found in the Indian case titled Syed Md. Saleem Hashmi vs. Syed Abdul Fate and ORS [AIR 1972 Patna 279] where the donor and donee resided together in a house, the court held that the donor’s act of handing over the property papers to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition for delivery of possession, thereby fulfilling the necessary requirement for completing the gift. 11. Section 153 of the Principles of Mohammedan Law is particularly relevant to the facts of this case, as the donor was the husband, and the donee was his wife. A conjoint reading of Sections 152(3) and 153 clearly establishes that formal delivery of possession is not required when the donor is the husband and the donee are his wife, and both were residing together in the property at the time of the gift's declaration and creation. In such instances, the existing shared possession satisfies the requirement of delivery of possession, provided the donor has clearly divested himself of ownership and control over the property. See) - O on So 8 : 28 5 is o 9 = 6 3 ©) © Fe) o en =) Cc on @. A. in CY a: Bo a: ass a 9 D in o = age Ss 5 GG PO 5 D- phials OD to i) S) ct on z HH o e a in - ct Fe) HHO Fe) o - o 5 Bog HAE g Ff Dog 8 5 OO f 5 A g 8 y _— a FC Q. 38 ct a) ;. NM A. — SAE “n Q. 5 = 8 5 2 3 SY é AE's 8 : B : _ 5 « E. 5 AED EP Ca Pp © e en 5 8 a. AR Sh 8 |B S 5 OS. ” SSS Se's a of Fe Q » ° g 5 AAA so.3 EEL 9, 5 ® N 2. a § TE) Se 8 Ss 2 8 D i EAE d © a 9 8 ° a UE Fe : 2 3 8 ; Be HE Him w CB EO EE 3 a FP St S 8 9 a ° TS 5 ct R. 9 >. O ct TV, e) in OO NO GS 8 Pee ray } DD ct. 3 A a “< =a 8 } China i) c. 3 OO D : @). 2) for) (o) — 5 a BG 2 _ no GE i 9 5 8 2 8 c § EG -_ GF UE _—_ BE is ¢ 6 5 Fog, 2 5 Alban EB 5 S g 5 ct o ASE) OT Sr 8 — Ss 5 a BP 7 ES r - of FHIUHE ~) Fe) 5 : ct OO a OS 53 © get OO. HT a. Q Q. = Se Rags SSE be EU all —_. : S 6 P Ed b 8g " 8 a8 a 3g LY ° £ a. i k, 3 3 - D S IR 5 fan lad CN a d, in =r of Z g Rh Ra eke OS, re) = OF _. A) Y ES OT 'S 3 a4 f 5 D 5 8. a Type © 3 E D O : 2. EO o N Bar O} 8 Fe) o ct. S, OE @. C Roe 3 OF. ct Fe). G £88 5 S a P. OO 3 6 > a oh o 3 ct ° 5 o ct OO ie o ct © 23 a 8 " a _~ WS, IQ) ct OO Io) Ry "6 S OO. O 5 Z EO) 5 8, S) e) of O Ry OF. Fe) a =) 0. OO Ms c : ° Fe) EU ° 7) an 7°) © AZ) OO OT S s) 5 D _ @ $ GQ © ; © ” my a © © O co. of, » OO o § —@ F 6 8 re RN en a a a PEP pee PEP Gee EE EERE EEE 1 3 @ 2 7 ff Be F 8 5 @ 8 2 § Seeeeeaseeeeaseaee ” DQ _ Co OO a FF 5 8 o OO -. o) re OO 0 OO A OF § RT a OO g GG FB § SP & Bo's OO GA a OO ‘OO 6 F 8 B Gee EF EG B FP 2 # o eye EE EE EE et 5 GB B FB SC GB the Fe GG 5 t ®& FF 5 8B me a ff PB F 8 we F - £ ® #€ Lw 2 8 8 B s 5 5° 8 c 82 OF O&O SB 2 EO JP 8 FTF 6 8 Bog SP ERD. EEG EG LEE EE EE 5 GF 9 FP Pa et SREP EGE ES EE = op o 38 3 s 3g OO OG of BF ow 2 § FS 8 > 5S 2 FS EP ET EE FE EE OS Ff OE a 8 2 FB EE OE « 2 BP ( [ff 8 → 8 g FR 3S 5 8 P s FP |e @& EO m? OC TF me OB Us =) RSP g¢ FP 3 &§, 8 ere PGE Re EERE EE a 8 AO 8 F @ 62 2. §¢ 2g 8 3 b on ct AO O 222 398 $3 § Be FE p =F 6 5 FE ¢ &§ ¢ 8 Fe BE s |S & Fe) -. _. @. PEPE GRE a EE ERE SE 2 3 8 Peed yes bee Ba Ike EEE ct OD 9 pe [5 mm B POE 8 SP SRE Ez Ogre BEE o GE On TF 5 7 » 8 § FO F WP 8S «+ [FF & 8g SB S 2 3 8 Pe 8 Fe gE s 8 ; 5 Peale ES eye GH Ea EGR ESE SY G NR EE EE EE 5 5 Ss HR g¢ O © ¢ OF FS FF GG B Boe EE OE EE BB 8 8 OO oO OB EF BS 6 C o1 RF » a CO FF RF © 85 TO 8 2 @ © F 8 EE FB f B " £8 3 08 8 BP Fe g BR BE > S BY 02h Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -8- divested all his interest in the gifted property and placed the donee in possession, treating the donee as the full owner, the gift is valid and binding on the donor's heirs. The fact that one of the donor's heirs, who disputes the validity of the gift, is subsequently found in possession of the gifted property does not undermine the completeness or validity of the gift. 17. Similar principle was laid down by this Court in the case of Abram Ahmed and another v. Ir shad Ahmed [PLD 2014 Supreme Court 331] wherein it has been held that the appellants could not claim any rights in the property during the lifetime of their father who was acknowledged as the owner. The appellants had no standing to challenge the validity of the gift on the grounds of non-delivery of possession, merely because they might have inherited the property as legal heirs upon his death. At the time of the gift, the appellants’ possession, at best, was that of a licensee, and a licensee cannot challenge the validity of a gift based on possession, especially when they had no enforceable right or interest in the property. The appellants, being either licensees or prospective heirs, were, in essence, strangers to the gift. Furthermore, under Mohammedan Law, the concept of sees successions (the mere hope or expectation of inheriting) is not recognized, meaning a presumptive heir has no rights in the property of the deceased until his death occurs. Therefore, the appellants, as potential heirs, could not challenge the validity of the gift made by their father. The donor, having made the gift voluntarily, affirmed it during his lifetime, and never questioned its validity before his death, leaving his successors (legal heirs) without standing to dispute the gift’s validity. (Paragraph 2 of the Abram Case supra) Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -9- 18. In light of the above discussion, it can safely be concluded that all requisite elements for a valid and legally enforceable gift/FIBA are satisfied in the present case. 19. With regard to the petitioner's assertion that the Donor’s signatures were forged due to the donor's illness, which allegedly rendered it impossible for him to sign the deed, the learned High Court has rightly dealt with this argument in the impugned judgment, as reproduced below:- “Q. It is further observed that the said Declaration of oral gift executed by the Donor stood proved through attestation of registered deed and endorsement thereupon by the Sub-Registrar, which has got presumption of truth. It is further noted that the appellants have failed to produce any document regarding illness of their father at the relevant time and even since 1991 when such Deed was registered, the appellants did not make any claim over the disputed property or even in the year 1999, when their father expired. The appellant No. during her cross- examination has admitted that in the year 2000, she came to know about the transfer of disputed property in the name of the respondent No.1, but even then the suit was filed in the year 2004, after the lapse of four years. If the appellants were aggrieved of such transfer through gift then it was obligatory upon them to have challenged the same as soon as they acquired knowledge about the same, but it is matter of record that they (appellants) from their own conduct and attitude proved otherwise. When query made to the learned counsel for the appellants to explain that as to what were the circumstances which compelled the appellants to remain calm for such a long a period of four years, he had no answer.” 20. Turning to petitioner's contention that the marginal witnesses of the Deed of Declaration and Confirmation of Oral Gift were not produced before the learned Trial Court, suffice is to state that neither the writing nor the registration of a Deed of Declaration and Confirmation of Oral Gift is an _ essential requirement for the validity of a lawful gift under the law. It has been rightly observed by the learned High Court that Respondent No. has established that the document was duly executed and that the essential ingredients for the creation of a valid gift, including offer, acceptance, and delivery of possession, were Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -10- fulfilled. Conversely, the petitioners have failed to discharge their burden of proving otherwise. 21. Thus, High Court has elaborately and comprehensively considered all aspects of the matter, legal as well as factual. Normally, this Court does not interfere in the concurrent findings unless those are perverse, arbitrary, fanciful or capricious which, in our candid view, is not the position in the instant case. 22. In view thereof, we find the impugned judgment to be well-reasoned. Neither any misreading and non-reading nor any infirmity or illegality has been noticed on the record which could make a basis to take a contra view. Learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to make out a case for interference. C.P.1108-K of 2023 23. In this case petitioner invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, seeking an inquiry against the learned Senior Civil Judge who had rendered a decision against him in Civil Suit No. in favor of petitioner’s stepmother namely MST. Verona Begum (Respondent No.1 in C.P.552-K of 2021). 24. The present case arises from Suit No. 227 of 2009, instituted by MST. Verona Begum for Declaration, Possession, Mesne Profits, and Permanent Injunction against the petitioner and his brother, Maroon Ali, concerning the second and third floors of the disputed building, allegedly occupied by them. The suit was decreed in favor of MST. Verona Begum by the Hurd Senior Civil Judge, Karachi Central, through a judgment and decree dated 25.01.2023 and 30.01.2023. 295. Aggrieved by the said decision, the petitioner invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court, raising objections Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -11- on factual grounds. However, the petitioner failed to imp lead MST. Verona Begum as a necessary party and instead sought to imp lead the presiding judge of the learned trial court, requesting an inquiry against him. The petitioner contended that the learned trial court should not have announced the decision in the suit since a leave to appeal arising out of Find Appeal No.22 of 2009 filed by the petitioner concerning the same disputed property, was pending before the Supreme Court. 26. It is pertinent to note that the parties in both suits were identical, and the subject property was the same, with the sole exception that MST. Verona Begum was the plaintiff and the petitioner was the defendant in Suit No. 227 of 2009, whereas the petitioner was the plaintiff and MST. Verona Begum was the defendant in Suit No. 581 of 2004. 27. Record reveals that as Find Appeal No. 22 of 2009, arising out of Civil Suit No. 581 of 2004 and pertaining to the same property, filed by the petitioner, was pending adjudication before the High Court therefore learned trial court stayed the proceedings in Suit No. 227 of 2009. Dissatisfied with the stay order, MST. Verona Begum filed Civil Revision No. 07 of 2011 before the learned LST Additional District and Sessions Judge, Karachi Central, which was allowed in the following terms: “Perusal of the impugned order reveals that the suit under revision is at the stage for evidence of plaintiff's witness and same is not for judgment, so court below is required to record the evidence of parties if situation demands thereby court below deem it necessary at the time of judgments may wait for the decision of appeal No. filed by the respondent before Honorable High Court of Sindh at Karachi.” 28. In compliance therewith, the learned trial court vide order dated 28.07.2012, proceeded with the matter and stayed the announcement of decision on merits until decision of High Court. The defendants filed their written statements, the learned trial Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -12- court framed the issues, and the evidence of both parties was duly recorded. However, the pronouncement of the judgment was deferred pending the decision of the High Court. After the High Court rendered its judgment dated 06.04.2021, MST. Verona Begum filed an application before trial Court for the reopening of the suit and the announcement of the decision. Consequently, the trial court resumed the proceedings, and after considering the evidence and hearing the parties, the suit was decided on its merits. 29. Perusal of the material available on the _ record indicates that the suit proceeded in the normal course. The defendants (petitioner in the present case) filed their written statement, issues were framed, evidence adduced by both parties was recorded, and a final decision was rendered on its merits after the decision of High Court in the same matter. It is important to note that the announcement of decision in the suit was kept in abeyance for more than 10 years i.e. from 28.07.2012 to 25.01.2023. Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the learned trial court should have stayed the announcement of the decision until the announcement of Supreme Court's decision is misconceived and was rightly addressed by the learned trial court in paragraph 34 of its judgment, as reproduced below: 34. I have heard the learned counsel for the defendant No.1. He argued that He has filed civil petition for leave to appeal No.552- K/2021 before unravel supreme court against the judgment dated 6th April 2021 up the Honorable High Court of Sindh whereby the 2nd appeal no.22 of 2009 preferred by defendant number one against the plaintiff was dismissed. He submitted that the judgment may not be pronounced till final disposal of the civil petition for leave to appeal. Keeping in view the above submissions it is matter of record that there is no stay or restraining order of the Honorable Supreme Court against the instant suit, moreover, the instant suit was kept in abeyance vide order dated 28th July 2012 till decision of the 24 appeal no before the High Court of Sindh which is already decided. In the circumstances, I see no reason to keep the instant civil suit pending.” Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -13- 30. It is a well-settled principle of law that where an alternative and efficacious remedy is available under the ordinary legal framework, constitutional jurisdiction cannot be invoked to bypass the statutory mechanisms in place. Constitutional jurisdiction is not intended to substitute the ordinary remedies provided under the law. 31. Dissatisfaction with a judicial decision alone cannot serve as a valid basis for invoking this Court’s extraordinary jurisdiction. The independence of the judiciary is a cornerstone of the legal system, ensuring that judicial officers are safeguarded by law for decisions made in the exercise of their judicial functions. Furthermore, the issue of whether a decision in the said suit may or may not have been rendered during the pendency of a similar matter before the Supreme Court is a legal question that can be adequately addressed by the appellate court. Therefore, directly raising allegations against the learned presiding Judge of the trial court is entirely unwarranted. Allowing constitutional petitions of this nature would undermine the autonomy of the judiciary and erode public confidence in the judicial process. 32. Moreover, it is evident from the record that the petitioner had already availed the statutory remedy of appeal available under the law by filing Civil Appeal No. before the appellate court, thereby challenging the judgment in accordance with the prescribed legal procedure. The High Court, in dismissing the constitutional petition, rightly observed that:- “2. Grievance of the petitioner revolves around judgment dated 30.01.2023 passed by the trial court in Civil Suit No. and per petitioner said judgment has been assailed by him in Cool Appeal No.40/ 2023. In wake of above, we do not find any force in the instant petition, which is accordingly dismissed a/w listed matters.” Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -14- 33. In view of the foregoing, no interference is warranted with the impugned judgment dated 06.04.2021 and impugned order dated 17.08.2023 passed by the High Court. Accordingly, both these petitions, being devoid of merits, are dismissed and leave is refused. JUDGE JUDGE Karachi 26.12.2024 APPROVED FOR REPORTING Paras Afar, LC*

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): and decree dated 27.04.2007 and 18.05.2007, respectively. Aggrieved by this decision, the petitioner filed Civil Appeal No. 95 of 2007 before the Court of Additional District Judge V, Karachi Central which was also dismissed affirming the decision of Trial Court vide judgment and decree dated 21.02.2009 and 28.02.2009, respectively. Dissatisfied with the said decision, the petitioner assailed it by filing IND Appeal No. 22 of 2009 before the High Court of Sindh, Karachi that too met with the fate of dismissal through the impugned judgment. Hence, the present petition. 3. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the impugned judgment is tainted with illegality, as well as misreading and non-reading of the evidence; that physical possession of the disputed property was never handed over to the respondent No.1 by the Donor; that marginal witnesses of the Deed of Declaration Confirmation of Oral Gift were not produced before the trial court; that the essential elements required for a valid and lawful gift are absent in the present case, thereby necessitating interference with the impugned judgment. 4. We have heard the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner and, with his able assistance, examined the material available on the record. D. Perusal of the record reflects that the disputed property was originally owned by the petitioner’s father, Syed Mahmood Ali, who was married to two wives, namely, MST. Akhtar c OOO o FF © at Q 4 5 8 5 8B S 5 FH OO 6 8§ SB 6 8 OO 8. me,~ = 8 & we B BB B a 8 2 & ES OT 08 it 9 OO Q {2 = in o 2 n 7 8 3 8 B 5 8 2 F 8 3 B % ¢ 3 8 B E 3 F Fe B a 2 BB SG SSS? re &§ GG F LB s 8, S F 2g 2 52 PO a GS ¢ PP OO 3 cf. o 9 "Sf BER BH =) Hi SP FF 5 SF OO 2 o Ff ¢do BP O so WO BB B § yr &2 ff 6 a BG B me 5 P Q EO) TO. O OO O “J Se SS 6 99 it Fe) D O oO a. RS 3885 gm 3 B B BP F 8 8 GB EF GS k FY © O ch =u IH Rey BY Ss EO OO GC 23 © 5 Ry o ct o 3). Fe) MS ) Po O 8eeee GG 3 F g § 6B EE EEE GE a of FB EE EE EE MO eye Ky =F o =p a. ca 5 =) 5 OE) O O Ne) ct FH CE £8 2 o &@ B @ 8 7 § 8 ; 25 & MC &£ OF ff 58 2» GO °° SO |F Hb BP w GF 78 GS Fag F CB eg &€ § GS 5 8 BG EE Bs ~$ @. ¢ B €8 BP BE F FT o B co

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): &@ B @ 8 7 § 8 ; 25 & MC &£ OF ff 58 2» GO °° SO |F Hb BP w GF 78 GS Fag F CB eg &€ § GS 5 8 BG EE Bs ~$ @. ¢ B €8 BP BE F FT o B co o BS EG See €6 § § 2 F 2 aw a BS By Be § 2 o ff F 8 Fe FR So F 8 BD Pr @® § FW WW 8 B OD Re a x Bat 9 4H - © TO 3B 56» &§— @g 2 SO o 8B ¢§ MN 9. o a we © FH OGG no Pp 8 8 an a. ER Fe) on a ct HQ © a OO Q 5 7 ms“ EO ff A FS OB FF B o 68 OE 3 5 5 RN) o I'm © a OO Q. =) eye Sg a Sr OF 5 ° OO AO Ss O c F OO OF of pH a. © re i - 3G s 5 = CQ, O FH U1 go @ 7 2 a. o Ry ; o) t+ D OO CY of "F< 8 ¢ Bo's 8 “ FS g F » EF g ZO GP ¢ i OS =e =i g GS 2 F FF 8 GP Ew EF the 8 © Z mg en ee 3 5 - § F q 2 * ct ark ® 5 w an Q o © co a ie O So FF » o) AO 2 Y UP OS 5 ie) O o) e) a. RM TO. o TO 4 \o a CO. i ct TO.)6|U6U8 a 9 OO ct ~) © CS o) OO. in by La JE) o a) ® Se OT 6 ct 5 Se SRO TE SIRT OD ® 3 OT ie Mr) ‘o) on GO KR s n OD re? @® ®fsaa8 QNE Rh sf WO ff m8 SS AR SSS RRR B 5 OO SB the: EG Sg 3 SE RBEGSTSSSE F J O48 s 8 QS OG in FY am 9% ® GS 3 Ky © ©. o GT 9 a S326 To OE 8 8 OO Best [OS @, OS BP ¢g a2 SSQASTR SG o 6 am SES (8 OG 2 ff § » ¢ 8 PSSST EE eye SO 6 5B FS Gey Np 7 =e TESS ¢3< 5 Q Ko SSVUS—E mg To a eye L888 & © S GQ 3388 o ff: 8 “> CG. U8 SEG GES Se 2 op § 2 8 E Beset JA AA 9 RN eye) eye RS so “ B&B ff g o =O 8 in EO) EP ® - OC a3 ct Rey 5 SS S LE OD OF TSG LE S5 Os OF. OS Sig O o [OT in a 9 O ct GS S9R 785 RS - 6 © n a3 GL c in OO are Arrest RES he 5 ES) sim FSS ®2 go § a 5S

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): a3 ct Rey 5 SS S LE OD OF TSG LE S5 Os OF. OS Sig O o [OT in a 9 O ct GS S9R 785 RS - 6 © n a3 GL c in OO are Arrest RES he 5 ES) sim FSS ®2 go § a 5S SS SAS Sass Fe) 5 QA Fa 88 s 5 FY 3 6 Q GGA °§ Texas to & 5B 2 Pees LP. CS 3 SESA SLRS B no 2) 5 yes 9 KE O © IP Se ls Q G lesser e283 PRP S g¢ 8 OS Q is) 9) in. 9) I@Sq EH a i) =) 9 9. a ta SAS ES o> ° o JO 8a. Go Bo St EU kg nod PSS FB 5 So GF E83 oho the RES 2g g 8 s ® EE s) Of etc GS OO OSH ™ | See Joe Fe) in =7 TS ” o) “SR EOSHL ATS © >) 4 R Were n= Pp Q o So _ GG GT 6 4 Ssa8a F x 2 2B Q. Fe of Fees ¢ 8 38 |S AE 6 KS We song_ us =) SAS a8 7 ¢ 2. SBR SR OD ETE a r. EAE ss C 2 GF B82 5 a SERS SR GR Sh OF go 5. a 5 erg's o Log 3 8 2 Bo Best key EE " GE ® BR a OG Rh OO) © C68 Seas ct as O48 s) c for) 5 © e) ch 2 6 S6recE. KE) KD Fe) areas 2 BP ¢ g 8 Reg SR ERSS 2s § 2 one OS a 5 + IB O S ~EEE S 9 ¢ ct list 6 @, Q @) ct O in 8a 85 AO o a O NM KE) gees B 8 8 5 OU a8 5S Sr SEP PG 2 6 2 p en 3 3 Ry EU. =H a) =y an OT Go EO) Rey for) NBA ss COK © or ) RO SA. SH A. =, ct EO) Sense op Ss S mph ew Ss PQRTGSTSS 3 CO 4 Fess B OE a ¢8 Ba g 5 KB WW 5 5 p. 2) o on a) Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -5- 10. Section 152 of the Principles of Mohammedan Law elaborates on the manner in which delivery of possession is to be effected in the cases of immovable property. Sub-section (3) of Section 152 specifically addresses situations where both the donor and the donee are residing in the subject property at the time the gift is made. It clarifies that in such circumstances, physical departure by the donor or formal entry by the donee is not required. Instead, the gift is considered complete upon an overt act by the donor indicating an intention to transfer possession and divest control over the property. The question that arises, therefore, is what may constitute such an overt act. A relevant example of such an overt

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): the donee is not required. Instead, the gift is considered complete upon an overt act by the donor indicating an intention to transfer possession and divest control over the property. The question that arises, therefore, is what may constitute such an overt act. A relevant example of such an overt act is found in the Indian case titled Syed Md. Saleem Hashmi vs. Syed Abdul Fate and ORS [AIR 1972 Patna 279] where the donor and donee resided together in a house, the court held that the donor’s act of handing over the property papers to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition for delivery of possession, thereby fulfilling the necessary requirement for completing the gift. 11. Section 153 of the Principles of Mohammedan Law is particularly relevant to the facts of this case, as the donor was the husband, and the donee was his wife. A conjoint reading of Sections 152(3) and 153 clearly establishes that formal delivery of possession is not required when the donor is the husband and the donee are his wife, and both were residing together in the property at the time of the gift's declaration and creation. In such instances, the existing shared possession satisfies the requirement of delivery of possession, provided the donor has clearly divested himself of ownership and control over the property. See) - O on So 8 : 28 5 is o 9 = 6 3 ©) © Fe) o en =) Cc on @. A. in CY a: Bo a: ass a 9 D in o = age Ss 5 GG PO 5 D- phials OD to i) S) ct on z HH o e a in - ct Fe) HHO Fe) o - o 5 Bog HAE g Ff Dog 8 5 OO f 5 A g 8 y _— a FC Q. 38 ct a) ;. NM A. — SAE “n Q. 5 = 8 5 2 3 SY é AE's 8 : B : _ 5 « E. 5 AED EP Ca Pp © e en 5 8 a. AR Sh 8 |B S 5 OS. ” SSS Se's a of Fe Q » ° g 5 AAA so.3 EEL 9, 5 ® N 2. a § TE) Se 8 Ss 2 8 D i EAE d © a 9 8 ° a UE Fe : 2 3 8 ; Be HE Him w CB EO EE 3 a FP St S 8 9 a ° TS 5 ct R. 9 >. O ct TV, e) in OO NO GS 8 Pee ray } DD ct. 3 A a “< =a 8 } China i) c. 3 OO D : @). 2) for) (o) — 5 a BG 2 _ no GE i 9 5 8 2 8 c § EG -_ GF UE _—_ BE is ¢ 6 5 Fog, 2 5 Alban EB 5 S g 5 ct o ASE) OT Sr 8 — Ss 5 a BP 7 ES

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): for) (o) — 5 a BG 2 _ no GE i 9 5 8 2 8 c § EG -_ GF UE _—_ BE is ¢ 6 5 Fog, 2 5 Alban EB 5 S g 5 ct o ASE) OT Sr 8 — Ss 5 a BP 7 ES r - of FHIUHE ~) Fe) 5 : ct OO a OS 53 © get OO. HT a. Q Q. = Se Rags SSE be EU all —_. : S 6 P Ed b 8g " 8 a8 a 3g LY ° £ a. i k, 3 3 - D S IR 5 fan lad CN a d, in =r of Z g Rh Ra eke OS, re) = OF _. A) Y ES OT 'S 3 a4 f 5 D 5 8. a Type © 3 E D O : 2. EO o N Bar O} 8 Fe) o ct. S, OE @. C Roe 3 OF. ct Fe). G £88 5 S a P. OO 3 6 > a oh o 3 ct ° 5 o ct OO ie o ct © 23 a 8 " a _~ WS, IQ) ct OO Io) Ry "6 S OO. O 5 Z EO) 5 8, S) e) of O Ry OF. Fe) a =) 0. OO Ms c : ° Fe) EU ° 7) an 7°) © AZ) OO OT S s) 5 D _ @ $ GQ © ; © ” my a © © O co. of, » OO o § —@ F 6 8 re RN en a a a PEP pee PEP Gee EE EERE EEE 1 3 @ 2 7 ff Be F 8 5 @ 8 2 § Seeeeeaseeeeaseaee ” DQ _ Co OO a FF 5 8 o OO -. o) re OO 0 OO A OF § RT a OO g GG FB § SP & Bo's OO GA a OO ‘OO 6 F 8 B Gee EF EG B FP 2 # o eye EE EE EE et 5 GB B FB SC GB the Fe GG 5 t ®& FF 5 8B me a ff PB F 8 we F - £ ® #€ Lw 2 8 8 B s 5 5° 8 c 82 OF O&O SB 2 EO JP 8 FTF 6 8 Bog SP ERD. EEG EG LEE EE EE 5 GF 9 FP Pa et SREP EGE ES EE = op o 38 3 s 3g OO OG of BF ow 2 § FS 8 > 5S 2 FS EP ET EE FE EE OS Ff OE a 8 2 FB EE OE « 2 BP ( [ff 8 → 8 g FR 3S 5 8 P s FP |e @& EO m? OC TF me OB Us =) RSP g¢ FP 3 &§, 8 ere PGE Re EERE EE a 8 AO 8 F @ 62 2. §¢ 2g 8 3 b on ct AO O 222 398 $3 § Be FE p =F 6

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): P s FP |e @& EO m? OC TF me OB Us =) RSP g¢ FP 3 &§, 8 ere PGE Re EERE EE a 8 AO 8 F @ 62 2. §¢ 2g 8 3 b on ct AO O 222 398 $3 § Be FE p =F 6 5 FE ¢ &§ ¢ 8 Fe BE s |S & Fe) -. _. @. PEPE GRE a EE ERE SE 2 3 8 Peed yes bee Ba Ike EEE ct OD 9 pe [5 mm B POE 8 SP SRE Ez Ogre BEE o GE On TF 5 7 » 8 § FO F WP 8S «+ [FF & 8g SB S 2 3 8 Pe 8 Fe gE s 8 ; 5 Peale ES eye GH Ea EGR ESE SY G NR EE EE EE 5 5 Ss HR g¢ O © ¢ OF FS FF GG B Boe EE OE EE BB 8 8 OO oO OB EF BS 6 C o1 RF » a CO FF RF © 85 TO 8 2 @ © F 8 EE FB f B " £8 3 08 8 BP Fe g BR BE > S BY 02h Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -8- divested all his interest in the gifted property and placed the donee in possession, treating the donee as the full owner, the gift is valid and binding on the donor's heirs. The fact that one of the donor's heirs, who disputes the validity of the gift, is subsequently found in possession of the gifted property does not undermine the completeness or validity of the gift. 17. Similar principle was laid down by this Court in the case of Abram Ahmed and another v. Ir shad Ahmed [PLD 2014 Supreme Court 331] wherein it has been held that the appellants could not claim any rights in the property during the lifetime of their father who was acknowledged as the owner. The appellants had no standing to challenge the validity of the gift on the grounds of non-delivery of possession, merely because they might have inherited the property as legal heirs upon his death. At the time of the gift, the appellants’ possession, at best, was that of a licensee, and a licensee cannot challenge the validity of a gift based on possession, especially when they had no enforceable right or interest in the property. The appellants, being either licensees or prospective heirs, were, in essence, strangers to the gift. Furthermore, under Mohammedan Law, the concept of sees successions (the mere hope or expectation of inheriting) is not recognized, meaning a presumptive heir has no rights in the property of the deceased until his death occurs. Therefore, the appellants, as potential heirs, could not challenge the validity of the gift made by their father. The donor, having made the gift voluntarily, affirmed it during his lifetime, and never questioned its validity before his death, leaving his successors (legal heirs) without standing to dispute the gift’s

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): occurs. Therefore, the appellants, as potential heirs, could not challenge the validity of the gift made by their father. The donor, having made the gift voluntarily, affirmed it during his lifetime, and never questioned its validity before his death, leaving his successors (legal heirs) without standing to dispute the gift’s validity. (Paragraph 2 of the Abram Case supra) Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -9- 18. In light of the above discussion, it can safely be concluded that all requisite elements for a valid and legally enforceable gift/FIBA are satisfied in the present case. 19. With regard to the petitioner's assertion that the Donor’s signatures were forged due to the donor's illness, which allegedly rendered it impossible for him to sign the deed, the learned High Court has rightly dealt with this argument in the impugned judgment, as reproduced below:- “Q. It is further observed that the said Declaration of oral gift executed by the Donor stood proved through attestation of registered deed and endorsement thereupon by the Sub-Registrar, which has got presumption of truth. It is further noted that the appellants have failed to produce any document regarding illness of their father at the relevant time and even since 1991 when such Deed was registered, the appellants did not make any claim over the disputed property or even in the year 1999, when their father expired. The appellant No. during her cross- examination has admitted that in the year 2000, she came to know about the transfer of disputed property in the name of the respondent No.1, but even then the suit was filed in the year 2004, after the lapse of four years. If the appellants were aggrieved of such transfer through gift then it was obligatory upon them to have challenged the same as soon as they acquired knowledge about the same, but it is matter of record that they (appellants) from their own conduct and attitude proved otherwise. When query made to the learned counsel for the appellants to explain that as to what were the circumstances which compelled the appellants to remain calm for such a long a period of four years, he had no answer.” 20. Turning to petitioner's contention that the marginal witnesses of the Deed of Declaration and Confirmation of Oral Gift were not produced before the learned Trial Court, suffice is to state that neither the writing nor the registration of a Deed of Declaration and Confirmation of Oral Gift is an _ essential requirement for the validity of a lawful gift under the law. It has been rightly observed by the learned High Court that Respondent No. has established that the document was duly executed and that the essential ingredients for the creation of a valid gift, including offer, acceptance, and delivery of possession, were Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -10- fulfilled. Conversely, the petitioners have failed to discharge their burden of proving otherwise. 21. Thus, High Court has elaborately and comprehensively considered all aspects

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): essential ingredients for the creation of a valid gift, including offer, acceptance, and delivery of possession, were Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -10- fulfilled. Conversely, the petitioners have failed to discharge their burden of proving otherwise. 21. Thus, High Court has elaborately and comprehensively considered all aspects of the matter, legal as well as factual. Normally, this Court does not interfere in the concurrent findings unless those are perverse, arbitrary, fanciful or capricious which, in our candid view, is not the position in the instant case. 22. In view thereof, we find the impugned judgment to be well-reasoned. Neither any misreading and non-reading nor any infirmity or illegality has been noticed on the record which could make a basis to take a contra view. Learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to make out a case for interference. C.P.1108-K of 2023 23. In this case petitioner invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, seeking an inquiry against the learned Senior Civil Judge who had rendered a decision against him in Civil Suit No. in favor of petitioner’s stepmother namely MST. Verona Begum (Respondent No.1 in C.P.552-K of 2021). 24. The present case arises from Suit No. 227 of 2009, instituted by MST. Verona Begum for Declaration, Possession, Mesne Profits, and Permanent Injunction against the petitioner and his brother, Maroon Ali, concerning the second and third floors of the disputed building, allegedly occupied by them. The suit was decreed in favor of MST. Verona Begum by the Hurd Senior Civil Judge, Karachi Central, through a judgment and decree dated 25.01.2023 and 30.01.2023. 295. Aggrieved by the said decision, the petitioner invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court, raising objections Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -11- on factual grounds. However, the petitioner failed to imp lead MST. Verona Begum as a necessary party and instead sought to imp lead the presiding judge of the learned trial court, requesting an inquiry against him. The petitioner contended that the learned trial court should not have announced the decision in the suit since a leave to appeal arising out of Find Appeal No.22 of 2009 filed by the petitioner concerning the same disputed property, was pending before the Supreme Court. 26. It is pertinent to note that the parties in both suits were identical, and the subject property was the same, with the sole exception that MST. Verona Begum was the plaintiff and the petitioner was the defendant in Suit No. 227 of 2009, whereas the petitioner was the plaintiff and MST. Verona Begum was the defendant in Suit No. 581 of 2004. 27. Record reveals that as Find Appeal No. 22 of 2009, arising out of Civil Suit No. 581 of 2004 and pertaining to the same property, filed by the petitioner, was pending adjudication before the High Court therefore learned trial court stayed the proceedings in Suit No. 227 of 2009. Dissatisfied

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): Record reveals that as Find Appeal No. 22 of 2009, arising out of Civil Suit No. 581 of 2004 and pertaining to the same property, filed by the petitioner, was pending adjudication before the High Court therefore learned trial court stayed the proceedings in Suit No. 227 of 2009. Dissatisfied with the stay order, MST. Verona Begum filed Civil Revision No. 07 of 2011 before the learned LST Additional District and Sessions Judge, Karachi Central, which was allowed in the following terms: “Perusal of the impugned order reveals that the suit under revision is at the stage for evidence of plaintiff's witness and same is not for judgment, so court below is required to record the evidence of parties if situation demands thereby court below deem it necessary at the time of judgments may wait for the decision of appeal No. filed by the respondent before Honorable High Court of Sindh at Karachi.” 28. In compliance therewith, the learned trial court vide order dated 28.07.2012, proceeded with the matter and stayed the announcement of decision on merits until decision of High Court. The defendants filed their written statements, the learned trial Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -12- court framed the issues, and the evidence of both parties was duly recorded. However, the pronouncement of the judgment was deferred pending the decision of the High Court. After the High Court rendered its judgment dated 06.04.2021, MST. Verona Begum filed an application before trial Court for the reopening of the suit and the announcement of the decision. Consequently, the trial court resumed the proceedings, and after considering the evidence and hearing the parties, the suit was decided on its merits. 29. Perusal of the material available on the _ record indicates that the suit proceeded in the normal course. The defendants (petitioner in the present case) filed their written statement, issues were framed, evidence adduced by both parties was recorded, and a final decision was rendered on its merits after the decision of High Court in the same matter. It is important to note that the announcement of decision in the suit was kept in abeyance for more than 10 years i.e. from 28.07.2012 to 25.01.2023. Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the learned trial court should have stayed the announcement of the decision until the announcement of Supreme Court's decision is misconceived and was rightly addressed by the learned trial court in paragraph 34 of its judgment, as reproduced below: 34. I have heard the learned counsel for the defendant No.1. He argued that He has filed civil petition for leave to appeal No.552- K/2021 before unravel supreme court against the judgment dated 6th April 2021 up the Honorable High Court of Sindh whereby the 2nd appeal no.22 of 2009 preferred by defendant number one against the plaintiff was dismissed. He submitted that the judgment may not be pronounced till final disposal of the civil petition for leave to appeal. Keeping in view

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (to the donee was a valid overt act, satisfying the requisite condition, ): 6th April 2021 up the Honorable High Court of Sindh whereby the 2nd appeal no.22 of 2009 preferred by defendant number one against the plaintiff was dismissed. He submitted that the judgment may not be pronounced till final disposal of the civil petition for leave to appeal. Keeping in view the above submissions it is matter of record that there is no stay or restraining order of the Honorable Supreme Court against the instant suit, moreover, the instant suit was kept in abeyance vide order dated 28th July 2012 till decision of the 24 appeal no before the High Court of Sindh which is already decided. In the circumstances, I see no reason to keep the instant civil suit pending.” Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -13- 30. It is a well-settled principle of law that where an alternative and efficacious remedy is available under the ordinary legal framework, constitutional jurisdiction cannot be invoked to bypass the statutory mechanisms in place. Constitutional jurisdiction is not intended to substitute the ordinary remedies provided under the law. 31. Dissatisfaction with a judicial decision alone cannot serve as a valid basis for invoking this Court’s extraordinary jurisdiction. The independence of the judiciary is a cornerstone of the legal system, ensuring that judicial officers are safeguarded by law for decisions made in the exercise of their judicial functions. Furthermore, the issue of whether a decision in the said suit may or may not have been rendered during the pendency of a similar matter before the Supreme Court is a legal question that can be adequately addressed by the appellate court. Therefore, directly raising allegations against the learned presiding Judge of the trial court is entirely unwarranted. Allowing constitutional petitions of this nature would undermine the autonomy of the judiciary and erode public confidence in the judicial process. 32. Moreover, it is evident from the record that the petitioner had already availed the statutory remedy of appeal available under the law by filing Civil Appeal No. before the appellate court, thereby challenging the judgment in accordance with the prescribed legal procedure. The High Court, in dismissing the constitutional petition, rightly observed that:- “2. Grievance of the petitioner revolves around judgment dated 30.01.2023 passed by the trial court in Civil Suit No. and per petitioner said judgment has been assailed by him in Cool Appeal No.40/ 2023. In wake of above, we do not find any force in the instant petition, which is accordingly dismissed a/w listed matters.” Civil Petition No.552-K of 2021 1108-K of 2023 -14- 33. In view of the foregoing, no interference is warranted with the impugned judgment dated 06.04.2021 and impugned order dated 17.08.2023 passed by the High Court. Accordingly, both these petitions, being devoid of merits, are dismissed and leave is refused. JUDGE JUDGE Karachi 26.12.2024 APPROVED FOR REPORTING Paras Afar, LC*

Question: What is case 1979 SCMR 191 about?
Answer: Case 1979 SCMR 191 was decided by Date on 1978-12-23. The case involved CUSTODIAN OF ENEMY PROPERTY (PETITIONER) VERSUS HOSHANG M DASTUR AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include SUPREME COURT RULES 1956 - O. XIII, R. SUPREME COURT RULES, 1956,O. XIII - R. AND O. XLIX, R. 6. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD AKRAM, KARAM ELAHEE CHAUHANAND NASIM HASAN SHAH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: In case 1979 SCMR 191, the court applied the following statutes: SUPREME COURT RULES 1956 - O. XIII, R. SUPREME COURT RULES, 1956,O. XIII - R. AND O. XLIX, R. 6. This case was heard in Date and decided on 1978-12-23.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1979 SCMR 191 were: SHEIKH, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY FAZAFY* HUSSAIN, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOJR PETITIONER. SYED IKHLAQ HUSSAIN, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY YAQUB HUSSAIN ZAIDI, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD AKRAM, KARAM ELAHEE CHAUHANAND NASIM HASAN SHAH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: The parties in case 1979 SCMR 191 were: CUSTODIAN OF ENEMY PROPERTY (PETITIONER) VERSUS HOSHANG M DASTUR AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in Date.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1979 SCMR 191.
Answer: Judgment Muhammad Abram, J-This is a petition under Article 185 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan for leave to appeal from the judgment and decree dated 11th of January 1975/15th of February 1977* passed by a Division Bench of the then High Court of Sind Baluchistan at Karachi in Letters Patent Appeal Nor 104 of 1968. 1\.j. i- This dispute relates to \a plot* bearing’ Survey No. 29, Sheet S. B. 5, measure 2724 square. Yards situated in Saddam; Bazaar Quarters, Karachi It belonged to 'Dr. Eddie ’’P. Baruch respondent No. and has since vested in the petitioner, the Custodian of Enemy Property. It appears that in the year 1963, the,plamntiffS-?respondents to r 5 harm, brought a suit against the defendants-respondents No. and. some.others on the original civil side \ of. the former High* Court of West Pakistan, Karachi Bench’, Karachi, for specific performance of an agreement dated '30th of August: 1956 for lease of this; plot of 1and with the option topurchasethesame and for recovery of a sum of Rs. 6,20,000. In the course of the sooty defendant. No.7, wast IJ VK.7_ \Jay declared as an enemy national, and thereby.the, property in dispute was vested in the Custodian of x Enemy Property who was imp leaded.1 as an additional defendant INI the.suit.;; Eventually, on the 11th of January 1967, a learned Singly Judge of. the High Court decreed the suit,of the plaintiffs against respondent No, 7.NAND.petitioner.also.: 1 for specific performance of the contract of please, dated;;30th of August. 1956 with pption.to purchase the said plot and Tor recovery of a sum‘of Rs; 1,55,000 as damages in addition to future damages at the. rate :oars.5,000 per-month. from the date of the - suit till the execution;Of the lease deed. ‘ 1 This petitioner then filed :the Letters Patent Appeal No. 104 of 1968 under clause. 10 of the Letters Patent against; the respondents from. The judgment’; and 'decree of the learned Single ;Judge. During the pendency of that appeal on the’ 14th of October 1976, : the plaintiffs. Filed ;ANV application for amendment of the judgment ‘anddj&ree 6f the'trial Court -alleging that. Their main prayer in,the amended7plamt: was for a decree, for specific performance of t the; option to.":purchase the property for Rs. 4,76,000 but that WW. the'learned; Single Judge shad inadvertently granted. the, alternative prayer for specific performance the control act. Of lease with option to purchase the property and that this error’ was due to an accidental slip or omission on the part of the Court to police their main prayer contained in para.' 22-A of the amended plaint! A notice' of this* "application was also sent to the parties in the appeal. On the 11th of January 1977, a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed'with cost the Letters Patent Appeal of the petitioner and subsequently by a separate order passed* on the 15th of February 1977, allowed the application for the necessary correction the judgment and decree, passed in terms of the ma'am prayer contamed’in paragraph 22-A of the amended plant: in. addition to the other reliefs already decreed in favor of the plaintiffs: Accordingly, the amended decree MN the appeal/ prepared by the Court was actually signed only on the 25th of March 1977. The petitioner, however, filed this petition for special leave from the \judgment and decree in this Court o'may on the 9th of January 1978 The office has raised the objection that it is barred by 272 days. Along with the main petition the petitioner has also filed a separate application under ? Order XIII, rule read with Order LIX, rule 6 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1956 for condonation of the delay. We partly heard the learned counsel for the petitioner in the application for condonation of the delay on the 9th of November 1978 and found that the allegations in the application were highly vague. At the request of the learned counsel we, therefore, allowed an adjournment to him to supplement the allegations in his application for condonation of the delay with an affidavit containing additional facts. The petitioner has accordingly filed an affidavit of Mr. Muhammad Anwar, Assistant Custodian (Law) supplementing the allegations in support of his application for condonation of delay. He has affirmed on solemn affirmation that he received an uncertified copy of the judgment dated 11th of January 1977 passed by the Division Bench from the office of his learned counsel Mr. Ali Ahmad Feel, Advocate, Karachi and had put up a note on the 17th of February 1977, seeking the advice of the Law Division whether the Custodian should go up in appeal to the Supreme Court or not. The case was marked to the Law Decision on the 19th of February 1977 WW. and was then examined by the Solicitor on the 28th of February, 1977 who opined that it was not a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court. This opinion was also endorsed by the Secretary-Law on the 2nd of March 1977. On receipt of this reference from the Law Division, the case remained under action in the office of the Custodian of Enemy Property. It is further averred that during this period, the learned counsel for the plaintiffs* respondents also held discussions with the various authorities for the settlement of the dispute out of Court. In the meanwhile the Custodian was of the opinion that considering the value of the property the Law Division may be approached once again to reconsider their opinion. Accordingly, the case was sent back to the Law Division on the 14th of June, 1977 but again on the 20th of June, 1977 the Secretary Law upheld his previous view in the matter. On receipt of the file from the Law Decision the matter was again considered by the authorities of the Custodian of the Enemy Property. On the 13th of July 1977 for the third time the case was again referred to the Law Division for a reconsideration of their opinion. _ A desire was also expressed for permission to consult the Attorney-General for Pakistan in the matter. This time the Law Division observed that the Custodian may be asked to prepare a self-contained summary for submission to. the Attorney- General. Accordingly, a summary of the case was put up to him and the learned Solicitor opined that the Supreme Court was not likely to condone the delay in the petition. On the 28th of August 1977, the Additional Secretary Law (in the office of the Attorney- General) wrote a note with the approval of the Attorney-General to the effect that the petition, if made, would not be entertained by the Supreme Court on account of delay. In spite of this advice, the case was again referred to the learned Attorney-General for a discussion in the matter. On this for the first time on the 14th of September 1977, it was stated that the Attorney-General had already appeared in the case for one of the parties and therefore, he would not be in a position to take up this case for the Custodian. He at the same time observed that there was no objection if the administrative Ministry was prepared to take a chance in the Supreme Court by engaging a private counsel. Thereafter, according to the said affidavit, Mr. Faisal--Hussain, Advocate-on-Record was contacted for the purpose. He was of the view that the case was of such a nature that the services of a senior counsel like Mr. A, K. Bro hi should be obtained. Accordingly, Mr. A. K. Bro hi was contacted in the last week of September 1977, but at the relevant time he was busy in defending the Federation of Pakistan in the case of Begum Nus rat Bhutto v. Chief of the Army ‘Staff, etc. pending in the Supreme Court and he. could not find adequate WW. time to attend to this matter. Afterwards, in'the month of November 1977, Mr. Bro hi. left for New York to attend the session of the United Nations General Assembly and the matter could not be settled with him to file the petition in the Supreme Court. As a last resort therefore, Mr. Fatal-+ Hussain, Advocate-on-Record was asked to file the petition himself In these, circumstances this, petition was ultimately filed through him on the. 9th of January. 1978. it is further averred in the application that in the circumstances of the case and keeping in view the value of the property which was in the neighborhood of rupees two crores, the delay mm filing this petition was. Liable to,be condoned. J In»IT W'"! \ We have heard the learned counsel for the.' petitioner and-the contesting respondents. The learned counselor the respondents has vehemently opposed the application for condonation of the delay. As already stated above, according to. the office' the main petition for special leave is barred by 272 days. But.according.to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the judgment in the Letters Patent Appeal was announced on the Utah of January 1977, When the necessary application for a 'certified, copy of the judgment was made on the same day. Afterwards, on the.r application of the plaintiffs-respofidents the 'Division Bench of the High Court allowed the amendment in'the judgment and decree on 15-2-1977. But-the.decree in appeal Was not signed until the 25th :of March, 1977. The petitioner then filed a second application for certified copies of. the amended judgment and. decree which were. Delivered ;to the petitioner on-the 13th of April. 1977. Even after allowing full allowance' to the petitioner for the time spent in obtaining the certified copies, etc. according, too. the computation made by the petitioner, the period of limitation -for filing’ the petition for special leave had expired on the 8th of June, 1977. But the petitioner took.another.seven months to file. The petition for special, leave to appeal in this Court only on the 9th of January/1978.1. Rule of Order XIII of the Supreme Court Rules, 1956 lays down that a: petition for special leave to appeal in ' civil proceedings shall be lodged within sixty days of the judgment appealed against. Provided that the Court may for“sufficient cause” extend the time. Even according to the affidavit filed before us this case was at first sent tithe Law Division on 19-2-1977 for its opinion whether to go up in appeal against the impugned judgment; On this, on 2-3-19.77 the - {Secretary Law advised that this was not a fit case for appeal. Evidently : the Custodian was Satisfied with’ the’ advice and apparently took no further action for over three months. It was only on 14-6-1977, for reasons best known to him, that he referred the case to the Law Division unsuccessfully for the second time and again for the third time on 13-7-1977 for reconsideration of their previous opinion. Eventually on 14-9-1977 the learned Attorney-General observed that there was no objection if the administrative Ministry was prepared to take a chance MN the Supreme Court. In spite of-this the petitioner did not show due diligence in filing theta petition for leave to appeal. According to the petitioner he. at first contacted) Mr. Fatal-i-Hussain, Advocate- on-Record and wanted to engage senior counsel Mr. A. K. Bro hi in this case, who was contacted in the last week of September 1977, but he was too busy with another professional engagement and afterward in November 1977 he left for New York to attend the session of the United Nations General Assembly and the matter could not be settled with him to file the petition in the Supreme Court. At long last the petition in the Supreme Court was filed through Mr. Fatal-e-Hussain, Advocate-on-Record on 9-1-1978. AJ All this presents a dismal picture and I find it difficult to shed the unfortunate impression that all along the petitioner did not act with due diligence in filing this petition. Most of the precious time was wasted in routine in repeatedly writing to the Law Division asking them to reconsider! their advice. Mr. A. K. Bro hi, Senior Advocate Supreme Court was not) in fact engaged by the petitioner in this case and admittedly the matter could not be settled with him. There was therefore, no point.in waiting for him to take up this case. I am not fully satisfied with this explanation and the petitioner has failed to explain this long and inordinate delay of at least seven months MN film this petition. There is no sufficient cause made out for condonation of this delay. I Before use the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on Ch. Manor Elah v. Federation of Pakistan etc. In that case a civil review petition was filed after a. delay of 208 days which was condoned by this Court. In that case Muhammad Aqua Ali, J. (as he then was) condoned the delay as public interest was involved. Aladdin, J. observed that there was a plausible explanation forthcoming for the condonation of the delay. Similarly Anwar Had, J. (as he then was) condoned the delay in view of the public importance of the Constitutional question of jurisdiction of Supreme -Court and High Courts involved in the case. But no such compelling considerations arise m the instant case before us. In Syed Ahmad Hussain v. The Chief Justice and Judges of the West Pakistan High Court (2) the delay of several months had already been condoned at the time of the granting of the special leave upon sufficient reasons, and in the course of the hearing of the appeal, this Court declined to interfere with the order of condonation. Both these cases cited before us were decided on their own facts and have ho relevancy to the facts of this case before us. In Superintendent of Central Excise, Lyallpur v. Ch. Fair Muhammad (3) the application for special leave made by the petitioner was time-barred by 57 days. In the petition for condonation of the delay it was explained that the extra time was needed for consultation in a number of offices including the Ministry of Law of the Pakistan Government and for the engagement of special counsel. But repelling this contention this Court observed that. “No extended period of limitation is provided for Government, as litigants before this Court. This is because it is felt that enjoy mg unusual facilities for preparation and conduct of their cases, as against those available to private litigants, Governments do not need any greater latitude in respect of limitation than the ordinary litigant. The reasons advanced for the delay are not, m our opinion, convincing, and we wish to emphasize the necessity for as great vigilance on the part of Governments in these matters as the Court is entitled to expect from, and enforces against, private litigants/*. 1 In Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner and another v. Ghulam Hussein etc. (I) the civil petitions for special leave to appeal were beyond time by 67 days. It was WW. pleaded that after obtaining the copies of the impugned judgment, the departmental file was submitted to ' the. Chief Settlement Commissioner for sanction for film the special leave petitions and for sanctioning funds. The file was however, mislaid in the office and was not traceable until after the expiry of period of limitation. It took another ten days to discuss the matter with, law advisors.'and to draft the two, petitions. In these circumstances the learned counsel, for the petitioners submitted that such delays were common in'Governmental Offices and the Courts do generally take a lenient view in such cases. But this. Court repelled the contention and observed 1 «Jr. It is - firmly established principle that when: a litigant has allowed the normal period of imitation for a legal proceeding to expire. He has to explain each day’s' delay beyond a period of limitation. This Court has always adhered to the view, that in civil matters,’ delay in filing appeals or petitions, save in exceptional cases should not be lightly condoned, for a valuable right has accrued’ to the other party of which it cannot be deprived except for very substantial reasons. To make departments of Government exception to this rule would be placing a prem mm on the negligence, and want of proper diligence in public offices. It /is pertinent to "observe that "Where " Legislature “ considers it necessary to make the Government an exception to-the ordinary rule of limitation, it always makes express provisions in that behalf”. a) Also in The Province of ‘ West Pakistan, Lahore v. Main Noor Ahmad and ALF*’?1-1-'1l« others (2) it was remarked that as observed by this Court in more than one judgment, Government is not. Entitled to any- preferential treatment as compared,to ordinary citizens in adjudication of civil matters. - It was also argued before us on behalf of the petitioner that this is a hard case in which very valuable property hies been disposed of by specific performance form adequate - consideration and on onerous terms under the impugned decree. But it was held in MST. Harlan v. Vardar Muhammad (3)1 that the mere fact that the valuable rights further petitioner are involved, 1s] by itself no proper ground for condonation of the-delay in civil matters Nor any recourse can be' had to the provisions MN rule,6 Of Order XLIX off the Pakistan Supreme Court Rules, 1956 for this purpose. ' ; For the foregoing reasons, ho case has been made out before us for condonation of the inordinate delay in the petition for special leave to appeal, and we are constrained to dismiss the. Same as barred by time. ‘. - }* V Karma Elaine Chauhan, J.-I agree.' 1 Na sim Hasan Shah, J.-I agree. Petition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 191 (Date, 1978-12-23): Judgment Muhammad Abram, J-This is a petition under Article 185 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan for leave to appeal from the judgment and decree dated 11th of January 1975/15th of February 1977* passed by a Division Bench of the then High Court of Sind Baluchistan at Karachi in Letters Patent Appeal Nor 104 of 1968. 1\.j. i- This dispute relates to \a plot* bearing’ Survey No. 29, Sheet S. B. 5, measure 2724 square. Yards situated in Saddam; Bazaar Quarters, Karachi It belonged to 'Dr. Eddie ’’P. Baruch respondent No. and has since vested in the petitioner, the Custodian of Enemy Property. It appears that in the year 1963, the,plamntiffS-?respondents to r 5 harm, brought a suit against the defendants-respondents No. and. some.others on the original civil side \ of. the former High* Court of West Pakistan, Karachi Bench’, Karachi, for specific performance of an agreement dated '30th of August: 1956 for lease of this; plot of 1and with the option topurchasethesame and for recovery of a sum of Rs. 6,20,000. In the course of the sooty defendant. No.7, wast IJ VK.7_ \Jay declared as an enemy national, and thereby.the, property in dispute was vested in the Custodian of x Enemy Property who was imp leaded.1 as an additional defendant INI the.suit.;; Eventually, on the 11th of January 1967, a learned Singly Judge of. the High Court decreed the suit,of the plaintiffs against respondent No, 7.NAND.petitioner.also.: 1 for specific performance of the contract of please, dated;;30th of August. 1956 with pption.to purchase the said plot and Tor recovery of a sum‘of Rs; 1,55,000 as damages in addition to future damages at the. rate :oars.5,000 per-month. from the date of the - suit till the execution;Of the lease deed. ‘ 1 This petitioner then filed :the Letters Patent Appeal No. 104 of 1968 under clause. 10 of the Letters Patent against; the respondents from. The judgment’; and 'decree of the learned Single ;Judge. During the pendency of that appeal on the’ 14th of October 1976, : the plaintiffs. Filed ;ANV application for amendment of the judgment ‘anddj&ree 6f the'trial Court -alleging that. Their main prayer in,the amended7plamt: was for a decree, for specific performance of t the; option to.":purchase the property for Rs. 4,76,000 but that WW. the'learned; Single Judge shad inadvertently granted. the, alternative prayer for specific performance the control act. Of lease with option to purchase the property and that this error’ was due to an accidental slip or omission on the part of the Court to police their main prayer contained in para.' 22-A of the amended plaint! A notice' of this* "application was also sent to the parties in the appeal. On the 11th of January 1977, a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed'with cost the Letters Patent Appeal of the petitioner and subsequently by a separate order passed* on the 15th of February 1977, allowed the application for the necessary correction the judgment and decree, passed in terms of the ma'am prayer

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 191 (Date, 1978-12-23): of January 1977, a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed'with cost the Letters Patent Appeal of the petitioner and subsequently by a separate order passed* on the 15th of February 1977, allowed the application for the necessary correction the judgment and decree, passed in terms of the ma'am prayer contamed’in paragraph 22-A of the amended plant: in. addition to the other reliefs already decreed in favor of the plaintiffs: Accordingly, the amended decree MN the appeal/ prepared by the Court was actually signed only on the 25th of March 1977. The petitioner, however, filed this petition for special leave from the \judgment and decree in this Court o'may on the 9th of January 1978 The office has raised the objection that it is barred by 272 days. Along with the main petition the petitioner has also filed a separate application under ? Order XIII, rule read with Order LIX, rule 6 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1956 for condonation of the delay. We partly heard the learned counsel for the petitioner in the application for condonation of the delay on the 9th of November 1978 and found that the allegations in the application were highly vague. At the request of the learned counsel we, therefore, allowed an adjournment to him to supplement the allegations in his application for condonation of the delay with an affidavit containing additional facts. The petitioner has accordingly filed an affidavit of Mr. Muhammad Anwar, Assistant Custodian (Law) supplementing the allegations in support of his application for condonation of delay. He has affirmed on solemn affirmation that he received an uncertified copy of the judgment dated 11th of January 1977 passed by the Division Bench from the office of his learned counsel Mr. Ali Ahmad Feel, Advocate, Karachi and had put up a note on the 17th of February 1977, seeking the advice of the Law Division whether the Custodian should go up in appeal to the Supreme Court or not. The case was marked to the Law Decision on the 19th of February 1977 WW. and was then examined by the Solicitor on the 28th of February, 1977 who opined that it was not a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court. This opinion was also endorsed by the Secretary-Law on the 2nd of March 1977. On receipt of this reference from the Law Division, the case remained under action in the office of the Custodian of Enemy Property. It is further averred that during this period, the learned counsel for the plaintiffs* respondents also held discussions with the various authorities for the settlement of the dispute out of Court. In the meanwhile the Custodian was of the opinion that considering the value of the property the Law Division may be approached once again to reconsider their opinion. Accordingly, the case was sent back to the Law Division on the 14th of June, 1977 but again on the 20th of June, 1977 the Secretary Law upheld his previous view in the matter. On

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 191 (Date, 1978-12-23): of the property the Law Division may be approached once again to reconsider their opinion. Accordingly, the case was sent back to the Law Division on the 14th of June, 1977 but again on the 20th of June, 1977 the Secretary Law upheld his previous view in the matter. On receipt of the file from the Law Decision the matter was again considered by the authorities of the Custodian of the Enemy Property. On the 13th of July 1977 for the third time the case was again referred to the Law Division for a reconsideration of their opinion. _ A desire was also expressed for permission to consult the Attorney-General for Pakistan in the matter. This time the Law Division observed that the Custodian may be asked to prepare a self-contained summary for submission to. the Attorney- General. Accordingly, a summary of the case was put up to him and the learned Solicitor opined that the Supreme Court was not likely to condone the delay in the petition. On the 28th of August 1977, the Additional Secretary Law (in the office of the Attorney- General) wrote a note with the approval of the Attorney-General to the effect that the petition, if made, would not be entertained by the Supreme Court on account of delay. In spite of this advice, the case was again referred to the learned Attorney-General for a discussion in the matter. On this for the first time on the 14th of September 1977, it was stated that the Attorney-General had already appeared in the case for one of the parties and therefore, he would not be in a position to take up this case for the Custodian. He at the same time observed that there was no objection if the administrative Ministry was prepared to take a chance in the Supreme Court by engaging a private counsel. Thereafter, according to the said affidavit, Mr. Faisal--Hussain, Advocate-on-Record was contacted for the purpose. He was of the view that the case was of such a nature that the services of a senior counsel like Mr. A, K. Bro hi should be obtained. Accordingly, Mr. A. K. Bro hi was contacted in the last week of September 1977, but at the relevant time he was busy in defending the Federation of Pakistan in the case of Begum Nus rat Bhutto v. Chief of the Army ‘Staff, etc. pending in the Supreme Court and he. could not find adequate WW. time to attend to this matter. Afterwards, in'the month of November 1977, Mr. Bro hi. left for New York to attend the session of the United Nations General Assembly and the matter could not be settled with him to file the petition in the Supreme Court. As a last resort therefore, Mr. Fatal-+ Hussain, Advocate-on-Record was asked to file the petition himself In these, circumstances this, petition was ultimately filed through him on the. 9th of January. 1978. it is further averred in the application that in the circumstances of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 191 (Date, 1978-12-23): petition in the Supreme Court. As a last resort therefore, Mr. Fatal-+ Hussain, Advocate-on-Record was asked to file the petition himself In these, circumstances this, petition was ultimately filed through him on the. 9th of January. 1978. it is further averred in the application that in the circumstances of the case and keeping in view the value of the property which was in the neighborhood of rupees two crores, the delay mm filing this petition was. Liable to,be condoned. J In»IT W'"! \ We have heard the learned counsel for the.' petitioner and-the contesting respondents. The learned counselor the respondents has vehemently opposed the application for condonation of the delay. As already stated above, according to. the office' the main petition for special leave is barred by 272 days. But.according.to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the judgment in the Letters Patent Appeal was announced on the Utah of January 1977, When the necessary application for a 'certified, copy of the judgment was made on the same day. Afterwards, on the.r application of the plaintiffs-respofidents the 'Division Bench of the High Court allowed the amendment in'the judgment and decree on 15-2-1977. But-the.decree in appeal Was not signed until the 25th :of March, 1977. The petitioner then filed a second application for certified copies of. the amended judgment and. decree which were. Delivered ;to the petitioner on-the 13th of April. 1977. Even after allowing full allowance' to the petitioner for the time spent in obtaining the certified copies, etc. according, too. the computation made by the petitioner, the period of limitation -for filing’ the petition for special leave had expired on the 8th of June, 1977. But the petitioner took.another.seven months to file. The petition for special, leave to appeal in this Court only on the 9th of January/1978.1. Rule of Order XIII of the Supreme Court Rules, 1956 lays down that a: petition for special leave to appeal in ' civil proceedings shall be lodged within sixty days of the judgment appealed against. Provided that the Court may for“sufficient cause” extend the time. Even according to the affidavit filed before us this case was at first sent tithe Law Division on 19-2-1977 for its opinion whether to go up in appeal against the impugned judgment; On this, on 2-3-19.77 the - {Secretary Law advised that this was not a fit case for appeal. Evidently : the Custodian was Satisfied with’ the’ advice and apparently took no further action for over three months. It was only on 14-6-1977, for reasons best known to him, that he referred the case to the Law Division unsuccessfully for the second time and again for the third time on 13-7-1977 for reconsideration of their previous opinion. Eventually on 14-9-1977 the learned Attorney-General observed that there was no objection if the administrative Ministry was prepared to take a chance MN the Supreme Court. In spite of-this the petitioner did not show due diligence in filing theta petition for leave to appeal. According to the petitioner he.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 191 (Date, 1978-12-23): opinion. Eventually on 14-9-1977 the learned Attorney-General observed that there was no objection if the administrative Ministry was prepared to take a chance MN the Supreme Court. In spite of-this the petitioner did not show due diligence in filing theta petition for leave to appeal. According to the petitioner he. at first contacted) Mr. Fatal-i-Hussain, Advocate- on-Record and wanted to engage senior counsel Mr. A. K. Bro hi in this case, who was contacted in the last week of September 1977, but he was too busy with another professional engagement and afterward in November 1977 he left for New York to attend the session of the United Nations General Assembly and the matter could not be settled with him to file the petition in the Supreme Court. At long last the petition in the Supreme Court was filed through Mr. Fatal-e-Hussain, Advocate-on-Record on 9-1-1978. AJ All this presents a dismal picture and I find it difficult to shed the unfortunate impression that all along the petitioner did not act with due diligence in filing this petition. Most of the precious time was wasted in routine in repeatedly writing to the Law Division asking them to reconsider! their advice. Mr. A. K. Bro hi, Senior Advocate Supreme Court was not) in fact engaged by the petitioner in this case and admittedly the matter could not be settled with him. There was therefore, no point.in waiting for him to take up this case. I am not fully satisfied with this explanation and the petitioner has failed to explain this long and inordinate delay of at least seven months MN film this petition. There is no sufficient cause made out for condonation of this delay. I Before use the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on Ch. Manor Elah v. Federation of Pakistan etc. In that case a civil review petition was filed after a. delay of 208 days which was condoned by this Court. In that case Muhammad Aqua Ali, J. (as he then was) condoned the delay as public interest was involved. Aladdin, J. observed that there was a plausible explanation forthcoming for the condonation of the delay. Similarly Anwar Had, J. (as he then was) condoned the delay in view of the public importance of the Constitutional question of jurisdiction of Supreme -Court and High Courts involved in the case. But no such compelling considerations arise m the instant case before us. In Syed Ahmad Hussain v. The Chief Justice and Judges of the West Pakistan High Court (2) the delay of several months had already been condoned at the time of the granting of the special leave upon sufficient reasons, and in the course of the hearing of the appeal, this Court declined to interfere with the order of condonation. Both these cases cited before us were decided on their own facts and have ho relevancy to the facts of this case before us. In Superintendent of Central Excise, Lyallpur v. Ch. Fair Muhammad (3) the application for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 191 (Date, 1978-12-23): the appeal, this Court declined to interfere with the order of condonation. Both these cases cited before us were decided on their own facts and have ho relevancy to the facts of this case before us. In Superintendent of Central Excise, Lyallpur v. Ch. Fair Muhammad (3) the application for special leave made by the petitioner was time-barred by 57 days. In the petition for condonation of the delay it was explained that the extra time was needed for consultation in a number of offices including the Ministry of Law of the Pakistan Government and for the engagement of special counsel. But repelling this contention this Court observed that. “No extended period of limitation is provided for Government, as litigants before this Court. This is because it is felt that enjoy mg unusual facilities for preparation and conduct of their cases, as against those available to private litigants, Governments do not need any greater latitude in respect of limitation than the ordinary litigant. The reasons advanced for the delay are not, m our opinion, convincing, and we wish to emphasize the necessity for as great vigilance on the part of Governments in these matters as the Court is entitled to expect from, and enforces against, private litigants/*. 1 In Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner and another v. Ghulam Hussein etc. (I) the civil petitions for special leave to appeal were beyond time by 67 days. It was WW. pleaded that after obtaining the copies of the impugned judgment, the departmental file was submitted to ' the. Chief Settlement Commissioner for sanction for film the special leave petitions and for sanctioning funds. The file was however, mislaid in the office and was not traceable until after the expiry of period of limitation. It took another ten days to discuss the matter with, law advisors.'and to draft the two, petitions. In these circumstances the learned counsel, for the petitioners submitted that such delays were common in'Governmental Offices and the Courts do generally take a lenient view in such cases. But this. Court repelled the contention and observed 1 «Jr. It is - firmly established principle that when: a litigant has allowed the normal period of imitation for a legal proceeding to expire. He has to explain each day’s' delay beyond a period of limitation. This Court has always adhered to the view, that in civil matters,’ delay in filing appeals or petitions, save in exceptional cases should not be lightly condoned, for a valuable right has accrued’ to the other party of which it cannot be deprived except for very substantial reasons. To make departments of Government exception to this rule would be placing a prem mm on the negligence, and want of proper diligence in public offices. It /is pertinent to "observe that "Where " Legislature “ considers it necessary to make the Government an exception to-the ordinary rule of limitation, it always makes express provisions in that behalf”. a) Also in The Province of ‘ West Pakistan, Lahore v. Main

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 191?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 191 (Date, 1978-12-23): of proper diligence in public offices. It /is pertinent to "observe that "Where " Legislature “ considers it necessary to make the Government an exception to-the ordinary rule of limitation, it always makes express provisions in that behalf”. a) Also in The Province of ‘ West Pakistan, Lahore v. Main Noor Ahmad and ALF*’?1-1-'1l« others (2) it was remarked that as observed by this Court in more than one judgment, Government is not. Entitled to any- preferential treatment as compared,to ordinary citizens in adjudication of civil matters. - It was also argued before us on behalf of the petitioner that this is a hard case in which very valuable property hies been disposed of by specific performance form adequate - consideration and on onerous terms under the impugned decree. But it was held in MST. Harlan v. Vardar Muhammad (3)1 that the mere fact that the valuable rights further petitioner are involved, 1s] by itself no proper ground for condonation of the-delay in civil matters Nor any recourse can be' had to the provisions MN rule,6 Of Order XLIX off the Pakistan Supreme Court Rules, 1956 for this purpose. ' ; For the foregoing reasons, ho case has been made out before us for condonation of the inordinate delay in the petition for special leave to appeal, and we are constrained to dismiss the. Same as barred by time. ‘. - }* V Karma Elaine Chauhan, J.-I agree.' 1 Na sim Hasan Shah, J.-I agree. Petition dismissed

Question: What is case 1979 SCMR 380 about?
Answer: Case 1979 SCMR 380 was decided by Date on 1979-04-22. The case involved EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST BOARD (PETITIONER) VERSUS MUSAWAR ALI AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185 (3). The case was heard by G. SAFDAR SHAH AND'KARAM ELAHEE CHAUHAN,JJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1979 SCMR 380?
Answer: In case 1979 SCMR 380, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185 (3). This case was heard in Date and decided on 1979-04-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1979 SCMR 380?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1979 SCMR 380 were: INAYAT HUSSAIN ADVO.CATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER.'M.A. QADRI, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD (ABSENT) FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: G. SAFDAR SHAH AND'KARAM ELAHEE CHAUHAN,JJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1979 SCMR 380?
Answer: The parties in case 1979 SCMR 380 were: EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST BOARD (PETITIONER) VERSUS MUSAWAR ALI AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in Date.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1979 SCMR 380.
Answer: G. Radar Shah, J.-Property No. B-H-10-S-1270, situated' at Hafizabad was transferred to Medawar. Al. and others on.24-12-1959 on the basis of earmarking scheme. Since the /property. m question formed part-, of the compensation pool, constituted under the Displaced Persons (Compensation Rehabilitation) Act. 1958.the same was transferred to Medawar Ali and others by the Settlement Department. WW. The Evacuee Property Trust Board, the petitioner in this. case, however, claimed the said property to >e Trust property, therefore, it filed an application before the Deputy. Settlement Commissioner praying there that for the determination of the character of the said property the matter be> referred to the District Judge for his decision. The record would show that after recording the evidence of the parties, the learned District Judge held that the property belonged Mehran Krishan and Kansai Ram evacuees, and consequently he negatived the claim of the petitioner Board that the same was Trust property. Being aggrieved of the said order the petitioner Board went in appeal to the High Court under section (4) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, but the same was dismissed by a learned single Judge, vide his order, dated 29-5-1975. It is in this background that the petitioner Board has come up to this Court praying for leave to appeal against the. Said order of the High Court. The petition is admittedly barred by 33 days. Therefore, when the case came up before a Bench of this Court on 25-6-1978, it was adjourned to enable the learned counsel for the petitioner to amend his application for the condonation of the said delay. And in compliance with the said order he has filed the amended application. Now the main grounds on the base of which the condonation of the delay is sought are that this case pertain to the Central Government ; that before. filing the petition MN -this Four the petitioner Board had to obtain the opinion of its lawyers; and that Du to the procedural difficulties the Government always takes a longer time to decide whether a petition has to be filed in this Court or not. Now APA from the fact that none of these considerations are relevant for the condonation of the said delay, the further difficulty in the way of the learned course is the has even violated the order of this Court dated 25-6-1978 by which he was allowed to present the amended application for the condonation OFJ delay and thereafter the case was ordered to be put up within one month for consideration. The order of the Bench was passed on 25-6- 1978 whereas this amended application was filed on 29-7-1978, evidently therefore, the application has been filed after the delay of four days for which also no explanation has been furnished. In these circumstances, therefore, this petition is clearly barred by imitation, and MN the absence of any satisfactory explanation in that behalf, the same is hereby dismissed. WW. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 380?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 380 (Date, 1979-04-22): G. Radar Shah, J.-Property No. B-H-10-S-1270, situated' at Hafizabad was transferred to Medawar. Al. and others on.24-12-1959 on the basis of earmarking scheme. Since the /property. m question formed part-, of the compensation pool, constituted under the Displaced Persons (Compensation Rehabilitation) Act. 1958.the same was transferred to Medawar Ali and others by the Settlement Department. WW. The Evacuee Property Trust Board, the petitioner in this. case, however, claimed the said property to >e Trust property, therefore, it filed an application before the Deputy. Settlement Commissioner praying there that for the determination of the character of the said property the matter be> referred to the District Judge for his decision. The record would show that after recording the evidence of the parties, the learned District Judge held that the property belonged Mehran Krishan and Kansai Ram evacuees, and consequently he negatived the claim of the petitioner Board that the same was Trust property. Being aggrieved of the said order the petitioner Board went in appeal to the High Court under section (4) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, but the same was dismissed by a learned single Judge, vide his order, dated 29-5-1975. It is in this background that the petitioner Board has come up to this Court praying for leave to appeal against the. Said order of the High Court. The petition is admittedly barred by 33 days. Therefore, when the case came up before a Bench of this Court on 25-6-1978, it was adjourned to enable the learned counsel for the petitioner to amend his application for the condonation of the said delay. And in compliance with the said order he has filed the amended application. Now the main grounds on the base of which the condonation of the delay is sought are that this case pertain to the Central Government ; that before. filing the petition MN -this Four the petitioner Board had to obtain the opinion of its lawyers; and that Du to the procedural difficulties the Government always takes a longer time to decide whether a petition has to be filed in this Court or not. Now APA from the fact that none of these considerations are relevant for the condonation of the said delay, the further difficulty in the way of the learned course is the has even violated the order of this Court dated 25-6-1978 by which he was allowed to present the amended application for the condonation OFJ delay and thereafter the case was ordered to be put up within one month for consideration. The order of the Bench was passed on 25-6- 1978 whereas this amended application was filed on 29-7-1978, evidently therefore, the application has been filed after the delay of four days for which also no explanation has been furnished. In these circumstances, therefore, this petition is clearly barred by imitation, and MN the absence of any satisfactory explanation in that behalf, the same is hereby dismissed. WW. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1979 SCMR 40 about?
Answer: Case 1979 SCMR 40 was decided by Date on 1978-04-17. The case involved RIZWAN CO OPERATIVE SOCIETY LTD VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include SUPREME COURT RULES 1956 O. XXVI. The case was heard by FANWARUL IHAQF C. MUHAMMAD AKRAM Y DORAB PATELARTREF. MUHAMMAD HALEEM.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1979 SCMR 40?
Answer: In case 1979 SCMR 40, the court applied the following statutes: SUPREME COURT RULES 1956 O. XXVI. This case was heard in Date and decided on 1978-04-17.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1979 SCMR 40?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1979 SCMR 40 were: KHALID ANWAR, ADVOCATE AND FAZLE HUSSAIN, ADVOCATE-ON- RECORD FOR PETITIONER.SHARIFUDDIN PIRZADA, SENIOR ADVOCATE AND M. A. RAHMAN, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.SALIM AHMAD MALIK, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.. The judges presiding were: FANWARUL IHAQF C. MUHAMMAD AKRAM Y DORAB PATELARTREF. MUHAMMAD HALEEM.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1979 SCMR 40?
Answer: The parties in case 1979 SCMR 40 were: RIZWAN CO OPERATIVE SOCIETY LTD VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in Date.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1979 SCMR 40.
Answer: Of Muhammad Hakeem, J.-This order will dispose of Civil Review Petitions Nos. 34 and 35 of 1971. Both of them are directed against the order of this Court dated 20tb of October, 1971, passed in Civil Appeals Nos. 36 and 37 of 1970 whereby the order of the High Court dated 26th of May, 1969 in Wait Petition No. 1142 of 1965 was set aside and the sale of the land to the petitioner under the sale deed executed on IST of May, 1964, was declared as without lawful authority and the Custodian was directed to cancel the sale deed and to refund to the petitioner the sum of Rs. 6,27,037,50. j. The facts of the case are sufficiently stated in the judgment and need not be recapitulated here. Mr. Khalid Anwar, learned counsel for the petitioner attacked the judgment of this Court principally on four grounds, namely. (a) That out of 2508 canals and 7 Marley of land sold to the petitioners on IST of May, 1964, by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Kara Nos. 1414-Min, 1415, 1416 to 1429, 1482, 1483, 1491 to 1494, 1494-Min, 1496-Min and 1498-Min measuring 406 Canals and Marla did not form part of the scheme prepared by the Lahore Improvement Trust and, therefore, it was not acquired by it for the proposed Punjab University Campus and should have been excluded (b) that in view of the compromise entered into between the Lahore Improvement Trust and the petitioner on 12th of March, 1971 during the pendency of the Letters Patent Appeal, the Letters Patent Bench erred in not giving effect to it on the objection raised by the Punjab University ; (c) that this Court has erred in construing section 36 of the Town Improvement Act, 1922, inasmuch as it violated section 12 of Ordinance 15 of 1949 as the land was evacuee ; and (d) that this Court wrongly construed sections 24 and 28. of the Town Improvement Act, 1922. As regards the first contention, it was not raised before the High Court but in para. 16(1) of the concise statement it was pleaded, but again it was not agitated at the hearing of the appeal. Nevertheless we directed the counsel to refer us the notification by which the land situate in village Bipedal was acquired, but he was unable to do so. He however, relied’ on the copy of the Award at page 15 of the green file 904 the statement showing description of the Kara numbers with the total area acquired by the Lahore Improvement Trust at page 30 of the same file* In the absence of the notification it is not. possible to conclude, as was contended, that these Kara numbers were excluded from. the above document. In order to succeed, the exclusion of the.K Basra - numbers should have been patent on the record which is not so. Therefore, on a’ post of principle, even otherwise this contention cannot be entertained, for, it was not raised either in the High Court or at the hearing of the appeal. In regard to the second contention it was stressed that this Court had erroneously held that the claim made by the petitioner that it had lawfully acquired the land from the Custodian did not constitute a claim under section 96(»»») of the Town Improvement Act ; had no power to admit IBE: claim, of the valuable property rights of the Trust. ' As be made by the Trust and that too with and, therefore, the Chairman Society- and thereby surrender such a compromise could only the concurrence of the Punjab University and the Provincial Government;' 'y -1ff* 1 *1.1«P1'7rJ, - Against ;this reasoning, the learned.counsel-contended that it was the Trust Which had the legal entitlement to the land as neither in the notice dated. 31st of March, 1954, issued under section 36 of the j\ct nor m the scheme sanctioned and, published on- 24th of January, 195.7, under, section 41 of the Act was any. Mention made of the land. Having been acquired for. the Punjab University, it was further "added-that the Punjab University.'had surrendered the disputed land in 1962 to the Lahore Improvement Trust as per para. of the petition for leave to 'appeal' and, therefore, it had no legal right to object--to >the compromise. As. -for.the surrender -of the land to the Lahore Improvement Trust, this.post was neither raised in the High Court nor at the bearing’ of Thai >8!peal / and even otherwise it was'later agreed in a meeting held on 27th of June, 1967>;that it be returned'to the Punjab University in case the Writ petition filed by the Lahore Improvement Trust succeeded. Apart frown. the fact.that. this. contention could not be entertained, the legal interest of the Punjab University in the land acquired was manifest by the.- fact that -it' had paid Rs. 20,000.00 for the purchase of the land ; and that ' further. the areal for the' Punjab University was included in the scheme. - It* therefore.mattered not if there'was no. reference to the acquisition of the land for the Punjab University Campus. Accordingly it was rightly held" by the Court' that the compromise could not have been effected without the concurrence of the Punjab University.: \t | In the alternative; it -as.' that the case. fell within the ambit of clause («7) of section 96 of the Town Improvement Act as. it was the Lahore Improvement ’ Trust which made the claim against the sale of the disputed land and not vice versa ; therefore, its legality could not be questioned as the Chairman had taken prior permission from, the Provincial Government to compromise the dispute. This contention was again not raised earlier at any stage of the proceedings and, therefore, it cannot be entertained.'* m Ru. FRM.1b* While disposing of the third contention this Court held :, “As notification of the scheme was not covered by any of these legal. processes. Mr. Bias. Muhammad relied on the words ‘or other order of whatever kind’- in the second part of subsection (1). of section 12. - Thus clause, however, is qualified by the words 'Sball.be granted or made by any court’. The notice issued under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act was, therefore, not covered by subsection (1) of section 12 of Ordinance IS of 1949 and the learned Judges erred in arriving at the contrary conclusion.’* The learned counsel contended that this Court overlooked the words “or any other authority*’ which could appropriately include a notice issued under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act and, therefore, it was invalid. Whatever may be the implication of this contention, the legal position is that even if the construction is erroneous still it cannot be regarded as an error apparent on the face of the record so as to mite interference in review jurisdiction. As to the fourth ground, the learned counsel took exception to the conclusion of this Court namely, that "a plain reading of these sections makes out that scheme framed under section 24 may provide for all or any one of the matters provided in it. The Scheme may thus provide for acquisition of the land only and that seems to be the case here.” The precise objection of the learned counsel was that the scheme did not provide for the development of the Campus as was required by section 24. It only gave the bounded area to be acquired for the University Campus which could not be construed as a development scheme. Therefore, it was an acquisition simpliciter under section 28 and not for the development of any locality as provided by section 24. L T LH H ' IL»p VW.4. - -A- reference to the site plan marked B. B. and B. B. reflects the bounded area in the scheme acquired for the University Campus. This, as was held by this Court, can be construed as a development scheme and, therefore, the aforementioned conclusion of this Court cannot be assailed in review jurisdiction on the ground that such a construction is not possible on the language of these TW.o sections. Lastly, we may point out that it was not a rehearing of the appeal and, therefore, it was not permissible to raise either a new ground or that which had not been argued in the manner in which* it was raised before us. Accordingly, we find no substance in the petitions which are dismissed. Petitions dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 40?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 40 (Date, 1978-04-17): Of Muhammad Hakeem, J.-This order will dispose of Civil Review Petitions Nos. 34 and 35 of 1971. Both of them are directed against the order of this Court dated 20tb of October, 1971, passed in Civil Appeals Nos. 36 and 37 of 1970 whereby the order of the High Court dated 26th of May, 1969 in Wait Petition No. 1142 of 1965 was set aside and the sale of the land to the petitioner under the sale deed executed on IST of May, 1964, was declared as without lawful authority and the Custodian was directed to cancel the sale deed and to refund to the petitioner the sum of Rs. 6,27,037,50. j. The facts of the case are sufficiently stated in the judgment and need not be recapitulated here. Mr. Khalid Anwar, learned counsel for the petitioner attacked the judgment of this Court principally on four grounds, namely. (a) That out of 2508 canals and 7 Marley of land sold to the petitioners on IST of May, 1964, by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Kara Nos. 1414-Min, 1415, 1416 to 1429, 1482, 1483, 1491 to 1494, 1494-Min, 1496-Min and 1498-Min measuring 406 Canals and Marla did not form part of the scheme prepared by the Lahore Improvement Trust and, therefore, it was not acquired by it for the proposed Punjab University Campus and should have been excluded (b) that in view of the compromise entered into between the Lahore Improvement Trust and the petitioner on 12th of March, 1971 during the pendency of the Letters Patent Appeal, the Letters Patent Bench erred in not giving effect to it on the objection raised by the Punjab University ; (c) that this Court has erred in construing section 36 of the Town Improvement Act, 1922, inasmuch as it violated section 12 of Ordinance 15 of 1949 as the land was evacuee ; and (d) that this Court wrongly construed sections 24 and 28. of the Town Improvement Act, 1922. As regards the first contention, it was not raised before the High Court but in para. 16(1) of the concise statement it was pleaded, but again it was not agitated at the hearing of the appeal. Nevertheless we directed the counsel to refer us the notification by which the land situate in village Bipedal was acquired, but he was unable to do so. He however, relied’ on the copy of the Award at page 15 of the green file 904 the statement showing description of the Kara numbers with the total area acquired by the Lahore Improvement Trust at page 30 of the same file* In the absence of the notification it is not. possible to conclude, as was contended, that these Kara numbers were excluded from. the above document. In order to succeed, the exclusion of the.K Basra - numbers should have been patent on the record which is not so. Therefore, on a’ post of principle, even otherwise this contention cannot be entertained, for, it was not raised either in the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 40?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 40 (Date, 1978-04-17): numbers were excluded from. the above document. In order to succeed, the exclusion of the.K Basra - numbers should have been patent on the record which is not so. Therefore, on a’ post of principle, even otherwise this contention cannot be entertained, for, it was not raised either in the High Court or at the hearing of the appeal. In regard to the second contention it was stressed that this Court had erroneously held that the claim made by the petitioner that it had lawfully acquired the land from the Custodian did not constitute a claim under section 96(»»») of the Town Improvement Act ; had no power to admit IBE: claim, of the valuable property rights of the Trust. ' As be made by the Trust and that too with and, therefore, the Chairman Society- and thereby surrender such a compromise could only the concurrence of the Punjab University and the Provincial Government;' 'y -1ff* 1 *1.1«P1'7rJ, - Against ;this reasoning, the learned.counsel-contended that it was the Trust Which had the legal entitlement to the land as neither in the notice dated. 31st of March, 1954, issued under section 36 of the j\ct nor m the scheme sanctioned and, published on- 24th of January, 195.7, under, section 41 of the Act was any. Mention made of the land. Having been acquired for. the Punjab University, it was further "added-that the Punjab University.'had surrendered the disputed land in 1962 to the Lahore Improvement Trust as per para. of the petition for leave to 'appeal' and, therefore, it had no legal right to object--to >the compromise. As. -for.the surrender -of the land to the Lahore Improvement Trust, this.post was neither raised in the High Court nor at the bearing’ of Thai >8!peal / and even otherwise it was'later agreed in a meeting held on 27th of June, 1967>;that it be returned'to the Punjab University in case the Writ petition filed by the Lahore Improvement Trust succeeded. Apart frown. the fact.that. this. contention could not be entertained, the legal interest of the Punjab University in the land acquired was manifest by the.- fact that -it' had paid Rs. 20,000.00 for the purchase of the land ; and that ' further. the areal for the' Punjab University was included in the scheme. - It* therefore.mattered not if there'was no. reference to the acquisition of the land for the Punjab University Campus. Accordingly it was rightly held" by the Court' that the compromise could not have been effected without the concurrence of the Punjab University.: \t | In the alternative; it -as.' that the case. fell within the ambit of clause («7) of section 96 of the Town Improvement Act as. it was the Lahore Improvement ’ Trust which made the claim against the sale of the disputed land and not vice versa ; therefore, its legality could not be questioned as the Chairman had taken prior permission from, the Provincial Government to compromise the dispute. This contention was again not raised earlier at

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 40?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 40 (Date, 1978-04-17): Lahore Improvement ’ Trust which made the claim against the sale of the disputed land and not vice versa ; therefore, its legality could not be questioned as the Chairman had taken prior permission from, the Provincial Government to compromise the dispute. This contention was again not raised earlier at any stage of the proceedings and, therefore, it cannot be entertained.'* m Ru. FRM.1b* While disposing of the third contention this Court held :, “As notification of the scheme was not covered by any of these legal. processes. Mr. Bias. Muhammad relied on the words ‘or other order of whatever kind’- in the second part of subsection (1). of section 12. - Thus clause, however, is qualified by the words 'Sball.be granted or made by any court’. The notice issued under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act was, therefore, not covered by subsection (1) of section 12 of Ordinance IS of 1949 and the learned Judges erred in arriving at the contrary conclusion.’* The learned counsel contended that this Court overlooked the words “or any other authority*’ which could appropriately include a notice issued under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act and, therefore, it was invalid. Whatever may be the implication of this contention, the legal position is that even if the construction is erroneous still it cannot be regarded as an error apparent on the face of the record so as to mite interference in review jurisdiction. As to the fourth ground, the learned counsel took exception to the conclusion of this Court namely, that "a plain reading of these sections makes out that scheme framed under section 24 may provide for all or any one of the matters provided in it. The Scheme may thus provide for acquisition of the land only and that seems to be the case here.” The precise objection of the learned counsel was that the scheme did not provide for the development of the Campus as was required by section 24. It only gave the bounded area to be acquired for the University Campus which could not be construed as a development scheme. Therefore, it was an acquisition simpliciter under section 28 and not for the development of any locality as provided by section 24. L T LH H ' IL»p VW.4. - -A- reference to the site plan marked B. B. and B. B. reflects the bounded area in the scheme acquired for the University Campus. This, as was held by this Court, can be construed as a development scheme and, therefore, the aforementioned conclusion of this Court cannot be assailed in review jurisdiction on the ground that such a construction is not possible on the language of these TW.o sections. Lastly, we may point out that it was not a rehearing of the appeal and, therefore, it was not permissible to raise either a new ground or that which had not been argued in the manner in which* it was raised before us. Accordingly, we find no substance in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 SCMR 40?
Answer: From case 1979 SCMR 40 (Date, 1978-04-17): sections. Lastly, we may point out that it was not a rehearing of the appeal and, therefore, it was not permissible to raise either a new ground or that which had not been argued in the manner in which* it was raised before us. Accordingly, we find no substance in the petitions which are dismissed. Petitions dismissed

Question: What is case 1979 PLD 903 about?
Answer: Case 1979 PLD 903 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1979-03-13. The case involved THE EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, LAHORE THROUGH ITS CHAIRMAN AND ANOTHER—PETITIONERS VERSUS MUHAMMAD NAWAZ—RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 16-A(1) AND SCHEME, PARAS. 16 AND 43 CIVIL SERVANTS (EFFICIENCY AND DISCIPLINE) RULES, 1973. The case was heard by AFTAB HUSSAIN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1979 PLD 903?
Answer: In case 1979 PLD 903, the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 16-A(1) AND SCHEME, PARAS. 16 AND 43 CIVIL SERVANTS (EFFICIENCY AND DISCIPLINE) RULES, 1973. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1979-03-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1979 PLD 903?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1979 PLD 903 were: MUHAMMAD ASLAM NAGI FOR APPELLANT. SH. ABDULAZIZ FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: AFTAB HUSSAIN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1979 PLD 903?
Answer: The parties in case 1979 PLD 903 were: THE EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, LAHORE THROUGH ITS CHAIRMAN AND ANOTHER—PETITIONERS VERSUS MUHAMMAD NAWAZ—RESPONDENT. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1979 PLD 903.
Answer: Judgment This revision petition has been filed against an order of Main Habit-ur-Rahman, Additional District Judge, Lahore, dated 12th November 1979. 2. The plaintiff-respondent was an Inspector in the District Evacuee Trust Committee, Multan. On 17th January 1969, his services were terminated for misconduct. He, therefore, filed a civil suit to challenge this order. 3. The suit was contested by the petitioners on various grounds. The learned trial Court framed the following issues — “(1) Whether the impugned order is illegal ? O. P. P. (2) Whether the plaintiffs no cause of action ? O. P. D.' (3) Whether this suit is not maintainable in its present form? O. P, D, (4) Whether this suit is time barred ? O. P. D. (5) Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to proceed with the present suit ? O. P. D. (6) Relief” 4. It was urged on behalf of the petitioners that the app moment o the plaintiff-respondent was on temporary basis and his services could be term mated at any time without assigning any reason, but the learned trial Court did not agree with this and found Issue No. against the petitioners on the ground that it was not a case of simple termination of services since the removal of the respondent was directed on ground of his misconduct, and such an order could not be passed without following the procedure provided by the Rules. The learned trial Court, however, dismissed the suit on a finding on Issues Nos. and 5 against the plaintiff-respondent. It held that the remedy of the plaintiff lay before the higher Authorities, or he could file a writ petition in the High Court, but he could not file a civil suit. 5. In appeal the learned Additional District Judge found Issues Nos. and S to have been incorrectly decided in the circumstances of the case. He, therefore, decreed the suit. 6. The learned counsel for the petitioners urged that the petitioners being only a statutory corporation the relationship between it and its employees were governed by the law of master and servant and consequently no suit for declaration could be filed to challenge the order of termination of service. The only remedy of the petitioners was to file a suit for damages. 7. The learned counsel relied upon Pakistan Refugee and Rehabilitation Corporation v. Syed Kara mat Hussain (1) I'm which it was held that servants of Refugee and Rehabilitation Corporation have no conditional protection or safeguard like civil servants and as such they are governed only by the law of master and servant. No civil suit for declaration by an employee of the Corporation is, therefore, competent. 8. The learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand submitted that this principle would not apply to a case where removal of an employee of a Corporation is ordered in violation of provisions of statutory rules. 9. I agree with the argument of the learned counsel that the civil suit was competent since the rules of service governing the petitioners are statutory rules. The case is distinguishable from those cases where it was held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court that the dispute between a statutory corporation and its employees are governed by the law of master ' and servant and in case of such dispute the only remedy for the employees is to file suits for damages even though the employees have been removed or dismissed from service without BMG granted an opportunity of being heard. The cases to this effect are Lahore Central Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. Said Allah Shah Pakistan v. Nadeem Ahmad (3) Messes Malik Had and another v. Muhammad Shams-UL-Islam (4) and Chairman, East Pakistan Development Corporation v. RUSTA Ali 10. But this principle does not apply to a case where the relations between employer and the employees are governed by the statutory rules. This is clear from the observation in the Lahore Central Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. Said Allah Shah in which reliance was placed upon a resolution passed by the Managing Committee to the effect that the Civil Services Rules would apply to the Bank’s employees. It was held that this could not help the employees since the resolution was not passed in the form of rule. The portion underlined* by me established that in the view of their Lordships of the Supreme Court a different view would have been taken if Abdullah Shah’s employment had been governed by statutory rules. In the case of Messes Malik Had and another v. Muhammad Shams-UL-Islam the principle of master and servant was applied in the absence of any statutory provision. In jazz Ahmad Siddiqui v. Municipal Committee (1) a Division Bench of the High Court of West Pakistan entered a caveat that "we should not be understood as saying that a Municipality or another corporate body is absolutely immune from the writ jurisdiction in the matter of grant of redress to an aggrieved employee even if the impugned order suffers from a meant vice and is for that reason ab initio.” Similar view was taken in District Board Lahore v. Aft Muhammad Khan (2) Abdul Harbor v. The Thai Development Authority Jalalabad Deputy Managing Director, National Bank of Pakistan v. Paul Hag (4), v. Karachi Cantonment Board (5) M. S. Kabuki v. Province of West Pakistan Secretary, East Pakistan Industrial Development Corporation v. Md. Serajevo Hague (7), Province of East Pakistan v. Mustard Din Ahmad Ayaz Hussain v. Administration Lahore Municipal Corporation (9) and Abdul Razz v. WAPDA (10). In view of this consistent view, I agree that the civil suit was not incompetent. 10. This question was agitated in some other cases filed against the employees by the Board. In Cultivar Ban v. Chairman Evacuee Trust Board Writ Petition No. 1709/S of 1969 decided on IST October 1974, it was held that the employees of the Evacuee Trust Board were governed by the Efficiency and Discipline Rules of the Central Government and where an order of termination of service was preceded by a charge-sheet and an explanation which was found unsatisfactory, the charge-sheet played an important part and the order of termination of service was by way of penalty and not in accordance with the terms of the employment of the employee. It could not be sustained unless the procedure laid down by the Rules was followed. Same view had been taken earlier in Writ Petition No. 1542/S of 1972 Muhammad Roman v. The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board and another decided on 13th May 1974, Writ Petition No. 217 of 1972 MacBook Ahmad and others v. Inapt Hussain and others decided on 22nd May 1974, and Writ Petition No. 152/S of 1972 Our Elah v. The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board and another decided on the same date. Civil Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal Nos. 645 and 646 of 1974 were filed by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board against the two latter cases which were dismissed. It was urged before their Lordships of the Supreme Court that Evacuee Trust Property Board *( Here in italics bad not framed any Rules prescribing the procedure for the removal or dismissal of the Board’s employees, and secondly the issuance of show-cause notices gave sufficient opportunity to the respondents. Under paragraph No. 43 of the Scheme framed under section 16-A(1) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, and under section 14(2) of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, the Evacuee Trust Board was authorized to make rules to carry out the purpose of the Scheme. Paragraph 16 of the Scheme provided that no employee of the Board shall be dismissed or otherwise punished except in accordance with rules framed by the Board and approved by the Central Government. The Evacuee Trust Board passed the following resolution MN the 60th meeting of the Board held in May 1969, by which it was resolved that— “Agreed. Central Government Rules would apply to the Board's employees for all intents and purposes.” Their Lordships of the Supreme Court repelled the argument of the learned counsel for the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board on the basis of this resolution and held that it amounted to the making of Rules by the Board. 11. It is clear that the employees of the Board were governed by the Efficiency and Discipline Rules. The order of termination of service of the respondent was based on a finding of misconduct which leaves a stigma on the respondent. In these circumstances, I agree that this was a case of penalty in which the procedure laid down by paragraph No. 16 should have been applied. The impugned order of the Board was not sustainable, and the suit was rightly decreed. I find no ground to interfere. « 12. The petition is dismissed with costs. Q Petition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 PLD 903?
Answer: From case 1979 PLD 903 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1979-03-13): Judgment This revision petition has been filed against an order of Main Habit-ur-Rahman, Additional District Judge, Lahore, dated 12th November 1979. 2. The plaintiff-respondent was an Inspector in the District Evacuee Trust Committee, Multan. On 17th January 1969, his services were terminated for misconduct. He, therefore, filed a civil suit to challenge this order. 3. The suit was contested by the petitioners on various grounds. The learned trial Court framed the following issues — “(1) Whether the impugned order is illegal ? O. P. P. (2) Whether the plaintiffs no cause of action ? O. P. D.' (3) Whether this suit is not maintainable in its present form? O. P, D, (4) Whether this suit is time barred ? O. P. D. (5) Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to proceed with the present suit ? O. P. D. (6) Relief” 4. It was urged on behalf of the petitioners that the app moment o the plaintiff-respondent was on temporary basis and his services could be term mated at any time without assigning any reason, but the learned trial Court did not agree with this and found Issue No. against the petitioners on the ground that it was not a case of simple termination of services since the removal of the respondent was directed on ground of his misconduct, and such an order could not be passed without following the procedure provided by the Rules. The learned trial Court, however, dismissed the suit on a finding on Issues Nos. and 5 against the plaintiff-respondent. It held that the remedy of the plaintiff lay before the higher Authorities, or he could file a writ petition in the High Court, but he could not file a civil suit. 5. In appeal the learned Additional District Judge found Issues Nos. and S to have been incorrectly decided in the circumstances of the case. He, therefore, decreed the suit. 6. The learned counsel for the petitioners urged that the petitioners being only a statutory corporation the relationship between it and its employees were governed by the law of master and servant and consequently no suit for declaration could be filed to challenge the order of termination of service. The only remedy of the petitioners was to file a suit for damages. 7. The learned counsel relied upon Pakistan Refugee and Rehabilitation Corporation v. Syed Kara mat Hussain (1) I'm which it was held that servants of Refugee and Rehabilitation Corporation have no conditional protection or safeguard like civil servants and as such they are governed only by the law of master and servant. No civil suit for declaration by an employee of the Corporation is, therefore, competent. 8. The learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand submitted that this principle would not apply to a case where removal of an employee of a Corporation is ordered in violation of provisions of statutory rules. 9. I agree with the argument of the learned counsel that the civil suit was competent since the rules

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 PLD 903?
Answer: From case 1979 PLD 903 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1979-03-13): on the other hand submitted that this principle would not apply to a case where removal of an employee of a Corporation is ordered in violation of provisions of statutory rules. 9. I agree with the argument of the learned counsel that the civil suit was competent since the rules of service governing the petitioners are statutory rules. The case is distinguishable from those cases where it was held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court that the dispute between a statutory corporation and its employees are governed by the law of master ' and servant and in case of such dispute the only remedy for the employees is to file suits for damages even though the employees have been removed or dismissed from service without BMG granted an opportunity of being heard. The cases to this effect are Lahore Central Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. Said Allah Shah Pakistan v. Nadeem Ahmad (3) Messes Malik Had and another v. Muhammad Shams-UL-Islam (4) and Chairman, East Pakistan Development Corporation v. RUSTA Ali 10. But this principle does not apply to a case where the relations between employer and the employees are governed by the statutory rules. This is clear from the observation in the Lahore Central Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. Said Allah Shah in which reliance was placed upon a resolution passed by the Managing Committee to the effect that the Civil Services Rules would apply to the Bank’s employees. It was held that this could not help the employees since the resolution was not passed in the form of rule. The portion underlined* by me established that in the view of their Lordships of the Supreme Court a different view would have been taken if Abdullah Shah’s employment had been governed by statutory rules. In the case of Messes Malik Had and another v. Muhammad Shams-UL-Islam the principle of master and servant was applied in the absence of any statutory provision. In jazz Ahmad Siddiqui v. Municipal Committee (1) a Division Bench of the High Court of West Pakistan entered a caveat that "we should not be understood as saying that a Municipality or another corporate body is absolutely immune from the writ jurisdiction in the matter of grant of redress to an aggrieved employee even if the impugned order suffers from a meant vice and is for that reason ab initio.” Similar view was taken in District Board Lahore v. Aft Muhammad Khan (2) Abdul Harbor v. The Thai Development Authority Jalalabad Deputy Managing Director, National Bank of Pakistan v. Paul Hag (4), v. Karachi Cantonment Board (5) M. S. Kabuki v. Province of West Pakistan Secretary, East Pakistan Industrial Development Corporation v. Md. Serajevo Hague (7), Province of East Pakistan v. Mustard Din Ahmad Ayaz Hussain v. Administration Lahore Municipal Corporation (9) and Abdul Razz v. WAPDA (10). In view of this consistent view, I agree that the civil suit was not incompetent. 10. This question was agitated in some other cases filed against the employees by the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 PLD 903?
Answer: From case 1979 PLD 903 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1979-03-13): East Pakistan v. Mustard Din Ahmad Ayaz Hussain v. Administration Lahore Municipal Corporation (9) and Abdul Razz v. WAPDA (10). In view of this consistent view, I agree that the civil suit was not incompetent. 10. This question was agitated in some other cases filed against the employees by the Board. In Cultivar Ban v. Chairman Evacuee Trust Board Writ Petition No. 1709/S of 1969 decided on IST October 1974, it was held that the employees of the Evacuee Trust Board were governed by the Efficiency and Discipline Rules of the Central Government and where an order of termination of service was preceded by a charge-sheet and an explanation which was found unsatisfactory, the charge-sheet played an important part and the order of termination of service was by way of penalty and not in accordance with the terms of the employment of the employee. It could not be sustained unless the procedure laid down by the Rules was followed. Same view had been taken earlier in Writ Petition No. 1542/S of 1972 Muhammad Roman v. The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board and another decided on 13th May 1974, Writ Petition No. 217 of 1972 MacBook Ahmad and others v. Inapt Hussain and others decided on 22nd May 1974, and Writ Petition No. 152/S of 1972 Our Elah v. The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board and another decided on the same date. Civil Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal Nos. 645 and 646 of 1974 were filed by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board against the two latter cases which were dismissed. It was urged before their Lordships of the Supreme Court that Evacuee Trust Property Board *( Here in italics bad not framed any Rules prescribing the procedure for the removal or dismissal of the Board’s employees, and secondly the issuance of show-cause notices gave sufficient opportunity to the respondents. Under paragraph No. 43 of the Scheme framed under section 16-A(1) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, and under section 14(2) of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, the Evacuee Trust Board was authorized to make rules to carry out the purpose of the Scheme. Paragraph 16 of the Scheme provided that no employee of the Board shall be dismissed or otherwise punished except in accordance with rules framed by the Board and approved by the Central Government. The Evacuee Trust Board passed the following resolution MN the 60th meeting of the Board held in May 1969, by which it was resolved that— “Agreed. Central Government Rules would apply to the Board's employees for all intents and purposes.” Their Lordships of the Supreme Court repelled the argument of the learned counsel for the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board on the basis of this resolution and held that it amounted to the making of Rules by the Board. 11. It is clear that the employees of the Board were governed by the Efficiency and Discipline Rules. The order of termination of service of the respondent was based on

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1979 PLD 903?
Answer: From case 1979 PLD 903 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1979-03-13): Board on the basis of this resolution and held that it amounted to the making of Rules by the Board. 11. It is clear that the employees of the Board were governed by the Efficiency and Discipline Rules. The order of termination of service of the respondent was based on a finding of misconduct which leaves a stigma on the respondent. In these circumstances, I agree that this was a case of penalty in which the procedure laid down by paragraph No. 16 should have been applied. The impugned order of the Board was not sustainable, and the suit was rightly decreed. I find no ground to interfere. « 12. The petition is dismissed with costs. Q Petition dismissed

Question: What is case 1970 SCMR 419 about?
Answer: Case 1970 SCMR 419 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1970-01-28. The case involved KHEMUMALAND 2. OTHERS—APPELLANTSVERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, SOUTH ZONE, KARACHI AND ANOTHER — RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ART.58(3). The case was heard by HAMOODUR RAHMAN, C. J. SAJJAD AHMAD AND M. R. KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1970 SCMR 419?
Answer: In case 1970 SCMR 419, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ART.58(3). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1970-01-28.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1970 SCMR 419?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1970 SCMR 419 were: ABDUL HAFEEZ1PIRZADA. ADVOCATE-SUPREMECOURT 'INSTRUCTED BYIBRAHIM MEMON, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR APPELLANTS. 1' 1'\,»1,-'P-./SAYEED A. SHEIKH, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY. SHAFIQ AHMAD, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: HAMOODUR RAHMAN, C. J. SAJJAD AHMAD AND M. R. KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1970 SCMR 419?
Answer: The parties in case 1970 SCMR 419 were: KHEMUMALAND 2. OTHERS—APPELLANTSVERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, SOUTH ZONE, KARACHI AND ANOTHER — RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1970 SCMR 419.
Answer: . Salad Ahmad, J—During. the arguments which we ‘have partly heard in this appeal, some very important questions of] law have been raised bearing on'the construction of the provisions of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, and the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958; which are of general application, and need to be finally determined by this Court.1 We are informed that. Some Other matters are already pending in this Court; which the same questions have to be decided. It is, therefore, advisable to adjourn this, appeal to be heard along. With the other. Cognate matters byte Full] Court at Lahore on the 2nd of larch 1970

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 SCMR 419?
Answer: From case 1970 SCMR 419 (SUPREME COURT, 1970-01-28): . Salad Ahmad, J—During. the arguments which we ‘have partly heard in this appeal, some very important questions of] law have been raised bearing on'the construction of the provisions of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, and the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958; which are of general application, and need to be finally determined by this Court.1 We are informed that. Some Other matters are already pending in this Court; which the same questions have to be decided. It is, therefore, advisable to adjourn this, appeal to be heard along. With the other. Cognate matters byte Full] Court at Lahore on the 2nd of larch 1970

Question: What is case 1970 SCMR 346 about?
Answer: Case 1970 SCMR 346 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1969-12-02. The case involved THE VICE CHAIRMAN EAST PAKISTAN ENEMY PROPERTY MANAGEMENT BOARD AND OTHERS PETITIONERSVERSUS SHAH GHULAM NABI AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include DEFENCE OF PAKISTAN RULES 1965 - R. 182(1). The case was heard by ABDUS SATTAR AND M. R. KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1970 SCMR 346?
Answer: In case 1970 SCMR 346, the court applied the following statutes: DEFENCE OF PAKISTAN RULES 1965 - R. 182(1). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1969-12-02.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1970 SCMR 346?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1970 SCMR 346 were: kK. A. BAKR, ADVOCATE SUPREME' COURT INSTRUCTED BYA. M. KHAN CHOWDHURY, SENIOR ATTORNEY FOR;.PETITIONERS.D;‘ C. - BM TTACHARTYA, SENIOR] -'ADVOCATE! SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BYABDUR RAB IT; ATTORNEY FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: ABDUS SATTAR AND M. R. KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1970 SCMR 346?
Answer: The parties in case 1970 SCMR 346 were: THE VICE CHAIRMAN EAST PAKISTAN ENEMY PROPERTY MANAGEMENT BOARD AND OTHERS PETITIONERSVERSUS SHAH GHULAM NABI AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1970 SCMR 346.
Answer: MIR. Khan, J.--The' Vice-Ch'airmail, East Pakistan-Erie'MV k 4d HA. >I1’t. PI 1“ J Lay Property ““Management’ Board, Dacca' (petitioned-No. 1) issued a 'Notified'ton on the-18th’ July 1'968, tinder while Cl) 'of r-ruleC182 of the,rDefenceJ of Pakistan Rules, |'declaring that Hahn’Maurice ‘and Oil Mills (formerly* known; *as Shari 'Rice- 'and Oil'Mills) in 'the, District of Dimapur being an ENE’myr6pé£r-fy,"the same along with its assets shall vest in ’the Additional Custodian!,of Enemy Property in East Pakistan (petitioner N6.;2). On;the same day, the petitioner No. issued another Notified'ton ' -under paragraph of the Enemy Property (Custody and Registration) Order, 1965, authorizing the Deputy Commissioner of Dimapur (petitioner No. to take such measures as might be necessary for the preservation of the said mills and to manage and carry on the trade and business of the mills. The validity of these two Notifications was challenged by the respondents herein in a writ petition under Article 98 of the 1962-Constitution in the High Court of East Pakistan. It was stated in the writ petition that Shari Rice and Oil Mills formerly belonged to one Turned.u Narayan Roy Deb Burma. In the. Year 1956 he contracted to sell the mills to Chianti Lai Sharif The latter filed a suit in 1962 for specific performance of that contract and obtained a decree. In pursuance of that decree, he obtained, a Karbala in respect of the mills through Court on the 5th October 1964. Subsequently on the 1st December 1967, Chianti Lai Sharif formed a partnership with the present 'respondents Nos. to 3 in respect of the said mills. This partnership was registered with the Registrar of Firms on the 3rd February 196& The respondents claimed to have acquired interest in the mills in question on the strength of the said partnership and denied the same to be an enemy property. A Decision Bench of the High Court accepted the writ petition and declared the impugned orders to have been made without lawful authority. The petitioners now seek special leave to appeal from the judgment, and order of the High Court. According to the petitioners, Chianti Lai Sharif left for India in early February 1968, after disposing of his other properties in Pakistan and since then he has been staying in India. The respondents did not dispute that since February 1-968, the whereabouts of Chianti Lai Sharif were not known. Mr. K. A. Bar; learned counsel appearing for the petitioners submits that in the background of the facts of this case the High Court was not correct in holding that the disputed mills is not an enemy property and that it did not vest in the Additional Custodian of Enemy Property. The question whether the disputed mills are an enemy property or not under the Defense of Pakistan Rules deserves consideration. Leave is accordingly granted to consider this question. Stay already granted shall continue. The. appeal shall be made ready for hearing in the next session. Leave granted WWW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 SCMR 346?
Answer: From case 1970 SCMR 346 (SUPREME COURT, 1969-12-02): MIR. Khan, J.--The' Vice-Ch'airmail, East Pakistan-Erie'MV k 4d HA. >I1’t. PI 1“ J Lay Property ““Management’ Board, Dacca' (petitioned-No. 1) issued a 'Notified'ton on the-18th’ July 1'968, tinder while Cl) 'of r-ruleC182 of the,rDefenceJ of Pakistan Rules, |'declaring that Hahn’Maurice ‘and Oil Mills (formerly* known; *as Shari 'Rice- 'and Oil'Mills) in 'the, District of Dimapur being an ENE’myr6pé£r-fy,"the same along with its assets shall vest in ’the Additional Custodian!,of Enemy Property in East Pakistan (petitioner N6.;2). On;the same day, the petitioner No. issued another Notified'ton ' -under paragraph of the Enemy Property (Custody and Registration) Order, 1965, authorizing the Deputy Commissioner of Dimapur (petitioner No. to take such measures as might be necessary for the preservation of the said mills and to manage and carry on the trade and business of the mills. The validity of these two Notifications was challenged by the respondents herein in a writ petition under Article 98 of the 1962-Constitution in the High Court of East Pakistan. It was stated in the writ petition that Shari Rice and Oil Mills formerly belonged to one Turned.u Narayan Roy Deb Burma. In the. Year 1956 he contracted to sell the mills to Chianti Lai Sharif The latter filed a suit in 1962 for specific performance of that contract and obtained a decree. In pursuance of that decree, he obtained, a Karbala in respect of the mills through Court on the 5th October 1964. Subsequently on the 1st December 1967, Chianti Lai Sharif formed a partnership with the present 'respondents Nos. to 3 in respect of the said mills. This partnership was registered with the Registrar of Firms on the 3rd February 196& The respondents claimed to have acquired interest in the mills in question on the strength of the said partnership and denied the same to be an enemy property. A Decision Bench of the High Court accepted the writ petition and declared the impugned orders to have been made without lawful authority. The petitioners now seek special leave to appeal from the judgment, and order of the High Court. According to the petitioners, Chianti Lai Sharif left for India in early February 1968, after disposing of his other properties in Pakistan and since then he has been staying in India. The respondents did not dispute that since February 1-968, the whereabouts of Chianti Lai Sharif were not known. Mr. K. A. Bar; learned counsel appearing for the petitioners submits that in the background of the facts of this case the High Court was not correct in holding that the disputed mills is not an enemy property and that it did not vest in the Additional Custodian of Enemy Property. The question whether the disputed mills are an enemy property or not under the Defense of Pakistan Rules deserves consideration. Leave is accordingly granted to consider this question. Stay already granted shall continue. The. appeal shall be made ready for hearing in the next session. Leave granted WWW.

Question: What is case 1984 PLD 81 about?
Answer: Case 1984 PLD 81 was decided by PESHAWAR HIGH COURT on 1983-02-02. The case involved GUL HAQ AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20. The case was heard by INAYAT ELAHI KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: In case 1984 PLD 81, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20. This case was heard in PESHAWAR HIGH COURT and decided on 1983-02-02.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 PLD 81 were: SARDAR KHAN FOR PETITIONERS. KH. NAZIR AHMAD FOR RESPONDENT NOS. TO 4.8. SAFDAR HUSSAIN FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 12.Z, MAHFOOZ KHAN FOR THE REMAINING RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: INAYAT ELAHI KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 PLD 81 were: GUL HAQ AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in PESHAWAR HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 PLD 81.
Answer: Judgment The dispute in this writ petition relates to agricultural land situated in village Patti Pagan Thesis and District Peshawar. According to the petitioners Hassan Jan and Noor Muhammad sons of Sultan and one Fatal Had purchased /6th share of the agricultural land, comprising That Nos. 30 and 31 of the Jacaranda of the year 1936-37 measuring 626 canals 13 Marley and 391 canals 17 mar las, respectively, from one Johan Singh vide registered sale-deed dated 29-8-1938, The aforesaid Hats were numbered as 31 and 32, in the Jacaranda of the year 1940-41. The other /6th share of Ram Singh in the aforesaid K_ hats is also alleged to have been purchased by them with possession on the basis fan oral sale. In support of this sale reliance is placed on a receipt m ‘Gurmukhi executed by Ram SMG whereby be had acknowledged the receipt of the sale consideration of Rs. 2,500. It is further alleged that AAUP Singh another co-sharer in the two Hats sold his /6th share in favor of one Abdul Jail. This sale was successfully pre-empted by Ram Singh who obtained a decree on 25-9-1942. The petitioners claimed to have been m continuous possession of the land in dispute without interruption. It is alleged that Ram Singh had himself appeared before the Atari on 1-7-1947 and by admitting the sale in favor of the petitioners got entered mutation No. 154 which was rejected in the first instance but on appeal was attested on 10-3-1948. The petitioners allege to be in peaceful possession of the land when in 1960, inquiry was initiated by the Special Police Establishment MTO the transfer of land of Ram Singh m their favor. On 7-1- 1961 petitioners made an application to the Deputy Custodian under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act (Act XII of 1957) clamming declaration of their ownership and possession regarding /3rd out of 626 canals 13 Marley in That No. 31 and 65 canals 5 Marley put of 391 canals 17 Marley of land TP That No, 32 as entered in the Jacaranda of the year 1940-41. The Deputy Custodian recommended their case to the Custodian for approval of the sale vide Reference No. 47 of 1969, but the reference was rejected by the Custodian vide order dated 3-9-1961 holding the land to be evacuee property. On 5-2-1962 the petitioners instituted a suit for a declaration that the property was not evacuee and was sold to them by Ram Singh evacuee. In the suit reliance was also placed on mutation No. 154 entered on 2-7- 1947 and attested on 10-3-1948 in the favor. The suit was dismissed on 19-3-1966 by the civil Court for want of jurisdiction. The petitioners appeal before the District Judge also failed vide order dated 4-10-1966. The petitioners then filed R. S. A. in the High Court but without any success which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. They then moved petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 70-P of 1970 before the Supreme Court which was also dismissed on 11-12-1972. Thereafter WW. the petitioners challenged the order of the Custodian in Writ Petition No. 92 of 1973 in this Court but since Custodian was not imp leaded as a party they were allowed to withdraw the writ petition with permission to bring a fresh one subject to deposit of Rs. 1,000 as cost. It was then on 9-9-1974 that the present writ petition was filed in this Court pleading Custodian Evacuee Property as respondent No. 1. 2. The learned counsel for the respondents raised an objection that the petition was not maintainable as it was barred by laches since the order of the Custodian dated 3C-9-1961 was being challenged in the writ petition filed on 9-9-1974. From the material available in the case it appears that a equity was imitated in 1960-61 by the Special Police Establishment into the transfer of the land in favor of the petitioners. They promptly filed an application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 on 7-1-1961 before the Deputy Custodian. The Deputy Custodian vide order dated 2-6-1961 treated the land as non-evacuee property and thus made a reference to the Custodian for his approval but since the approval was not accorded by the Custodian vide order dated 30-9-1961, the petitioners filed a declaratory suit in the civil Court on 5-2-1962 which was dismissed on 19-3-1966 by the Senior Civil Judge, Peshawar, for want of jurisdiction. Their appeal before the District Judge having been dismissed, they approached the High Court by filing R. S. A. No. 357 of 1966 which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. The petitioner then filed a petition for Special Leave to Appeal before the Supreme Court, but the leave was refused on 11-12-1972 with the observations that the petitioners remedy was by way of filing a writ petition against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property. Thereafter the petitioners died Writ Petition No. 92 of 1973 which was allowed to be withdrawn on 2-7-1974 with the permission to file a fresh writ petition. Thus on 9-9-1974 the present writ petition was died in this Court. From the facts stated above it is obvious that the! petitioners have all along been pursuing their remedy with diligence since 1961.U The petitioners have never been negligent in seeking their remedy. In Muhammad Khan v. Shamsuddin it was held that where the petitioner has been bona fide pursuing his remedy in the civil Courts, the fact that the writ petition was filed against the impugned order after the lapse of 8 years, would not disentitle the petitioner to the grant of equitable relief on the ground of laches. In Pakistan v. Sheikh Abdul Hamid (2) it was observed that “the delay was of no consequence as the petitioner had diligently been making representations to the Government all through from 1949 before film the writ petition in the High Court in 1957. WW. In Mohammad Umar Khan v. Pakistan (3) (1) 1969 S CMR 212 2) PLD 1961 SC 105 (3) PLD 1982 Push. it was held that “there was no Imitation on the discretion of the Court in granting relief and no hard and fast rule can be laid down as to what m particular circumstances would constitute laches”. The delay alone was held not sufficient to non-suit the petitioner or to constitute condonable laches, the delay must be coupled with other conduct of the petitioner amounting to estoppel etc. In this view of the matter the objection with regard to Lachesis cannot prevail in this case. 3. So far as /6th share of Johan Singh sold in favor of the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest is concerned there appears to be no dispute between the parties, as the sale was effected on the basis of a registered sale-deed dated 29-8-1938, and it was duly incorporated in the revenue record. \ Regarding /6th share of Ram Singh in the land in dispute which was obtained by him in the preemption Suit No. instituted on 4-1-1942 and decreed in his favor on 26-9- 1942, it may be mentioned that the petitioners have not specifically clammed ownership thereof: Although the said portion is also alleged to be in their possession. In the civil litigation the aforesaid I/6th share which was subject-matter of the preemption suit was claimed by the petitioners for the reason that Ram Singh was a ‘Beamier’ and in fact he had instituted the preemption suit for their benefit. This contention however, did not prevail with the learned District Judge who came to the conclusion that Ram Singh was the exclusive owner of the aforesaid /6th share in the land. In this writ petition no such contention has been raised by the petitioners. The learned counsel for the petitioners has mainly relied on the other /6th share of Ram Singh which is alleged to have been sold by him in favor of the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest for a consideration of Rs. 2,500 paid by means of a receipt executed by Ram Singh in ‘Gurmukhi in the year 1998 Vikram corresponding to the year 1941-42. It is urged that the possession of the aforesaid land was also given to the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest and in consequence Mutation No. 154 was entered at the instance of Ram Singh on 2-7-1947. This mutation was rejected on 5-10-1947 since ban has been imposed by the Provincial Government on transfer of Evacuee Property of non-Muslims. However, on appeal this mutation was ordered to be attested by the Collector Peshawar on 10-3-1948. The learned counsel urged that this mutation was entered pursuant to the oral sale effected by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners which was duly evidenced by the aforesaid receipt and since the WW. sale in question took place prior to 28-2-1947 it did not require any confirmation by the Custodian under section 20 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957). However, a reference to Mutation No. 154 would show that in the note of the Atari dated 2-7-1947 there is no mention of the aforesaid receipt of the fact that the sale had already been effected by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners prior to 28-2- 1947. The note of the Atari is in the following terms It is difficult to draw an inference from the aforesaid note of the Atari that the sale had taken place earlier than 28-2-1947 as it leads to the inference that soon after the oral sale the Atari was informed for enter mg the mutation. Even if the principle, that a mutation takes effect from the date of entry and not from the date of its attestation, is kept in view, it is evident that the sale in question, having taken place in the month of July, 1947, was within the mischief of section 20 of the Act XII 1957 and would not confer q any valid title on the petitioners unless accepted by the Custodian as required by law. About the receipt relied upon by the petitioners it may also be mentioned that the same being not registered could not be looked into. The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that it did not require registration as it was a simple receipt for payment of money would not prevail as it is clear from the contents of the receipt that the amount of Rs. 2,500 was received by Ram Singh as a consideration for the transfer of land wherein he also agreed to execute a registered sale-deed subsequently in favor of vendees. The aforesaid document if considered as a conveyance of title would obviously require registration but if the document is taken as an agreement to sell it would not confer any title on the vendees unless it was specifically enforced and a registered sale-deed duly executed in favor of the petitioners. The learned counsel then argued that the petitioners are recorded in possession of the land as owners. It is not disputed that Ram Singh was a co-sharer in the land along with the petitioners and the mere possession by one co-sharer would not amount to ouster in the absence of an overt act or assertion of hostile title. The contention of the learned counsel that the petitioners are recorded in the relevant Jamabandies as ‘Bill Logan Banana Ba?’ is not well-founded because from the perusal of the Jamabandies of 1940-41 and 1946-47 it appears that Ram Singh himself and also along with other co-sharers is shown MN possession of a portion of the land in dispute and there is no entry excepting for Kara Nos. 348-79 and 331 in the Jacaranda of 1946-47, showing the petitioners in possession of the land as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bai’. The entry regarding the aforesaid three Kara numbers in the Jacaranda of 1946-47 showing the petitioner as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bai’ would be of no consequence as there exists no basis i the revenue record for incorporating the aforesaid entry. Such like entries in the Jamabandies after 1946-47 would be of no avail as by operation of law the evacuee interest in the land stood vested in the Custodian since 1-3-1947. Thus it is evident that the oral sale or the receipt executed by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners was not given D effect to in the revenue record. There is nothing to prove that on the basis of the alleged sale of /6th share in favor of the petitioners or their predecessor-in- interest, they remained in exclusive possession thereof and the interest of the evacuee co- sharer stood extinguished. 4. It was next argued that the property BMG joint could not have been transferred to the allottees unless partitioned. Reliance is placed on Mehran v. The Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner In the cited case the land on which the property in dispute was constructed was ‘Shamilat-1-Deh’ and the evacuee interest could not be separated without partition. It was thus observed that the appellant who was a co-sharer in the ‘Shamika-i-Deh land was entitled to maintain his possession undisturbed until partition and that the land on which the property in dispute was situated being ‘Shamika-i-Deh’ and being a joint property could not be declared as evacuee property. In the case in hand it is not shown that the land in dispute is Shamika-i-Deh or that it has been constructed upon. Rather there is evidence to show that symbolic possession of the land belonging to the evacuee was taken by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Department through the Revenue Officer on 28-2-1961. The report of the Atari in this regard would show (1) P LD 1974 S C 193 that symbolic possession of specified Kara numbers out of various Bats was taken from the petitioners. This fact would indicate that the share of the non-Muslim Evacuee is identifiable and can be taken possession of separately from the joint property. Therefore, this objection of the learned counsel appears to be without any substance. The learned counsel then argued that after 1-1-1957 the property in dispute could not have been treated as evacuee property under section 3(1) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. 1957 (Act XII of 1957). But it is evident that clause (b) of section 3(2) of the Act is in the nature of an exception to the aforesaid provision of Saw thereunder the Custodian had the authority to treat the property as evacuee in cases covered by section 3(2) Thus, obviously where any evacuee property is occupied, supervised, or managed by a person whose right or authority in this regard F has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian, the same can be treated as evacuee property by the Custodian even after 1-1-1957. In Maj. Mehta Khan v. The Rehabilitation Authority (1) it was observed that the protection granted by subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of WW. 1957 is not available to properties occupied, supervised or managed by persons whose authority or right so to do after the 28th day of February, 1947 has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian of Evacuee Property and that these words are wide enough to include cases of vendees of the evacuee properties where the sale were effected after the 28th day of February, 1947, and they have been confirmed by the Custodian as required by section 20 of the Act. The petitioners having failed to prove a valid sale in their favor prior to q 1-3-1947, were obviously occupying the property whose right so to do was never accepted or approved by the Custodian. 5. For the aforesaid reasons, no exception can be taken to the order of the Custodian treating the land in dispute as evacuee property. Therefore, H the writ petition BMG without any substance is hereby dismissed. with no order as to costs. M. Y. h. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): Judgment The dispute in this writ petition relates to agricultural land situated in village Patti Pagan Thesis and District Peshawar. According to the petitioners Hassan Jan and Noor Muhammad sons of Sultan and one Fatal Had purchased /6th share of the agricultural land, comprising That Nos. 30 and 31 of the Jacaranda of the year 1936-37 measuring 626 canals 13 Marley and 391 canals 17 mar las, respectively, from one Johan Singh vide registered sale-deed dated 29-8-1938, The aforesaid Hats were numbered as 31 and 32, in the Jacaranda of the year 1940-41. The other /6th share of Ram Singh in the aforesaid K_ hats is also alleged to have been purchased by them with possession on the basis fan oral sale. In support of this sale reliance is placed on a receipt m ‘Gurmukhi executed by Ram SMG whereby be had acknowledged the receipt of the sale consideration of Rs. 2,500. It is further alleged that AAUP Singh another co-sharer in the two Hats sold his /6th share in favor of one Abdul Jail. This sale was successfully pre-empted by Ram Singh who obtained a decree on 25-9-1942. The petitioners claimed to have been m continuous possession of the land in dispute without interruption. It is alleged that Ram Singh had himself appeared before the Atari on 1-7-1947 and by admitting the sale in favor of the petitioners got entered mutation No. 154 which was rejected in the first instance but on appeal was attested on 10-3-1948. The petitioners allege to be in peaceful possession of the land when in 1960, inquiry was initiated by the Special Police Establishment MTO the transfer of land of Ram Singh m their favor. On 7-1- 1961 petitioners made an application to the Deputy Custodian under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act (Act XII of 1957) clamming declaration of their ownership and possession regarding /3rd out of 626 canals 13 Marley in That No. 31 and 65 canals 5 Marley put of 391 canals 17 Marley of land TP That No, 32 as entered in the Jacaranda of the year 1940-41. The Deputy Custodian recommended their case to the Custodian for approval of the sale vide Reference No. 47 of 1969, but the reference was rejected by the Custodian vide order dated 3-9-1961 holding the land to be evacuee property. On 5-2-1962 the petitioners instituted a suit for a declaration that the property was not evacuee and was sold to them by Ram Singh evacuee. In the suit reliance was also placed on mutation No. 154 entered on 2-7- 1947 and attested on 10-3-1948 in the favor. The suit was dismissed on 19-3-1966 by the civil Court for want of jurisdiction. The petitioners appeal before the District Judge also failed vide order dated 4-10-1966. The petitioners then filed R. S. A. in the High Court but without any success which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. They then moved petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 70-P of 1970 before

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): of jurisdiction. The petitioners appeal before the District Judge also failed vide order dated 4-10-1966. The petitioners then filed R. S. A. in the High Court but without any success which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. They then moved petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 70-P of 1970 before the Supreme Court which was also dismissed on 11-12-1972. Thereafter WW. the petitioners challenged the order of the Custodian in Writ Petition No. 92 of 1973 in this Court but since Custodian was not imp leaded as a party they were allowed to withdraw the writ petition with permission to bring a fresh one subject to deposit of Rs. 1,000 as cost. It was then on 9-9-1974 that the present writ petition was filed in this Court pleading Custodian Evacuee Property as respondent No. 1. 2. The learned counsel for the respondents raised an objection that the petition was not maintainable as it was barred by laches since the order of the Custodian dated 3C-9-1961 was being challenged in the writ petition filed on 9-9-1974. From the material available in the case it appears that a equity was imitated in 1960-61 by the Special Police Establishment into the transfer of the land in favor of the petitioners. They promptly filed an application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 on 7-1-1961 before the Deputy Custodian. The Deputy Custodian vide order dated 2-6-1961 treated the land as non-evacuee property and thus made a reference to the Custodian for his approval but since the approval was not accorded by the Custodian vide order dated 30-9-1961, the petitioners filed a declaratory suit in the civil Court on 5-2-1962 which was dismissed on 19-3-1966 by the Senior Civil Judge, Peshawar, for want of jurisdiction. Their appeal before the District Judge having been dismissed, they approached the High Court by filing R. S. A. No. 357 of 1966 which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. The petitioner then filed a petition for Special Leave to Appeal before the Supreme Court, but the leave was refused on 11-12-1972 with the observations that the petitioners remedy was by way of filing a writ petition against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property. Thereafter the petitioners died Writ Petition No. 92 of 1973 which was allowed to be withdrawn on 2-7-1974 with the permission to file a fresh writ petition. Thus on 9-9-1974 the present writ petition was died in this Court. From the facts stated above it is obvious that the! petitioners have all along been pursuing their remedy with diligence since 1961.U The petitioners have never been negligent in seeking their remedy. In Muhammad Khan v. Shamsuddin it was held that where the petitioner has been bona fide pursuing his remedy in the civil Courts, the fact that the writ petition was filed against the impugned order after the lapse of 8 years, would not disentitle the petitioner to the grant of equitable relief on the ground of laches. In Pakistan v. Sheikh Abdul Hamid

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): been bona fide pursuing his remedy in the civil Courts, the fact that the writ petition was filed against the impugned order after the lapse of 8 years, would not disentitle the petitioner to the grant of equitable relief on the ground of laches. In Pakistan v. Sheikh Abdul Hamid (2) it was observed that “the delay was of no consequence as the petitioner had diligently been making representations to the Government all through from 1949 before film the writ petition in the High Court in 1957. WW. In Mohammad Umar Khan v. Pakistan (3) (1) 1969 S CMR 212 2) PLD 1961 SC 105 (3) PLD 1982 Push. it was held that “there was no Imitation on the discretion of the Court in granting relief and no hard and fast rule can be laid down as to what m particular circumstances would constitute laches”. The delay alone was held not sufficient to non-suit the petitioner or to constitute condonable laches, the delay must be coupled with other conduct of the petitioner amounting to estoppel etc. In this view of the matter the objection with regard to Lachesis cannot prevail in this case. 3. So far as /6th share of Johan Singh sold in favor of the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest is concerned there appears to be no dispute between the parties, as the sale was effected on the basis of a registered sale-deed dated 29-8-1938, and it was duly incorporated in the revenue record. \ Regarding /6th share of Ram Singh in the land in dispute which was obtained by him in the preemption Suit No. instituted on 4-1-1942 and decreed in his favor on 26-9- 1942, it may be mentioned that the petitioners have not specifically clammed ownership thereof: Although the said portion is also alleged to be in their possession. In the civil litigation the aforesaid I/6th share which was subject-matter of the preemption suit was claimed by the petitioners for the reason that Ram Singh was a ‘Beamier’ and in fact he had instituted the preemption suit for their benefit. This contention however, did not prevail with the learned District Judge who came to the conclusion that Ram Singh was the exclusive owner of the aforesaid /6th share in the land. In this writ petition no such contention has been raised by the petitioners. The learned counsel for the petitioners has mainly relied on the other /6th share of Ram Singh which is alleged to have been sold by him in favor of the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest for a consideration of Rs. 2,500 paid by means of a receipt executed by Ram Singh in ‘Gurmukhi in the year 1998 Vikram corresponding to the year 1941-42. It is urged that the possession of the aforesaid land was also given to the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest and in consequence Mutation No. 154 was entered at the instance of Ram Singh on 2-7-1947. This mutation was rejected on 5-10-1947 since ban has been imposed by the Provincial Government

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): It is urged that the possession of the aforesaid land was also given to the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest and in consequence Mutation No. 154 was entered at the instance of Ram Singh on 2-7-1947. This mutation was rejected on 5-10-1947 since ban has been imposed by the Provincial Government on transfer of Evacuee Property of non-Muslims. However, on appeal this mutation was ordered to be attested by the Collector Peshawar on 10-3-1948. The learned counsel urged that this mutation was entered pursuant to the oral sale effected by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners which was duly evidenced by the aforesaid receipt and since the WW. sale in question took place prior to 28-2-1947 it did not require any confirmation by the Custodian under section 20 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957). However, a reference to Mutation No. 154 would show that in the note of the Atari dated 2-7-1947 there is no mention of the aforesaid receipt of the fact that the sale had already been effected by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners prior to 28-2- 1947. The note of the Atari is in the following terms It is difficult to draw an inference from the aforesaid note of the Atari that the sale had taken place earlier than 28-2-1947 as it leads to the inference that soon after the oral sale the Atari was informed for enter mg the mutation. Even if the principle, that a mutation takes effect from the date of entry and not from the date of its attestation, is kept in view, it is evident that the sale in question, having taken place in the month of July, 1947, was within the mischief of section 20 of the Act XII 1957 and would not confer q any valid title on the petitioners unless accepted by the Custodian as required by law. About the receipt relied upon by the petitioners it may also be mentioned that the same being not registered could not be looked into. The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that it did not require registration as it was a simple receipt for payment of money would not prevail as it is clear from the contents of the receipt that the amount of Rs. 2,500 was received by Ram Singh as a consideration for the transfer of land wherein he also agreed to execute a registered sale-deed subsequently in favor of vendees. The aforesaid document if considered as a conveyance of title would obviously require registration but if the document is taken as an agreement to sell it would not confer any title on the vendees unless it was specifically enforced and a registered sale-deed duly executed in favor of the petitioners. The learned counsel then argued that the petitioners are recorded in possession of the land as owners. It is not disputed that Ram Singh was a co-sharer in the land along with the petitioners and the mere

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): specifically enforced and a registered sale-deed duly executed in favor of the petitioners. The learned counsel then argued that the petitioners are recorded in possession of the land as owners. It is not disputed that Ram Singh was a co-sharer in the land along with the petitioners and the mere possession by one co-sharer would not amount to ouster in the absence of an overt act or assertion of hostile title. The contention of the learned counsel that the petitioners are recorded in the relevant Jamabandies as ‘Bill Logan Banana Ba?’ is not well-founded because from the perusal of the Jamabandies of 1940-41 and 1946-47 it appears that Ram Singh himself and also along with other co-sharers is shown MN possession of a portion of the land in dispute and there is no entry excepting for Kara Nos. 348-79 and 331 in the Jacaranda of 1946-47, showing the petitioners in possession of the land as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bai’. The entry regarding the aforesaid three Kara numbers in the Jacaranda of 1946-47 showing the petitioner as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bai’ would be of no consequence as there exists no basis i the revenue record for incorporating the aforesaid entry. Such like entries in the Jamabandies after 1946-47 would be of no avail as by operation of law the evacuee interest in the land stood vested in the Custodian since 1-3-1947. Thus it is evident that the oral sale or the receipt executed by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners was not given D effect to in the revenue record. There is nothing to prove that on the basis of the alleged sale of /6th share in favor of the petitioners or their predecessor-in- interest, they remained in exclusive possession thereof and the interest of the evacuee co- sharer stood extinguished. 4. It was next argued that the property BMG joint could not have been transferred to the allottees unless partitioned. Reliance is placed on Mehran v. The Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner In the cited case the land on which the property in dispute was constructed was ‘Shamilat-1-Deh’ and the evacuee interest could not be separated without partition. It was thus observed that the appellant who was a co-sharer in the ‘Shamika-i-Deh land was entitled to maintain his possession undisturbed until partition and that the land on which the property in dispute was situated being ‘Shamika-i-Deh’ and being a joint property could not be declared as evacuee property. In the case in hand it is not shown that the land in dispute is Shamika-i-Deh or that it has been constructed upon. Rather there is evidence to show that symbolic possession of the land belonging to the evacuee was taken by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Department through the Revenue Officer on 28-2-1961. The report of the Atari in this regard would show (1) P LD 1974 S C 193 that symbolic possession of specified Kara numbers out of various Bats was taken from the petitioners. This fact would indicate that the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): the Settlement and Rehabilitation Department through the Revenue Officer on 28-2-1961. The report of the Atari in this regard would show (1) P LD 1974 S C 193 that symbolic possession of specified Kara numbers out of various Bats was taken from the petitioners. This fact would indicate that the share of the non-Muslim Evacuee is identifiable and can be taken possession of separately from the joint property. Therefore, this objection of the learned counsel appears to be without any substance. The learned counsel then argued that after 1-1-1957 the property in dispute could not have been treated as evacuee property under section 3(1) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. 1957 (Act XII of 1957). But it is evident that clause (b) of section 3(2) of the Act is in the nature of an exception to the aforesaid provision of Saw thereunder the Custodian had the authority to treat the property as evacuee in cases covered by section 3(2) Thus, obviously where any evacuee property is occupied, supervised, or managed by a person whose right or authority in this regard F has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian, the same can be treated as evacuee property by the Custodian even after 1-1-1957. In Maj. Mehta Khan v. The Rehabilitation Authority (1) it was observed that the protection granted by subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of WW. 1957 is not available to properties occupied, supervised or managed by persons whose authority or right so to do after the 28th day of February, 1947 has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian of Evacuee Property and that these words are wide enough to include cases of vendees of the evacuee properties where the sale were effected after the 28th day of February, 1947, and they have been confirmed by the Custodian as required by section 20 of the Act. The petitioners having failed to prove a valid sale in their favor prior to q 1-3-1947, were obviously occupying the property whose right so to do was never accepted or approved by the Custodian. 5. For the aforesaid reasons, no exception can be taken to the order of the Custodian treating the land in dispute as evacuee property. Therefore, H the writ petition BMG without any substance is hereby dismissed. with no order as to costs. M. Y. h. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1984 CLC 526 about?
Answer: Case 1984 CLC 526 was decided by SCAJ&K on 1983-04-05. The case involved SAKHI MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER—APPELLANTSIS VERSUS MREHABILITATION DEPARTMENT THROUGH CUSTODIAN,EVACUEE PROPERTY—RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 22 AND 41 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. The case was heard by SHER ZAMAN CHAUDHRY.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: In case 1984 CLC 526, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 22 AND 41 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. This case was heard in SCAJ&K and decided on 1983-04-05.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 CLC 526 were: T. H. TARIQ FOR APPELLANTS. SH. ABDULAZIZ FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: SHER ZAMAN CHAUDHRY.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 CLC 526 were: SAKHI MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER—APPELLANTSIS VERSUS MREHABILITATION DEPARTMENT THROUGH CUSTODIAN,EVACUEE PROPERTY—RESPONDENT. This case was heard in SCAJ&K.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 CLC 526.
Answer: J UDGMBNT A V Appellants Height Muhammad and Muhammad Sharif through this appeal by leave seek to challenge the legality of the judgment and decree passed by the Division Bench of the High Court on 25th December, 1975. The circa instances giving rise to the controversy are that a declaratory suit with respect to the land in dispute measuring 18 canals, 18 mar las, situated in village Opera Hannah, was instituted in the Court of Deputy Custodian Kohl wherein the appellants claimed that they purchased occupancy rights of this land through an oral sale against a consideration of Rs. 265 from the non-Muslims in 1942; and as such they were the owners of the property in dispute. It was further claimed that their right had opened MTO title. on account of adverse possession and that they have effected’ improvements to the tune of Rs. 2,045. After recording the evidence the claim was allowed by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment dated 6th June, 1967. The file, when submitted for confirmation, the learned Custodian after harem the parties reversed the findings arrived at by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment, dated 28th December, 1968. The review petition filed by the appellant- plaintiffs before the Custodian was also dismissed by the learned Custodian vide his order, dated 22nd July, 1969. ' m2. A civil suit was then filed by the appellants in the High Court based on identical ground to those taken by them in the proceedings before the Deputy Custodian and the learned-Custodian. The suit was resisted by the respondent. The learned Single Judge in the High Court after recording evidence however decreed the. suit of the appellants vide his judgment and decree, dated 12th February, 1973. On appeal by the respondents before the Division Bench of the High Court the judgment and decree passed by the learned Single Judge was set aside by the High Court vide its judgment, dated 25th December, 1975. Feeling aggrieved by this judgment and decree passed by the learned High Court on 25th December, 1975, a petition for leave to appeal was filed by the appellants. Leave was granted by this Court for the consideration whether the civil Court had the jurisdiction to hear the case and. allow the relief claimed by the appellants or was it within the competence of the Custodian alone to hear and decide the matter. 3. While arguing on the point of jurisdiction Mr. T. H. Tariq, the learned counsel for the appellants, submitted that although to decide. And adjudicate Upon question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person Is or is not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Custodian, yet in a case where the Custodian is found to have acted in excess of the jurisdiction vested in him or in a case of failure of exercise of the jurisdiction, the civil Court had the competence to enter tam and allow the relief’ Besides, with respect to the claim of a local relating to a property shown as an evacuee it was the civil Court alone which had the jurisdiction to hear and decide the matter. This aspect of the case, argued the learned. counsel, was not taken into consideration by the Division Bench of the learned High Court. The impugned judgment and decree, therefore, was contrary to law and could not be sustained. -1p 4. Sh. Abdul Aziz, the learned counsel for the respondent, in reply argued that under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, it was the Custodian alone who could determine whether any property was evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee had in any such property. The jurisdiction of the civil Courts has been expressly barred to adjudicate upon such matter. The grounds taken in the suit filed by the appellant in the High Court had already been taken by them in the proceedings before the Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian. The finding of the Custodian in this respect was final and conclusive. Enter taming the suit of the appellant-plaintiffs by the learned Single Judge of the High Court and then hearing and deciding it was an assumption of the jurisdiction not vested in him under law. The learned Single Judge in the High Court, argued the learned counsel, had, by hearing a civil suit and deciding it, converted the Court as a Court of appeal against the judgment and finding of the Custodian. The judgment and decree passed by the learned Single Judge was, therefore, contrary to law and the reversal of it by the Division Bench of the learned High Court was perfectly legal and open to no exception. 5. I will now proceed to examine the proposition in the light of the reason mg advanced by the learned Advocates for the parties. On careful examination of the relevant provisions contained in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, J find that any claim with respect to the right on interest in any property treated by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Author*) cities as an evacuee property is to be adjudicated upon by the Custodian and jurisdiction of the civil Courts in this respect has expressly been barred. Any person claiming any right or interest in any property shown as an evacuee property is to approach the Custodian for the relief: The relevant! provision on the subject is section 22 of the Act which reads —— A “Any person claiming any right or interest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian." In the' present case the appellants moved the Deputy Custodian for the determination of their claim with respect to the land in dispute- The findings arrived at by the learned Deputy Custodian, on examination, having been found erroneous, were set aside by the learned Custodian and the suit of the appellant-plamtifis was rejected. It was entirely with the competence of the learned Custodian to confirm or set aside the order of the I Deputy Custodian. It is well settled that where a Court or a Tribunal has the jurisdiction to determine the question it has got the jurisdiction to, decide it nightly or wrongly. Assumption of the jurisdiction by the learned Single Judge of the High Court as a civil Court merely on- the ground that] conclusions, in his estimation, arrived at by the learned Custodian were long was unwarranted and not permissible under law. The jurisdiction of any civil Court to adjudicate upon such matter has clearly been barred under the provisions of section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. For the proper appreciation of the point involved section 41 is reproduced. It reads -— (1) Save as expressly provided in this Act no civil or Revenue Court or any other authority shall have jurisdiction -—— \\7 TT (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person is or not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or merest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property ; (IB) to question the legality of anything done under this Act by or at the instance of the Custodian ; or (c) in respect of any matter which the Custodian is empowered by or under this Act to determine/1 Powers and jurisdiction conferred on the High Court under the Code of Civil Procedure or under the provisions of Constitution are not to be used as vehicle to intervene with the decision of a Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction merely because the decision of the Tribunal, in its opinion, was wrong. The High Court will not, even in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction conferred on it under the Constitutional provisions, interfere in any finding arrived at by any Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction except in exceptional cases and where it is found that the Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction passed an order in excess of the jurisdiction so vested in it. The High Court will not take upon itself and convert itself to a Court of regular appeal for the simple reason that the findings arrived at by the Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction, in its estimation, are wrong. C 6. I have. Carefully gone through the relevant record. Going carefully ( through the impugned judgment I find '{hat the reasoning advanced by the learned Judges of the High Court reflects the correct legal approach to the proposition evolved and I find no justification to interfere with the judge meet and decree under appeal. On careful examination of the judgment passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court I find that justifications shown for assumption of the jurisdiction by the civil Court are merely academic in nature and not relevant to the present case. Nowhere in the D judgment is there any mention the learned Custodian haying acted in excess of its jurisdiction“or that it was a case of illegal exercise of the jurisdiction by the Custodian. The suit instituted by the appellant-plaintiffs in the High Court, under the provisions of section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, was not maintainable. The learned Single Judge in the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The impugned judgment passed by the High Court on 25th December, 1975, is perfectly in accordance with law and [ find no fault in it. The appeal having no force is dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 526 (SCAJ&K, 1983-04-05): J UDGMBNT A V Appellants Height Muhammad and Muhammad Sharif through this appeal by leave seek to challenge the legality of the judgment and decree passed by the Division Bench of the High Court on 25th December, 1975. The circa instances giving rise to the controversy are that a declaratory suit with respect to the land in dispute measuring 18 canals, 18 mar las, situated in village Opera Hannah, was instituted in the Court of Deputy Custodian Kohl wherein the appellants claimed that they purchased occupancy rights of this land through an oral sale against a consideration of Rs. 265 from the non-Muslims in 1942; and as such they were the owners of the property in dispute. It was further claimed that their right had opened MTO title. on account of adverse possession and that they have effected’ improvements to the tune of Rs. 2,045. After recording the evidence the claim was allowed by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment dated 6th June, 1967. The file, when submitted for confirmation, the learned Custodian after harem the parties reversed the findings arrived at by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment, dated 28th December, 1968. The review petition filed by the appellant- plaintiffs before the Custodian was also dismissed by the learned Custodian vide his order, dated 22nd July, 1969. ' m2. A civil suit was then filed by the appellants in the High Court based on identical ground to those taken by them in the proceedings before the Deputy Custodian and the learned-Custodian. The suit was resisted by the respondent. The learned Single Judge in the High Court after recording evidence however decreed the. suit of the appellants vide his judgment and decree, dated 12th February, 1973. On appeal by the respondents before the Division Bench of the High Court the judgment and decree passed by the learned Single Judge was set aside by the High Court vide its judgment, dated 25th December, 1975. Feeling aggrieved by this judgment and decree passed by the learned High Court on 25th December, 1975, a petition for leave to appeal was filed by the appellants. Leave was granted by this Court for the consideration whether the civil Court had the jurisdiction to hear the case and. allow the relief claimed by the appellants or was it within the competence of the Custodian alone to hear and decide the matter. 3. While arguing on the point of jurisdiction Mr. T. H. Tariq, the learned counsel for the appellants, submitted that although to decide. And adjudicate Upon question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person Is or is not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Custodian, yet in a case where the Custodian is found to have acted in excess of the jurisdiction vested in him or in a case of failure of exercise of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 526 (SCAJ&K, 1983-04-05): what right or interest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Custodian, yet in a case where the Custodian is found to have acted in excess of the jurisdiction vested in him or in a case of failure of exercise of the jurisdiction, the civil Court had the competence to enter tam and allow the relief’ Besides, with respect to the claim of a local relating to a property shown as an evacuee it was the civil Court alone which had the jurisdiction to hear and decide the matter. This aspect of the case, argued the learned. counsel, was not taken into consideration by the Division Bench of the learned High Court. The impugned judgment and decree, therefore, was contrary to law and could not be sustained. -1p 4. Sh. Abdul Aziz, the learned counsel for the respondent, in reply argued that under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, it was the Custodian alone who could determine whether any property was evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee had in any such property. The jurisdiction of the civil Courts has been expressly barred to adjudicate upon such matter. The grounds taken in the suit filed by the appellant in the High Court had already been taken by them in the proceedings before the Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian. The finding of the Custodian in this respect was final and conclusive. Enter taming the suit of the appellant-plaintiffs by the learned Single Judge of the High Court and then hearing and deciding it was an assumption of the jurisdiction not vested in him under law. The learned Single Judge in the High Court, argued the learned counsel, had, by hearing a civil suit and deciding it, converted the Court as a Court of appeal against the judgment and finding of the Custodian. The judgment and decree passed by the learned Single Judge was, therefore, contrary to law and the reversal of it by the Division Bench of the learned High Court was perfectly legal and open to no exception. 5. I will now proceed to examine the proposition in the light of the reason mg advanced by the learned Advocates for the parties. On careful examination of the relevant provisions contained in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, J find that any claim with respect to the right on interest in any property treated by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Author*) cities as an evacuee property is to be adjudicated upon by the Custodian and jurisdiction of the civil Courts in this respect has expressly been barred. Any person claiming any right or interest in any property shown as an evacuee property is to approach the Custodian for the relief: The relevant! provision on the subject is section 22 of the Act which reads —— A “Any person claiming any right or interest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 526 (SCAJ&K, 1983-04-05): any property shown as an evacuee property is to approach the Custodian for the relief: The relevant! provision on the subject is section 22 of the Act which reads —— A “Any person claiming any right or interest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian." In the' present case the appellants moved the Deputy Custodian for the determination of their claim with respect to the land in dispute- The findings arrived at by the learned Deputy Custodian, on examination, having been found erroneous, were set aside by the learned Custodian and the suit of the appellant-plamtifis was rejected. It was entirely with the competence of the learned Custodian to confirm or set aside the order of the I Deputy Custodian. It is well settled that where a Court or a Tribunal has the jurisdiction to determine the question it has got the jurisdiction to, decide it nightly or wrongly. Assumption of the jurisdiction by the learned Single Judge of the High Court as a civil Court merely on- the ground that] conclusions, in his estimation, arrived at by the learned Custodian were long was unwarranted and not permissible under law. The jurisdiction of any civil Court to adjudicate upon such matter has clearly been barred under the provisions of section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. For the proper appreciation of the point involved section 41 is reproduced. It reads -— (1) Save as expressly provided in this Act no civil or Revenue Court or any other authority shall have jurisdiction -—— \\7 TT (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person is or not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or merest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property ; (IB) to question the legality of anything done under this Act by or at the instance of the Custodian ; or (c) in respect of any matter which the Custodian is empowered by or under this Act to determine/1 Powers and jurisdiction conferred on the High Court under the Code of Civil Procedure or under the provisions of Constitution are not to be used as vehicle to intervene with the decision of a Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction merely because the decision of the Tribunal, in its opinion, was wrong. The High Court will not, even in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction conferred on it under the Constitutional provisions, interfere in any finding arrived at by any Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction except in exceptional cases and where it is found that the Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction passed an order in excess of the jurisdiction so vested in it. The High Court will not take upon itself and convert itself to a Court of regular appeal for the simple reason that the findings arrived at by the Court or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 526 (SCAJ&K, 1983-04-05): is found that the Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction passed an order in excess of the jurisdiction so vested in it. The High Court will not take upon itself and convert itself to a Court of regular appeal for the simple reason that the findings arrived at by the Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction, in its estimation, are wrong. C 6. I have. Carefully gone through the relevant record. Going carefully ( through the impugned judgment I find '{hat the reasoning advanced by the learned Judges of the High Court reflects the correct legal approach to the proposition evolved and I find no justification to interfere with the judge meet and decree under appeal. On careful examination of the judgment passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court I find that justifications shown for assumption of the jurisdiction by the civil Court are merely academic in nature and not relevant to the present case. Nowhere in the D judgment is there any mention the learned Custodian haying acted in excess of its jurisdiction“or that it was a case of illegal exercise of the jurisdiction by the Custodian. The suit instituted by the appellant-plaintiffs in the High Court, under the provisions of section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, was not maintainable. The learned Single Judge in the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The impugned judgment passed by the High Court on 25th December, 1975, is perfectly in accordance with law and [ find no fault in it. The appeal having no force is dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 1984 CLC 204 about?
Answer: Case 1984 CLC 204 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1982-11-21. The case involved HAJI GHULAM QADIR THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS ’ AND ANOTHER— PETITIONERS.' VERSUS ; ;CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY. AND OTHERS—REPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - §. (2)' AND (6) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 DISPLACED PERSONS.(LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVII OF 1958) - S. PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 3(2) (5) AND 22 DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVIT OF 1958) - S. OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1984/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1984_204.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 01:32 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1984/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1984_204.htm!. The case was heard by Z. C. VALIANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: In case 1984 CLC 204, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - §. (2)' AND (6) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 DISPLACED PERSONS.(LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVII OF 1958) - S. PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 3(2) (5) AND 22 DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVIT OF 1958) - S. OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1984/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1984_204.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 01:32 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1984/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1984_204.htm!. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1982-11-21.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 CLC 204 were: S. NASIRUDDIN AND S. KAR AM ALI SHAH FOR APPELLANTS. ALI ASLAM JAFREE, HABIBULLAH AND ABBAS FAROOQIFOT RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: Z. C. VALIANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 CLC 204 were: HAJI GHULAM QADIR THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS ’ AND ANOTHER— PETITIONERS.' VERSUS ; ;CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY. AND OTHERS—REPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 CLC 204.
Answer: Judgment P Petitioners above-named, being aggrieved by order, dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, passed in Revision Petition No. 47 of 1969, by which he set aside the order dated Sth June, 1969 of the learned Additional Custodian E.P. passed in Appeal No. S/69, have preferred the above petition, on the following facts and grounds : 2. That the petitioners’ common ancestor Waders Air BUX Bhutto was an owner of the agricultural land bearing Survey Nos. (0*25), (0-18), (0-38), 486 (1-14), 487 (1-12), (0-18), (0-16) 488-3 (0-35) admeasuring 6–18 acres, situated in Del Visor Wuhan, Talk and District Khairpur Mir’s, by virtue of Registered'Sale Deed between the common ancestor of the petitioners and Tillman, Jhummromal and Chandoomal sons of Galangal, for a consideration of Rs. 2,500 registered before the Sub-Registrar, Khairpur on 24th March, 1938. The S. No. 496 in same Del was obtained vide registered Exchange Deed dated 21st September, 1936. 3. That the above said land after registration was duly mutated in the name of the common ancestor of the petitioners in all the Revenue Records and the same still continues as such, vide order No. 17750, dated 27th April, 1938. 4. That the said property has been all along in continuous and actual enjoyment of the petitioners, and it is the petitioners, who have all along been paying the land assessment etc. to the Government, 5. That the entire record of rights viz. Form No. VIII for the years 1945-46 and 1946*47 onwards also shows the name of the common ancestor of the petitioners, as its owner and possessor. 6. That m the year 1964, the respondent late Soon Muhammad Obtain moved the then Deputy Commissioner and Additional Settlement Commissioner (Lands) Khairpur, (Mr. Parve Ahmed Butt) that he has been allotted the above said disputed land and some other, land bearing S. Nos. 490, 492 and 491 admeasuring 3–37 acres, situated in the same Del. 7. That the then Deputy Commissioner and Additional Settlement Commissioner (Mr. Parve Ahmed Butt) by his order dated 11th August, 1964 decided, that the petitioners were the owners of the disputed. pro* party and of the other property bear mg Nos. 490, 491 and 492 admeasuring 3*37 acres, was purchased by the petitioner’s common ancestor by a Registered Sale Deed No. 1163, dated 19th Decade ?r, 1947 for which the confirmation order has already been passed by TNE Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property. Khairpur State. He further held, that the property could not be held to be an evacuee property under section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) after January, 1957. However he further observed in the said order, that section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act bars his jurisdiction, he therefore, remitted the file to the Custodian, so far the disputed lands under the above Constitution petition are concerned and further ordered, that the petitioners to continue in possession till the final - disposal by the Custodian. ' 8. That there has been no order so far, m reference to the order of the Deputy Commissioner-cum- Additional Settlement Commissioner Khairpur, so far, but as the petitioners were being harassed by the late Soon Muhammad Sib tam, who was known for his mischievous activities, as he dragged the petitioners in criminal cases etc. they therefore, moved the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Sukkur, for declaration under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 vide application No. 79 of 1964. TO, That the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property (Mr. Aft Ali Answer)), vide his order dated nil, rejected the application of the petitioners and at the same time held, that as the property was acquired by the Central Government under Settlement Act, therefore, the Custodian Department has ceased to have the jurisdiction. 10. That the petitioners, against the order of the learned Deputy Custodian, filed an appeal before the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property (Mr. Muhammad Azar), who, by his order dated 5th June, 1969 was pleased to allow the appeal of the petitioners and made a reference to the Custodian of Evacuee Property. - 11. That against the order of the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property, the late respondent No. Soon Muhammad Obtain also moved the Custodian in Revision. 12. That the learned respondent No. 1, however rejected the ref* Terence of the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property and allowed the Revision filed by late Soon Muhammad Obtain, vide order dated 28th October, 1971. 13. That the petitioners however, filed a review petition before the respondent No. 1, who by his order dated 24th July, 1974 dismissed the same as he could not review the order of his learned predecessor. 14. The learned Advocate for the petitioners in support of the above petition submitted as under :. (a) That the order of the learned Custodian is perverse, inasmuch as the learned respondent No. has not considered the relevant documents, though the same were very much available before him. (b) That the documents which are mostly registered deeds as old as 35 years old, and their genuineness cannot be, suspected as they were executed much before the commencement of the Evacuee laws, clearly show, that it was the late ancestor of the petitioners Heidi Air BUX Bhutto, who acquired the full ownership rights in the disputed properties. (c) That the learned respondent No. 1, it appears has not cared to go through the orders passed by the relevant authorities in the case. The order dated 11th August, 1964 passed by the respondent No. 2, is so clear, which hardly required any interference by the. Custodian Department. The unfortunate thing is. that neither the Deputy Custodian (B.P.) for the respondent No. had. taken notice of it even. The learned Custodian ought- to have considered, that the respondent No. was an authority on the spot and could be well-informed of the entire situation. The respondent No. late Soon Muhammad Obtain was known for his misdeeds. The learned Custodian ought to have considered, that on the contrary a document viz. the death certificate in respect of Diwan Lansing, produced by the late respondent No. was a forged document* as Khairpur Mir’s is not a notified area : but it has a Municipal Committee, from where the petitioners had obtained and produced the death certificate about the actual date of death of Diwan Lansing. (d) That the learned Custodian has seriously erred in holding9 that because the petitioners could not produce the Deal receipts for the years before 1946-47, therefore, they were not the owners. This contention is quite perverse and illegal and ultra vires, when the name of the petitioners is very much available in Form 8 for the year 1946-47, there was no sense in talk mg about the Deal receipts for the year 1946-47. (e) That the learned respondent No. 1, it appears has not cared to - go through the contents of registered documents of the year 1938 ; the land prior to the sale-deed was mortgaged, and this fact too is very much mentioned m the sale-deed. In short there is nothing to suspect the bona fide of the petitioners' cm any way. The ownership of the petitioners was proved in full beyond any reasonable doubt. k y (g) That the partition deed dated 9th July, 1957 is a registered document* showing the partition of the property between the petitioner No. and petitioner No. and that there is clear entry of the disputed survey numbers in the said deed. (A) That the admitted position is, that till July, 1957 the properties in dispute were not declared an Evacuee Property, as such the respondent No. was barred from giving such a finding and bolding the properties to be an evacuee property. That the order passed by the respondent No. is illegal, ultra vires and void and is liable to be quashed. IS. In support of the above contentions, the learned Advocate for. the petitioners relied upon cases reported in PLD 1973 S C ; PLD 1961 Keir. 589 ; PLD 1964 SC 74; PLD 1972 LAH. 798 ; PLD 1978 Quetta 121, PLD 1978 B. J. 1, PLD 1968 Lab. 148, PLD 1958 Keir. 518 ; PLD 1964 Lab. 274 and PLD 1982 S C 330. 16. The learned Advocate for respondent No. on the other hand submitted as under: id y (a) That by notification in 1959 all evacuee properties were acquired by the Government of Pakistan and become part of the compensation pool and since in Jacaranda Register these properties stood in the name of the Hindus they were treated as Hidden Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958 and on issue of. above notification these properties become part and parcel of Compensation Pool and as such petitioners' application under section 22 of Pakistan (Administration of. Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957 was not maintainable and was liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. h. (6) That notice dated 20th May, 1958 under section 2 (3) (b) of Act XII of 1957 was issued by Assistant Custodian (Survey) to petitioners to show cause, why the properties in question should not be treated as evacuee properties, but petitioners did not send any reply nor appeared before the said Assistant Custodian and consequently properties in question were rightly treated as Hidden. Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958. (c) That order dated nil of the Deputy Custodian passed on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957, cannot be challenged by way of writ, as the same has been confirmed by Custodian of Evacuee Property, vide his impugned order, dated 28th October, 1971. (d) That petitioners petition suffers from laches, as impugned order of learned Custodian is dated 28th October, 1971 and even petitioners Review Petition was dismissed on 25th July, 1974 whereas above petition was filed on 21st February, 1975 and con* sequently on this ground alone, the above petition is liable to be dismissed. 16. In support of the above petition the learned Advocate for respondent No. relied upon cases reported in P LD 1974 S C 139, PLD 1976 Keir. 514, 1969 SCMR 315; 1975 SCMR PLD 1973 S C 451 and 1973 Law Notes 559. 17. The learned Advocate appearing for respondents Nos. and 2 submitted, that by notice dated 20th May, 1958 of Assistant Custodian (Survey) which was final notice, properties in question were treated as evacuee properties. However, the learned Advocate for respondents Nos. |] and 2 stated, that he was not in position to produce or point out any order prior to IST January, 1957 by which the properties in question were treated as Evacuee Properties and/or-declared. as such. He also admitted, that there is no specific order under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958, by which the properties in question were treated, as Hidden Evacuee Properties. 18. I have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned counsels before me and have gone through R P of this learned Deputy Custodian, Additional Custodian and Custodian of Evacuee Property and their respective orders as well as through the various cases cited by the learned Advocates before me. w 19. Provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 are very clear, that no property could be treated as Evacuee Property after 1st January, 19S7 unless it was covered under two exceptions to the said section. Neither learned Advocate for respondent No. for learned Advocate for respondents Nos. and were able to post out to me anything on record to show, that any pro feedings for treating the properties in question as Evacuee Properties had commenced prior to IST January, 1957. The question of applicability of clause 2(b) of section 3 to the rights claimed by the petitioners and their predecessors-in-title obviously did not arise, as these properties were purchased by registered Sale Deeds in the years 1936 and 1938 and in respect of sale-deed dated 19th December, 1947 confirmation order was passed by Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, Khairpur State, which has not been set aside, nor it is the case of respondents, that the said order was set aside at any time. 20. In view of the above facts, which were not disputed by respondents before me, I am of the option, that properties in question were neither declared as evacuee nor treated as such prior to 1st January. 1957 and consequently these properties did not become part and parcel of Compensation Pool, as a result of notification issued in this connection! MN 1959. 21. The only question which now requires consideration is whether properties in question were treated as Hidden/Concealed Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, and as such protection given under section 3 of Act XII of 1957, would not be available to the petitioners. In this connection, I repeatedly asked the learned Advocates of respondents to show me any order under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 in respect of these properties, but they were unable to post -out any such order. In addition to these petitioners acquired these properties much before partition by a registered sale-deeds of 1936 and 1938, genuineness of which cannot be doubted, merely on the basis of the reasoning given by the learned Custodian in his impugned order, in my opinion. The sale-deed dated 19th December, 1947 was duly confirmed by Deputy Custodian and there is nothing in the impugned order by which, any doubt is shown on existence of such order. - Even the learned Advocates of respondents before me have not disputed passing of such order in favor of the petitioners. It may be further noted, that learned Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property in his order dated 5th June, 1969 on the basis of documents on record held, that Heidi Air BUX Bhutto and thereafter petitioners have been in continuance possession of these survey numbers, as this finding was fully supported by Ex. 47, the order of Additional Settlement Commissioner (Land) which was produced before him and as such non-mention of the names of petitioners and/or their predecessors-in-title in Revenue Records cannot by itself deprive the petitioners of their legitimate legal rights acquired by the registered documents, hereinbefore mentioned, as entries in Revenue Record, by itself do not confer rights of ownership, such entries are only corroborative evidence for said purpose. h' 22. In view of my above conclusions and observations, in my opinion it was not necessary for the petitioners to have moved application under section 22 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, consequently dismissal of petitioners said application by impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 does not affect the non-evacuee nature of ownership rights acquired by petitioners, under above-mentioned three registered documents, in respect of the survey numbers in question, as these survey numbers were neither treated as evacuee properties, nor declared as such prior to IST January, 1957, nor it could be considered-] ed as hidden/concealed Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, on any grounds mentioned in the order dated Nil of the learned Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property and/or impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property. 23. The last point which requires consideration is whether above petition is liable to be dismissed on account of laches, as urged by the learned Advocate of the respondents. I am afraid, in view of fact mentioned hereinbefore, this is not a fit case, where the said doctrine BF made applicable. However this is the discretion vested in. this Court, which I am not prepared to exercise in favor of respondents, in view OL the above-mentioned facts, specially as Review Petition filed by petitioner! against the order dated 28th October, 1971 was dismissed on 24th July, 1974 and above petition was filed on 21st February, 1975. In this view of mine, I am fully supported by judgment of Hon’BLE Supreme Court reported in PLD 1982 S C 330 and observations made in para. 10 of the said judgment. 24. Therefore I allow the above petition and declare, that nonevacuee status of the agricultural survey Nos., *586, 487, and admeasuring 6–10 acres, situated in Del Visor Wall an Talk and District Khairpur Mrs, belonging to petitioners, which were acquired by petitioners by means of registered sale-deeds dated 2nd September, 1936, 24th March, 1938 and 19th December, 1947 are not in any way affected by impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian and/or order dated Nil of the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property passed on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957, as the said agricultural survey numbers were neither treated as Evacuee Property and/or declared as such prior to IST January, 1957 nor the said survey numbers could be considered as concealed/Hidden Evacuee Property under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, so as. to automatically become Evacuee Properties and form part of the compensation pool and as such became available for allotments to the original respondent No. 3. 25. In view of the above declaration granted to the petitioners, and in view of my conclusion, that filing of application under section 22 of the Act XJI of 1957 was not at all necessary for the petitioners, order dated Nil of the Deputy Custodian on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 and impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property are of no legal consequence and do not in any way affect the ownership of petitioner nor non- evacuees status of the survey numbers in question, which were acquired by three registered sale-deeds, by the petitioners predecessors-in-title. 25. The above petition is disposed of in terms of the above judgment with no order as to costs. T Petition allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): Judgment P Petitioners above-named, being aggrieved by order, dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, passed in Revision Petition No. 47 of 1969, by which he set aside the order dated Sth June, 1969 of the learned Additional Custodian E.P. passed in Appeal No. S/69, have preferred the above petition, on the following facts and grounds : 2. That the petitioners’ common ancestor Waders Air BUX Bhutto was an owner of the agricultural land bearing Survey Nos. (0*25), (0-18), (0-38), 486 (1-14), 487 (1-12), (0-18), (0-16) 488-3 (0-35) admeasuring 6–18 acres, situated in Del Visor Wuhan, Talk and District Khairpur Mir’s, by virtue of Registered'Sale Deed between the common ancestor of the petitioners and Tillman, Jhummromal and Chandoomal sons of Galangal, for a consideration of Rs. 2,500 registered before the Sub-Registrar, Khairpur on 24th March, 1938. The S. No. 496 in same Del was obtained vide registered Exchange Deed dated 21st September, 1936. 3. That the above said land after registration was duly mutated in the name of the common ancestor of the petitioners in all the Revenue Records and the same still continues as such, vide order No. 17750, dated 27th April, 1938. 4. That the said property has been all along in continuous and actual enjoyment of the petitioners, and it is the petitioners, who have all along been paying the land assessment etc. to the Government, 5. That the entire record of rights viz. Form No. VIII for the years 1945-46 and 1946*47 onwards also shows the name of the common ancestor of the petitioners, as its owner and possessor. 6. That m the year 1964, the respondent late Soon Muhammad Obtain moved the then Deputy Commissioner and Additional Settlement Commissioner (Lands) Khairpur, (Mr. Parve Ahmed Butt) that he has been allotted the above said disputed land and some other, land bearing S. Nos. 490, 492 and 491 admeasuring 3–37 acres, situated in the same Del. 7. That the then Deputy Commissioner and Additional Settlement Commissioner (Mr. Parve Ahmed Butt) by his order dated 11th August, 1964 decided, that the petitioners were the owners of the disputed. pro* party and of the other property bear mg Nos. 490, 491 and 492 admeasuring 3*37 acres, was purchased by the petitioner’s common ancestor by a Registered Sale Deed No. 1163, dated 19th Decade ?r, 1947 for which the confirmation order has already been passed by TNE Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property. Khairpur State. He further held, that the property could not be held to be an evacuee property under section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) after January, 1957. However he further observed in the said order, that section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act bars his jurisdiction, he therefore, remitted the file to the Custodian, so far the disputed lands under the above Constitution petition are concerned and further ordered, that the petitioners to continue in possession till the final - disposal by the Custodian. ' 8. That

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act bars his jurisdiction, he therefore, remitted the file to the Custodian, so far the disputed lands under the above Constitution petition are concerned and further ordered, that the petitioners to continue in possession till the final - disposal by the Custodian. ' 8. That there has been no order so far, m reference to the order of the Deputy Commissioner-cum- Additional Settlement Commissioner Khairpur, so far, but as the petitioners were being harassed by the late Soon Muhammad Sib tam, who was known for his mischievous activities, as he dragged the petitioners in criminal cases etc. they therefore, moved the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Sukkur, for declaration under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 vide application No. 79 of 1964. TO, That the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property (Mr. Aft Ali Answer)), vide his order dated nil, rejected the application of the petitioners and at the same time held, that as the property was acquired by the Central Government under Settlement Act, therefore, the Custodian Department has ceased to have the jurisdiction. 10. That the petitioners, against the order of the learned Deputy Custodian, filed an appeal before the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property (Mr. Muhammad Azar), who, by his order dated 5th June, 1969 was pleased to allow the appeal of the petitioners and made a reference to the Custodian of Evacuee Property. - 11. That against the order of the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property, the late respondent No. Soon Muhammad Obtain also moved the Custodian in Revision. 12. That the learned respondent No. 1, however rejected the ref* Terence of the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property and allowed the Revision filed by late Soon Muhammad Obtain, vide order dated 28th October, 1971. 13. That the petitioners however, filed a review petition before the respondent No. 1, who by his order dated 24th July, 1974 dismissed the same as he could not review the order of his learned predecessor. 14. The learned Advocate for the petitioners in support of the above petition submitted as under :. (a) That the order of the learned Custodian is perverse, inasmuch as the learned respondent No. has not considered the relevant documents, though the same were very much available before him. (b) That the documents which are mostly registered deeds as old as 35 years old, and their genuineness cannot be, suspected as they were executed much before the commencement of the Evacuee laws, clearly show, that it was the late ancestor of the petitioners Heidi Air BUX Bhutto, who acquired the full ownership rights in the disputed properties. (c) That the learned respondent No. 1, it appears has not cared to go through the orders passed by the relevant authorities in the case. The order dated 11th August, 1964 passed by the respondent No. 2, is so clear, which hardly required any interference by the. Custodian Department. The unfortunate thing is. that neither the Deputy Custodian (B.P.) for the respondent No. had.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): through the orders passed by the relevant authorities in the case. The order dated 11th August, 1964 passed by the respondent No. 2, is so clear, which hardly required any interference by the. Custodian Department. The unfortunate thing is. that neither the Deputy Custodian (B.P.) for the respondent No. had. taken notice of it even. The learned Custodian ought- to have considered, that the respondent No. was an authority on the spot and could be well-informed of the entire situation. The respondent No. late Soon Muhammad Obtain was known for his misdeeds. The learned Custodian ought to have considered, that on the contrary a document viz. the death certificate in respect of Diwan Lansing, produced by the late respondent No. was a forged document* as Khairpur Mir’s is not a notified area : but it has a Municipal Committee, from where the petitioners had obtained and produced the death certificate about the actual date of death of Diwan Lansing. (d) That the learned Custodian has seriously erred in holding9 that because the petitioners could not produce the Deal receipts for the years before 1946-47, therefore, they were not the owners. This contention is quite perverse and illegal and ultra vires, when the name of the petitioners is very much available in Form 8 for the year 1946-47, there was no sense in talk mg about the Deal receipts for the year 1946-47. (e) That the learned respondent No. 1, it appears has not cared to - go through the contents of registered documents of the year 1938 ; the land prior to the sale-deed was mortgaged, and this fact too is very much mentioned m the sale-deed. In short there is nothing to suspect the bona fide of the petitioners' cm any way. The ownership of the petitioners was proved in full beyond any reasonable doubt. k y (g) That the partition deed dated 9th July, 1957 is a registered document* showing the partition of the property between the petitioner No. and petitioner No. and that there is clear entry of the disputed survey numbers in the said deed. (A) That the admitted position is, that till July, 1957 the properties in dispute were not declared an Evacuee Property, as such the respondent No. was barred from giving such a finding and bolding the properties to be an evacuee property. That the order passed by the respondent No. is illegal, ultra vires and void and is liable to be quashed. IS. In support of the above contentions, the learned Advocate for. the petitioners relied upon cases reported in PLD 1973 S C ; PLD 1961 Keir. 589 ; PLD 1964 SC 74; PLD 1972 LAH. 798 ; PLD 1978 Quetta 121, PLD 1978 B. J. 1, PLD 1968 Lab. 148, PLD 1958 Keir. 518 ; PLD 1964 Lab. 274 and PLD 1982 S C 330. 16. The learned Advocate for respondent No. on the other hand submitted as under: id y (a) That by notification in 1959 all evacuee properties

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): 121, PLD 1978 B. J. 1, PLD 1968 Lab. 148, PLD 1958 Keir. 518 ; PLD 1964 Lab. 274 and PLD 1982 S C 330. 16. The learned Advocate for respondent No. on the other hand submitted as under: id y (a) That by notification in 1959 all evacuee properties were acquired by the Government of Pakistan and become part of the compensation pool and since in Jacaranda Register these properties stood in the name of the Hindus they were treated as Hidden Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958 and on issue of. above notification these properties become part and parcel of Compensation Pool and as such petitioners' application under section 22 of Pakistan (Administration of. Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957 was not maintainable and was liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. h. (6) That notice dated 20th May, 1958 under section 2 (3) (b) of Act XII of 1957 was issued by Assistant Custodian (Survey) to petitioners to show cause, why the properties in question should not be treated as evacuee properties, but petitioners did not send any reply nor appeared before the said Assistant Custodian and consequently properties in question were rightly treated as Hidden. Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958. (c) That order dated nil of the Deputy Custodian passed on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957, cannot be challenged by way of writ, as the same has been confirmed by Custodian of Evacuee Property, vide his impugned order, dated 28th October, 1971. (d) That petitioners petition suffers from laches, as impugned order of learned Custodian is dated 28th October, 1971 and even petitioners Review Petition was dismissed on 25th July, 1974 whereas above petition was filed on 21st February, 1975 and con* sequently on this ground alone, the above petition is liable to be dismissed. 16. In support of the above petition the learned Advocate for respondent No. relied upon cases reported in P LD 1974 S C 139, PLD 1976 Keir. 514, 1969 SCMR 315; 1975 SCMR PLD 1973 S C 451 and 1973 Law Notes 559. 17. The learned Advocate appearing for respondents Nos. and 2 submitted, that by notice dated 20th May, 1958 of Assistant Custodian (Survey) which was final notice, properties in question were treated as evacuee properties. However, the learned Advocate for respondents Nos. |] and 2 stated, that he was not in position to produce or point out any order prior to IST January, 1957 by which the properties in question were treated as Evacuee Properties and/or-declared. as such. He also admitted, that there is no specific order under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958, by which the properties in question were treated, as Hidden Evacuee Properties. 18. I have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned counsels before me and have gone through R P of this learned Deputy Custodian,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958, by which the properties in question were treated, as Hidden Evacuee Properties. 18. I have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned counsels before me and have gone through R P of this learned Deputy Custodian, Additional Custodian and Custodian of Evacuee Property and their respective orders as well as through the various cases cited by the learned Advocates before me. w 19. Provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 are very clear, that no property could be treated as Evacuee Property after 1st January, 19S7 unless it was covered under two exceptions to the said section. Neither learned Advocate for respondent No. for learned Advocate for respondents Nos. and were able to post out to me anything on record to show, that any pro feedings for treating the properties in question as Evacuee Properties had commenced prior to IST January, 1957. The question of applicability of clause 2(b) of section 3 to the rights claimed by the petitioners and their predecessors-in-title obviously did not arise, as these properties were purchased by registered Sale Deeds in the years 1936 and 1938 and in respect of sale-deed dated 19th December, 1947 confirmation order was passed by Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, Khairpur State, which has not been set aside, nor it is the case of respondents, that the said order was set aside at any time. 20. In view of the above facts, which were not disputed by respondents before me, I am of the option, that properties in question were neither declared as evacuee nor treated as such prior to 1st January. 1957 and consequently these properties did not become part and parcel of Compensation Pool, as a result of notification issued in this connection! MN 1959. 21. The only question which now requires consideration is whether properties in question were treated as Hidden/Concealed Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, and as such protection given under section 3 of Act XII of 1957, would not be available to the petitioners. In this connection, I repeatedly asked the learned Advocates of respondents to show me any order under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 in respect of these properties, but they were unable to post -out any such order. In addition to these petitioners acquired these properties much before partition by a registered sale-deeds of 1936 and 1938, genuineness of which cannot be doubted, merely on the basis of the reasoning given by the learned Custodian in his impugned order, in my opinion. The sale-deed dated 19th December, 1947 was duly confirmed by Deputy Custodian and there is nothing in the impugned order by which, any doubt is shown on existence of such order. - Even the learned Advocates of respondents before me have not disputed passing of such order in favor of the petitioners. It may be further noted,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): duly confirmed by Deputy Custodian and there is nothing in the impugned order by which, any doubt is shown on existence of such order. - Even the learned Advocates of respondents before me have not disputed passing of such order in favor of the petitioners. It may be further noted, that learned Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property in his order dated 5th June, 1969 on the basis of documents on record held, that Heidi Air BUX Bhutto and thereafter petitioners have been in continuance possession of these survey numbers, as this finding was fully supported by Ex. 47, the order of Additional Settlement Commissioner (Land) which was produced before him and as such non-mention of the names of petitioners and/or their predecessors-in-title in Revenue Records cannot by itself deprive the petitioners of their legitimate legal rights acquired by the registered documents, hereinbefore mentioned, as entries in Revenue Record, by itself do not confer rights of ownership, such entries are only corroborative evidence for said purpose. h' 22. In view of my above conclusions and observations, in my opinion it was not necessary for the petitioners to have moved application under section 22 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, consequently dismissal of petitioners said application by impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 does not affect the non-evacuee nature of ownership rights acquired by petitioners, under above-mentioned three registered documents, in respect of the survey numbers in question, as these survey numbers were neither treated as evacuee properties, nor declared as such prior to IST January, 1957, nor it could be considered-] ed as hidden/concealed Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, on any grounds mentioned in the order dated Nil of the learned Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property and/or impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property. 23. The last point which requires consideration is whether above petition is liable to be dismissed on account of laches, as urged by the learned Advocate of the respondents. I am afraid, in view of fact mentioned hereinbefore, this is not a fit case, where the said doctrine BF made applicable. However this is the discretion vested in. this Court, which I am not prepared to exercise in favor of respondents, in view OL the above-mentioned facts, specially as Review Petition filed by petitioner! against the order dated 28th October, 1971 was dismissed on 24th July, 1974 and above petition was filed on 21st February, 1975. In this view of mine, I am fully supported by judgment of Hon’BLE Supreme Court reported in PLD 1982 S C 330 and observations made in para. 10 of the said judgment. 24. Therefore I allow the above petition and declare, that nonevacuee status of the agricultural survey Nos., *586, 487, and admeasuring 6–10 acres, situated in Del Visor Wall an Talk and District Khairpur Mrs, belonging to petitioners, which were acquired by petitioners by means of registered sale-deeds dated 2nd September, 1936, 24th

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): I allow the above petition and declare, that nonevacuee status of the agricultural survey Nos., *586, 487, and admeasuring 6–10 acres, situated in Del Visor Wall an Talk and District Khairpur Mrs, belonging to petitioners, which were acquired by petitioners by means of registered sale-deeds dated 2nd September, 1936, 24th March, 1938 and 19th December, 1947 are not in any way affected by impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian and/or order dated Nil of the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property passed on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957, as the said agricultural survey numbers were neither treated as Evacuee Property and/or declared as such prior to IST January, 1957 nor the said survey numbers could be considered as concealed/Hidden Evacuee Property under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, so as. to automatically become Evacuee Properties and form part of the compensation pool and as such became available for allotments to the original respondent No. 3. 25. In view of the above declaration granted to the petitioners, and in view of my conclusion, that filing of application under section 22 of the Act XJI of 1957 was not at all necessary for the petitioners, order dated Nil of the Deputy Custodian on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 and impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property are of no legal consequence and do not in any way affect the ownership of petitioner nor non- evacuees status of the survey numbers in question, which were acquired by three registered sale-deeds, by the petitioners predecessors-in-title. 25. The above petition is disposed of in terms of the above judgment with no order as to costs. T Petition allowed.

Question: What is case 1984 SCMR 47 about?
Answer: Case 1984 SCMR 47 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1982-05-03. The case involved MUSHTAQ AHMAD (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE ADMINISTRATOR RESIDUAL PROPERTY AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLES 185(3) AND 199. The case was heard by \ASLAM RIAZ HUSSAIN, NASIM HASAN SHAH AND ;,M. S. H. QURAISH, JJ '.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 SCMR 47?
Answer: In case 1984 SCMR 47, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLES 185(3) AND 199. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1982-05-03.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 SCMR 47?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 SCMR 47 were: ISHAQ MUHAMMAD KHAN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY TANVIR AHMAD SHEIKH, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER.. The judges presiding were: \ASLAM RIAZ HUSSAIN, NASIM HASAN SHAH AND ;,M. S. H. QURAISH, JJ '.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 SCMR 47?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 SCMR 47 were: MUSHTAQ AHMAD (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE ADMINISTRATOR RESIDUAL PROPERTY AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 SCMR 47.
Answer: V. Order M. SI H. Quraish, Ji-The petitioner seeks leave to appeal from the judgment of the Lahore High Court dated 24-1-1982, whereby his writ petition, filed to challenge the rejection of his plea for transfer of a Delhi and courtyard by the Administrator, Residual Property, was dismissed. 2. The Delhi and the courtyard m question form part of a composite building, the ground-floor of which comprises, besides the Delhi and courtyard, a number of shops. The first-floor is a residential unit. The shops had been transferred in favor of their respective occupants, including petitioner Must Ahmad, while the residential portion on the first-floor to Abdul Harbor respondent No. 3, by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on 4- 4-1973. Later on the application of Abdul Harbor, the Delhi and the courtyard were transferred in his favor by the Deputy Administrator, Residual Property, on 8-8-1979. The petitioner applied for implement in the proceeding before, the Deputy Administrator. But his application was rejected. He filed a revision petition which was dismissed, by the Administrator on 28-9-1980, against which he had moved the writ petition. 3. The; case of the petitioner was that the Delhi and the courtyard had already stood transferred in his favor by the initial transfer order of 4-4-1973 and that as no portion of the ground-floor had remained available, the question of the transfer of the Delhi and the courtyard in favor of Abdul Harbor did not arise. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner’s order dated 4-4-1973, by which all the shops had been transferred to their respective occupants speaks, of only “shop having two rooms” having been transferred to the petitioner. There is no mention there that the Delhi / and the courtyard had also, been transferred to him. Both the Deputy Administrator and the Administrator, Residual Property, had come to the view that only the shop had been transferred to the petitioner and that he was not in physical possession of or had any link with the Delhi and the courtyard. With these findings of fact the Hill Court had rightly declined to interfere. "£. y, ‘. 4. We, therefore, -find no merit in this petition which we according? RUN Re Synapse-com WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 SCMR 47?
Answer: From case 1984 SCMR 47 (SUPREME COURT, 1982-05-03): V. Order M. SI H. Quraish, Ji-The petitioner seeks leave to appeal from the judgment of the Lahore High Court dated 24-1-1982, whereby his writ petition, filed to challenge the rejection of his plea for transfer of a Delhi and courtyard by the Administrator, Residual Property, was dismissed. 2. The Delhi and the courtyard m question form part of a composite building, the ground-floor of which comprises, besides the Delhi and courtyard, a number of shops. The first-floor is a residential unit. The shops had been transferred in favor of their respective occupants, including petitioner Must Ahmad, while the residential portion on the first-floor to Abdul Harbor respondent No. 3, by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on 4- 4-1973. Later on the application of Abdul Harbor, the Delhi and the courtyard were transferred in his favor by the Deputy Administrator, Residual Property, on 8-8-1979. The petitioner applied for implement in the proceeding before, the Deputy Administrator. But his application was rejected. He filed a revision petition which was dismissed, by the Administrator on 28-9-1980, against which he had moved the writ petition. 3. The; case of the petitioner was that the Delhi and the courtyard had already stood transferred in his favor by the initial transfer order of 4-4-1973 and that as no portion of the ground-floor had remained available, the question of the transfer of the Delhi and the courtyard in favor of Abdul Harbor did not arise. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner’s order dated 4-4-1973, by which all the shops had been transferred to their respective occupants speaks, of only “shop having two rooms” having been transferred to the petitioner. There is no mention there that the Delhi / and the courtyard had also, been transferred to him. Both the Deputy Administrator and the Administrator, Residual Property, had come to the view that only the shop had been transferred to the petitioner and that he was not in physical possession of or had any link with the Delhi and the courtyard. With these findings of fact the Hill Court had rightly declined to interfere. "£. y, ‘. 4. We, therefore, -find no merit in this petition which we according? RUN Re Synapse-com WW.

Question: What is case 1984 MLD 340 about?
Answer: Case 1984 MLD 340 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-03-25. The case involved THE DEPUTY CUSTODIAN, ENEMY PROPERTY—APPELLANT VERSUS MESSRS MUHAMMAD JAMIL CO.—RESPONDENT*. The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S.100-. The case was heard by FAKHRUDDIN SHAIKH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: In case 1984 MLD 340, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S.100-. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-03-25.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 MLD 340 were: ABDUL MAJEED KHAN FOR APPELLANT. NEMO FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: FAKHRUDDIN SHAIKH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 MLD 340 were: THE DEPUTY CUSTODIAN, ENEMY PROPERTY—APPELLANT VERSUS MESSRS MUHAMMAD JAMIL CO.—RESPONDENT*. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 MLD 340.
Answer: This second appeal has been filed against the judgment of learned Find Additional District Judge, Hyderabad dated 1-6-1971, whereby he had set aside the judgment of Civil Judge, Hyderabad, dated 9-8-1969 in Civil Suit No.885 of 1963 and decreed the suit of the respondent for Rs.10,000 with costs against the appellant. 2. The case of the respondent/plaintiff before the Civil Judge was that Muhammad Jamil, Muhammad Saeed and others were partners of the plaintiffs firm namely, M/s. Muhammad Jamil Co. and used to run business at Hyderabad. This firm had dealings with Central Bank of India Ltd.( hereinafter referred to as the Bank) which has since been taken over by the Custodian of Enemy Property. The account with the Bank was being operated both by Muhammad Jamil and Muhammad Saeed. The respondents alleged that on 16-9-1960 the Bank fraudulently and without their consent transferred an amount of Rs.10,000 from their account and credited the same in the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. The respondents came to know of this fact m April, 1961 when they received their passbook with the above entry of debit from the Bank. Thereafter the respondents immediately wrote to the Bank that the amount was wrongly transferred/debited from their account and credited to the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. Muhammad Jamil died in the meanwhile and the subsequent correspondence on the point continued between Muhammad Saeed and the Bank. As the Bank refused to WeTransfer this amount from the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. to that of the respondent, hence they filed suit. 3. In the written statement it was alleged by the Bank that on 2-9-1960 M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. had advised them to transfer an amount of Rs.10,000 from their account to that of the respondents by way of loan for 10–15 days, that on this advice the amount was transferred to the respondent's account and that on 16th September, 1960 the Bank received a telephone call from deceased Muhammad Jamil partner of the respondent's firm to WeTransfer the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. It is, therefore, alleged that no amount is payable by the Bank to the respondent's firm. 4. On these pleadings following issues were framed by the trial Court Whether plaintiff is stopped from bringing the suit?. "(1 (2 (3 (4 (5 (6 Whether suit is barred under section 69 of Partnership Act? Whether suit fails on account of non-joinder of necessary parties? Whether defendant fraudulently misappropriated the suit amount? Is defendant liable to pay the amount to the plaintiff? What should the decree be?".5. In support of the above issue the respondent's firm examined Muhammad Saeed only, as Ex.25. He has produced 10 letters which are Ex's. to saying that the Bank had wrongly transferred the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondent's firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and further asking the Bank to credit this amount in the account of their firm. This correspondence had taken place between 2nd May, 1961 to 2nd March; 1963. P.W. Muhammad Saeed was also confronted with the document (Ex.32) dated 1-7-1961 in cross-examination. This document is a letter dated 1-7-1961 from the Bank addressed to the respondent's firm saying that the balance debit of Rs. 10,746.60 as on 1-7-1961 in the account of respondents firm may be confirmed. Below this letter there is endorsement signed by Muhammad Jamil on behalf of M/s. Jamil Co. as follows-TI "We hereby confirm the correctness of the securities mentioned above and that the balance now due by me/us in the above account against the said securities inter alia is Rs.10,746.60 as at 30-6-61." 116. In rebuttal the appellant Bank examined Nazi Shah, the agent of the Bank who has produced various extracts from the ledger of the respondents! firm and M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. showing debit, credit and again debit of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondents firm, M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and the respondents! firm dated 2-9-1960, 16-9-1960 and 16-9-1960, respectively. LV -, 7. The learned Civil Judge relied on. the endorsement of Muhammad Jamil Ex.32 and held that the respondents/Plaintiffs are stopped from challenging the transfer of Rs.10,000 from the account of the firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. by the Bank. On this finding the suit was dismissed. h 8. In first appeal the learned Additional District Judge relied on the correspondence Exes. to in which both Muhammad Jamil and after his death, Muhammad Saeed had, between the two dates mentioned above, been consistently denying any oral instructions having been given to the Bank in respect of transfer of Rs.10,000 from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. The learned first Appellate Court was also of the view that the burden of proving the oral instructions alleged to have been given by M/s. Jamil 6 Co. to the Bank, was upon the Bank, but the latter has failed to prove this allegation, hence the plaintiff's suit was liable to be decreed. x 4' 9. I have heard arguments of Mr. Abdul Marked learned counsel for the appellant, who has laid stress only on the endorsement of deceased Muhammad Jamil on Ex.32 acknowledging the balance of Rs. 10,746.60 on the debit side on 1-7-1961. The learned counsel has stated that this balance on the* debit side of the respondent's account also included the disputed amount of Rs.10,000 which was transferred from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. as long back. As on 16-9-1960. This letter does not show that the balance includes the disputed amount. Had it been so, then Muhammad Jamil himself in his letter, dated22nd May, 1961' Ex. would not have emphatically denied having given oral instructions to the Bank for transfer of Rs.10,000 from the account of the Bank. Again on 30-6-1961 Muhammad Jamil addressed a letter Ex. to the Bank in which he categorically stated that the amount of Rs.10,000 was arbitrarily debited in their account on 16-9-1960. In the correspondence that followed right up to 21-3-1963, both Muhammad Jamil and after his death Muhammad Saeed, had been repudiating the claim of the Bank that there were any instructions on behalf of the firm for debiting,Rs.10,000 on 16-9-1960 from their account. In the face of these documents which consist of correspondence between the respondent's firm and the Bank and which has not been denied by the Bank, it cannot be understood that in July, 1961 deceased Muhammad Jamil would have confirmed the debit of Rs.10,000 which related to 16-9-1961. Thus the endorsement on Ex.32 is of no help to the Bank and does note stop the respondent from claiming the amount of Rs.10,000 which in view of the lengthy correspondence which ensued between the parties for about two years, is proved to have been wrongly debited from the account of the respondents. 10. Mr. Abdul Marked, learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the judgment of the First Appellate Court should be set aside on the ground that a very important document namely Ex.32 has not been taken into consideration. In support of this plea he has relied on the case of Muhammad Afar and 7 others v. Allah Pitta and 13 others j- PLD 1970S CM R118. This decision related to second appeal under section 100, C.P.C. in which it was held by the Supreme Court that non-consideration of material evidence would vitiate finding of fact and could be interfered with in second appeal. He.has also relied on the case of Mayan Goal v. Marian Bear PLD 1969 S C 617. This case also related to second appeal under section 100, C.P.C. It was held by the Supreme Court in this case that finding of fact of First Appellate Court, which is at variance with that of TNA Court, ordinarily prevails, but it would not possess the same, value or sanctity as of concurrent findings. It was further held that if finding of Lower Appellate Court is not supported by evidence on record or if the Appellate Court to take into account material evidence or not revealing logical basis for differ mg from finding of the trial Court, then such finding of the First Appellate Court can be interfered with in the second appeal. 11. The only piece of evidence which, according to Mr. Abdul Marked Khan, has not been considered by the learned appellate Court is Ex.32. It his been shown in para. No. above that even if the document Ex.32 had been considered, the result would not have been any different. The above decisions are therefore, of no assistance to the learned counsel 111 therefore, do not find any reason to take exception to the view that has been taken by the First Appellate Court. Consequently the appeal fails and is dismissed. As none was present for the respondents, hence there shall be no order as to costs. ' M.Y.H. Appeal dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 340 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-03-25): This second appeal has been filed against the judgment of learned Find Additional District Judge, Hyderabad dated 1-6-1971, whereby he had set aside the judgment of Civil Judge, Hyderabad, dated 9-8-1969 in Civil Suit No.885 of 1963 and decreed the suit of the respondent for Rs.10,000 with costs against the appellant. 2. The case of the respondent/plaintiff before the Civil Judge was that Muhammad Jamil, Muhammad Saeed and others were partners of the plaintiffs firm namely, M/s. Muhammad Jamil Co. and used to run business at Hyderabad. This firm had dealings with Central Bank of India Ltd.( hereinafter referred to as the Bank) which has since been taken over by the Custodian of Enemy Property. The account with the Bank was being operated both by Muhammad Jamil and Muhammad Saeed. The respondents alleged that on 16-9-1960 the Bank fraudulently and without their consent transferred an amount of Rs.10,000 from their account and credited the same in the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. The respondents came to know of this fact m April, 1961 when they received their passbook with the above entry of debit from the Bank. Thereafter the respondents immediately wrote to the Bank that the amount was wrongly transferred/debited from their account and credited to the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. Muhammad Jamil died in the meanwhile and the subsequent correspondence on the point continued between Muhammad Saeed and the Bank. As the Bank refused to WeTransfer this amount from the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. to that of the respondent, hence they filed suit. 3. In the written statement it was alleged by the Bank that on 2-9-1960 M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. had advised them to transfer an amount of Rs.10,000 from their account to that of the respondents by way of loan for 10–15 days, that on this advice the amount was transferred to the respondent's account and that on 16th September, 1960 the Bank received a telephone call from deceased Muhammad Jamil partner of the respondent's firm to WeTransfer the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. It is, therefore, alleged that no amount is payable by the Bank to the respondent's firm. 4. On these pleadings following issues were framed by the trial Court Whether plaintiff is stopped from bringing the suit?. "(1 (2 (3 (4 (5 (6 Whether suit is barred under section 69 of Partnership Act? Whether suit fails on account of non-joinder of necessary parties? Whether defendant fraudulently misappropriated the suit amount? Is defendant liable to pay the amount to the plaintiff? What should the decree be?".5. In support of the above issue the respondent's firm examined Muhammad Saeed only, as Ex.25. He has produced 10 letters which are Ex's. to saying that the Bank had wrongly transferred the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondent's firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and further asking the Bank to credit this amount in the account of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 340 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-03-25): only, as Ex.25. He has produced 10 letters which are Ex's. to saying that the Bank had wrongly transferred the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondent's firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and further asking the Bank to credit this amount in the account of their firm. This correspondence had taken place between 2nd May, 1961 to 2nd March; 1963. P.W. Muhammad Saeed was also confronted with the document (Ex.32) dated 1-7-1961 in cross-examination. This document is a letter dated 1-7-1961 from the Bank addressed to the respondent's firm saying that the balance debit of Rs. 10,746.60 as on 1-7-1961 in the account of respondents firm may be confirmed. Below this letter there is endorsement signed by Muhammad Jamil on behalf of M/s. Jamil Co. as follows-TI "We hereby confirm the correctness of the securities mentioned above and that the balance now due by me/us in the above account against the said securities inter alia is Rs.10,746.60 as at 30-6-61." 116. In rebuttal the appellant Bank examined Nazi Shah, the agent of the Bank who has produced various extracts from the ledger of the respondents! firm and M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. showing debit, credit and again debit of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondents firm, M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and the respondents! firm dated 2-9-1960, 16-9-1960 and 16-9-1960, respectively. LV -, 7. The learned Civil Judge relied on. the endorsement of Muhammad Jamil Ex.32 and held that the respondents/Plaintiffs are stopped from challenging the transfer of Rs.10,000 from the account of the firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. by the Bank. On this finding the suit was dismissed. h 8. In first appeal the learned Additional District Judge relied on the correspondence Exes. to in which both Muhammad Jamil and after his death, Muhammad Saeed had, between the two dates mentioned above, been consistently denying any oral instructions having been given to the Bank in respect of transfer of Rs.10,000 from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. The learned first Appellate Court was also of the view that the burden of proving the oral instructions alleged to have been given by M/s. Jamil 6 Co. to the Bank, was upon the Bank, but the latter has failed to prove this allegation, hence the plaintiff's suit was liable to be decreed. x 4' 9. I have heard arguments of Mr. Abdul Marked learned counsel for the appellant, who has laid stress only on the endorsement of deceased Muhammad Jamil on Ex.32 acknowledging the balance of Rs. 10,746.60 on the debit side on 1-7-1961. The learned counsel has stated that this balance on the* debit side of the respondent's account also included the disputed amount of Rs.10,000 which was transferred from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. as long back. As on 16-9-1960. This letter does not show that the balance includes the disputed amount. Had it been so, then Muhammad Jamil himself in his letter, dated22nd May,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 340 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-03-25): included the disputed amount of Rs.10,000 which was transferred from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. as long back. As on 16-9-1960. This letter does not show that the balance includes the disputed amount. Had it been so, then Muhammad Jamil himself in his letter, dated22nd May, 1961' Ex. would not have emphatically denied having given oral instructions to the Bank for transfer of Rs.10,000 from the account of the Bank. Again on 30-6-1961 Muhammad Jamil addressed a letter Ex. to the Bank in which he categorically stated that the amount of Rs.10,000 was arbitrarily debited in their account on 16-9-1960. In the correspondence that followed right up to 21-3-1963, both Muhammad Jamil and after his death Muhammad Saeed, had been repudiating the claim of the Bank that there were any instructions on behalf of the firm for debiting,Rs.10,000 on 16-9-1960 from their account. In the face of these documents which consist of correspondence between the respondent's firm and the Bank and which has not been denied by the Bank, it cannot be understood that in July, 1961 deceased Muhammad Jamil would have confirmed the debit of Rs.10,000 which related to 16-9-1961. Thus the endorsement on Ex.32 is of no help to the Bank and does note stop the respondent from claiming the amount of Rs.10,000 which in view of the lengthy correspondence which ensued between the parties for about two years, is proved to have been wrongly debited from the account of the respondents. 10. Mr. Abdul Marked, learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the judgment of the First Appellate Court should be set aside on the ground that a very important document namely Ex.32 has not been taken into consideration. In support of this plea he has relied on the case of Muhammad Afar and 7 others v. Allah Pitta and 13 others j- PLD 1970S CM R118. This decision related to second appeal under section 100, C.P.C. in which it was held by the Supreme Court that non-consideration of material evidence would vitiate finding of fact and could be interfered with in second appeal. He.has also relied on the case of Mayan Goal v. Marian Bear PLD 1969 S C 617. This case also related to second appeal under section 100, C.P.C. It was held by the Supreme Court in this case that finding of fact of First Appellate Court, which is at variance with that of TNA Court, ordinarily prevails, but it would not possess the same, value or sanctity as of concurrent findings. It was further held that if finding of Lower Appellate Court is not supported by evidence on record or if the Appellate Court to take into account material evidence or not revealing logical basis for differ mg from finding of the trial Court, then such finding of the First Appellate Court can be interfered with in the second appeal. 11. The only piece of evidence which, according to Mr. Abdul Marked Khan, has not been considered by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 340 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-03-25): material evidence or not revealing logical basis for differ mg from finding of the trial Court, then such finding of the First Appellate Court can be interfered with in the second appeal. 11. The only piece of evidence which, according to Mr. Abdul Marked Khan, has not been considered by the learned appellate Court is Ex.32. It his been shown in para. No. above that even if the document Ex.32 had been considered, the result would not have been any different. The above decisions are therefore, of no assistance to the learned counsel 111 therefore, do not find any reason to take exception to the view that has been taken by the First Appellate Court. Consequently the appeal fails and is dismissed. As none was present for the respondents, hence there shall be no order as to costs. ' M.Y.H. Appeal dismissed

Question: What is case 1984 MLD 202 about?
Answer: Case 1984 MLD 202 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-04-01. The case involved ABDUL BAQI KHAN—PETITIONER VERSUS ' THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARDAND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199- DISPLACED' PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - 8.29. The case was heard by SALEEM AKHTART.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: In case 1984 MLD 202, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199- DISPLACED' PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - 8.29. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-04-01.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 MLD 202 were: KHALILUR REHMAN FOR PETITIONER. WAJIHUDDIN AHMED FOR RESPONDENT NO.2. ABDUL NASEER KHAN FOR RESPONDENT NO.3.. The judges presiding were: SALEEM AKHTART.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 MLD 202 were: ABDUL BAQI KHAN—PETITIONER VERSUS ' THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARDAND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 MLD 202.
Answer: The petitioner has challenged the order passed by the respondents Nos.] 2 whereby the respondent No.3 has been permitted to occupy a portion of the courtyard. The Properties bearing Plots No. R.C. 12/37A and 12/37B, situated in Ran chore Quarter, Karachi, were treated as evacuee properties and acquired in the Compensation Pool. It has been stated by the Petitioner that plot No. RC. is dependent from plot No. 12/37B and separated by Tea Street. The property on Plot No. RC 12/37A consists of a double storeyed building having three tenements on the.first floor numbered as G/l, G/2 and G/3 in the records of the Custodian Evacuee Property. The tenement bearing No. G/l and G/2 were transferred to the petitioner under a PTO dated 10-5-1960 followed by an approved plan demarcating the said tenement and finally a PTD was issued on 8-6-1965 and the petitioner accordingly got his name mutated in the records of nights and the relevant records of various authorities. After PTO was issued in favor of the petitioner he filed proceedings under section 29 of the Displaced Persons (Rehab. Comp.) Act, 1958 against Marauding and others for their ejectment by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner who by his order, dated 30th April, 1962 rejected it and the petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional Settlement Commissioner. In those proceedings Marauding arid others took the stand that Property R.C. 12/37A was Evacuee Trust Property. Notice was sent to the Trust Board which was represented by a counsel before the Additional Settlement Commissioner, who by his order dated 4- 6-1963 held that property No. being a trust property is separated by Tea Street, and has no. Concern with Plot No.R.C. A and consequently accepted the appeal and directed the lower Court to proceed with the application under section 29 filed by the petitioner. The petitioner, however, served a notice under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act and on refusal of Marauding the petitioner filed an ejectment application before the Controller. In these proceedings the Controller directed Marauding to. deposit arrears of rent amounting to Rs.4,400 before 15-4-1975. As Merrajuddin defaulted in. payment of rent application for striking off the defense was filed which was granted on 2-8-1975 and Marauding was directed to handover possession by 30th August, 1975. It is pleaded that during the pendency of the proceedings before the Controller, the Respondent No.3 stored some planks with Merajuddin in the courtyard and approached the. Deputy, Administrator the respondent No.2 for regularization of his possession in respect of property No. R.C. without disclosing that the disputed portion was part and parcel of 12/37A™* nor it was disclosed that the disputed portion was transferred to the petitioner. An ex parte order was obtained from the respondent No. on 6-2-1975; whereby,th$ occupation of portion of R.C. was regularized and rent was proposed to be charged. The respondent No.3 thereafter stated collecting material with object to raise unauthorized construction IRR the courtyard. The petitioner filed an appeal before the Administrator Evacuee Property* Trust Board* Karachi. The Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board considering the confused state of facts inspected the site and by order dated, 14-4-1975 held that the respondent No.3 was not in possession as claimed by him and set aside the order of the Deputy Administrator, dated 6-2-1975. He also directed the Respondent - No. to seek determination of the status of property as evacuee, trust property.-The respondent No,3 filed an appeal before the respondent No.1 which according to the petitioner was -not a Trust Property and the action could be taken as PTD had been issued to the petitioner. The petitioner challenged the jurisdiction of the respondent No.1 However the respondent No.1! on the basis of possession of the father of the respondent No.3 on the roof of G/3 of R.C.12/37A allowed, him to be entitled to use a portion in the courtyard for earning his livelihood. Against this order a Revision was filed’ before;>the Jolt Secretary who held that as the status of the property had >not been determined he had no jurisdiction in the matter. The respondent No.l was again, approached by< the petitioner and by order, dated 15-2-1977 he refused to withdraw or- cancel his previous order, dated, 25-5-1976. The petitioner has therefore* challenged these orders in this petition. Petition No. has. been.filed by Bashir Ahmed who is respondent No.3 in Petition.- He has pleaded that he and his late father were residing in a portion of the first floor of property No.RC12/37A bearing No. and he is carrying on business in a portion of the property on the first floor’ fac mg the main road for the last 30 years. It has been pleaded that these "properties were trust properties, and could not be transferred by the Settlement Department* nor could be taken in compensation and Rehabilitation Pool It-is further, pleaded that his father was occupy mg portion of. plot No.R.C. A and has. applied for transfer of property, but as it was evacuee trust property application was not entertained. It is further stated that his possession was regularized on 6-2-1976* but Abdul Bali predecessor of. Abdul Had! Khan respondent. No.3 (petitioner in Petition No. ) filed an appeal which was allowed. Thereafter an appeal was filed which was allowed in favor, of Bashir, it has been pleaded that PTO has been illegally obtained by late Abdul Bali Khan. On the application of the Deputy Administrator Evacuee Property respondent No.2 the Chairman Evacuee Trust, Property decided the matter by order dated 29-1-1978 holding that R.C. 12/37A was evacuee. Trust property and declared it to be evacuee trust property under section 8 of, Act XIII. of 1975. Bashir has also challenged that the PTO and site plan issued in favor of Abdul Bali is illegal and void. It has been further prayed that orders dated 29-1-78 and 27-11-1978 are illegal and erroneous. I ‘' The admitted position seems to be that both the parties now agree that the property is an evacuee trust property. There is no dispute on this post, and therefore, all objections in that regard-raised by the petitioner MN Petition No. are of no consequence. As regards Petition No. the learned counsel for Abdul Bali has contended that Bashir has no locus standi as he is not a transferee of any portion of the property, and the. order dated 6-2-1975 was set aside by the Administrator and the respondent No.] also has not regularized his possession, nor there was any order by the Chairman in his favor and hence it is stated that the order passed by the respondent No.l] was merely on a compassionate ground and has no legal basis. From the statement of fact and the history of litigation it is plain that now the only dispute remains in respect of the portion of courtyard occupied by respondent No.3 Bashir* He has not made any claim of any nature whatsoever on the property transferred to the petitioner. Throughout the entire litigation he has resisted the claim of the petitioner in respect of portion of courtyard occupied by him. In these circumstances,v I do. not find much force in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent No.3 that Bashir is entitled to seek relief for the cancellation of P T 0 and other title* documents issued to the petitioner by the Settlement Authorities. Now coming to the disputed land the courtyard there seems to be conflicting claims. Bashir has stated that his father was residing on the first floor and that he had been occupying the land for the last 30 years. He has also stated that he had applied for its transfer, but in fact no document of any nature was produced whatsoever at any stage and the only finding in his favor given by the respondent No.1 is that he is' occupying a very small corner portion of the courtyard for carrying on his business. The respondent No.2 before whom the matter was proceeding had inspected the site and even considered the rival claims as the possession of Bashir had been regularized ex parte. He had come to the conclusion that the two properties and 12/37A were two distinct and different properties. He had also noted that the record was silent about the possession of. the respondent No.1 on the disputed portion of the courtyard. Bashir (Respondent No.3) only resided with his father on the first floor and therefore, it was held that the respondent No.3 does not have any locus standi. The respondent No.l, however summarized the situation in the following manner:- "It has been established that tenements G/l and G/2 have been transferred to Mr. Abdul Bali Khan, or it may be said that Mr. Abdul Bali is the occupant of the said two tenements in property No. 12/37A. Mr. Irshad Hussain TS the occupant of tenement No.G/3,in the same building. There is more than one ( family residing on the first floor of this property and among them Mr. Allah Baths, the petitioner's father. The existence of this tenant in the building is proved by the record and the fact that he has paid rent for several years. Photographs have been placed on record confirming that ramshackle structures have been set by people who. live on the first floor. The fact remains that there are people who do live there. The entrance to the house is through the courtyard where Mr. Muhammad Bashir occupies a smalbycorner. and through the front verandah’ where the stairs to the. first floor are located. Thai courtyard, has therefore to be considered a* place, for the common use of all those who, live in the building, Mr. Muhammad Bashir therefore as one of the occupants has the right to use the courtyard as much as the other tenant, Mr;Abdul Bali Khan, of his tenancy is disputed, his father's occupation of a part of the main building has been established. Thong;sh’Mr. Bashir has -filed affidavits of local occupants to; support ‘his tenancy his claim to use the courtyard for work is supported by his father's presence in the building. This occupation AR\d used of this'portion by Mr. Bashir is subject to the bye-laws of the Karachi Municipal Corporation. But there is] hardly any, justification, under the circumstances of the case to prevent him from using the small\ nook in the courtyard for4 earning his live. The appears therefore disposed of accordingly.11 ': I. 1114 J he. main ground, for. granting permission’ to Bashir to. Use the courtyard for business purposes seems to be that, his father was. occupy NG a tenement on. The first floor. In fact, it was.a teacher on the roof:BF G/3 and therefore. it.was observed; :that every party. who has; been residing is. Entitled to a-right to'use the courtyard. The report proceeded further that the respondent No.3 should be allowed to continue to earn his; livelihood. The order seems to be completely contradictory, inasmuch as the only night if at all conferred on Bashir,> the respondent to.3s by virtue of his father's possession of a tenement on the first floor in which he is alleged for reside is that he; can use the courtyard like other allottees and transferees’ residing in different tenements. The permission to use the portion of courtyard to 'carry on business does not seem.to have any legal justification. In titfer second‘order. dated 15-2-1977 ’the respondent No.] has proceeded,on completely different grounds' relating to the declaration’ of the status of property.’ In view of these facts the order, dated 25-5-1976 granting respondent No.3 Mohammad "Bashir a right to occupy and carry in business in a portion of the courtyard was passed without lawful Authority. To that extent the Petition Nb. is allowed and the Petition Nb. is dismissed; with no order as to cost. I\Part‘.1

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): The petitioner has challenged the order passed by the respondents Nos.] 2 whereby the respondent No.3 has been permitted to occupy a portion of the courtyard. The Properties bearing Plots No. R.C. 12/37A and 12/37B, situated in Ran chore Quarter, Karachi, were treated as evacuee properties and acquired in the Compensation Pool. It has been stated by the Petitioner that plot No. RC. is dependent from plot No. 12/37B and separated by Tea Street. The property on Plot No. RC 12/37A consists of a double storeyed building having three tenements on the.first floor numbered as G/l, G/2 and G/3 in the records of the Custodian Evacuee Property. The tenement bearing No. G/l and G/2 were transferred to the petitioner under a PTO dated 10-5-1960 followed by an approved plan demarcating the said tenement and finally a PTD was issued on 8-6-1965 and the petitioner accordingly got his name mutated in the records of nights and the relevant records of various authorities. After PTO was issued in favor of the petitioner he filed proceedings under section 29 of the Displaced Persons (Rehab. Comp.) Act, 1958 against Marauding and others for their ejectment by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner who by his order, dated 30th April, 1962 rejected it and the petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional Settlement Commissioner. In those proceedings Marauding arid others took the stand that Property R.C. 12/37A was Evacuee Trust Property. Notice was sent to the Trust Board which was represented by a counsel before the Additional Settlement Commissioner, who by his order dated 4- 6-1963 held that property No. being a trust property is separated by Tea Street, and has no. Concern with Plot No.R.C. A and consequently accepted the appeal and directed the lower Court to proceed with the application under section 29 filed by the petitioner. The petitioner, however, served a notice under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act and on refusal of Marauding the petitioner filed an ejectment application before the Controller. In these proceedings the Controller directed Marauding to. deposit arrears of rent amounting to Rs.4,400 before 15-4-1975. As Merrajuddin defaulted in. payment of rent application for striking off the defense was filed which was granted on 2-8-1975 and Marauding was directed to handover possession by 30th August, 1975. It is pleaded that during the pendency of the proceedings before the Controller, the Respondent No.3 stored some planks with Merajuddin in the courtyard and approached the. Deputy, Administrator the respondent No.2 for regularization of his possession in respect of property No. R.C. without disclosing that the disputed portion was part and parcel of 12/37A™* nor it was disclosed that the disputed portion was transferred to the petitioner. An ex parte order was obtained from the respondent No. on 6-2-1975; whereby,th$ occupation of portion of R.C. was regularized and rent was proposed to be charged. The respondent No.3 thereafter stated collecting material with object to raise unauthorized construction IRR the courtyard. The petitioner filed an appeal before the Administrator

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): ex parte order was obtained from the respondent No. on 6-2-1975; whereby,th$ occupation of portion of R.C. was regularized and rent was proposed to be charged. The respondent No.3 thereafter stated collecting material with object to raise unauthorized construction IRR the courtyard. The petitioner filed an appeal before the Administrator Evacuee Property* Trust Board* Karachi. The Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board considering the confused state of facts inspected the site and by order dated, 14-4-1975 held that the respondent No.3 was not in possession as claimed by him and set aside the order of the Deputy Administrator, dated 6-2-1975. He also directed the Respondent - No. to seek determination of the status of property as evacuee, trust property.-The respondent No,3 filed an appeal before the respondent No.1 which according to the petitioner was -not a Trust Property and the action could be taken as PTD had been issued to the petitioner. The petitioner challenged the jurisdiction of the respondent No.1 However the respondent No.1! on the basis of possession of the father of the respondent No.3 on the roof of G/3 of R.C.12/37A allowed, him to be entitled to use a portion in the courtyard for earning his livelihood. Against this order a Revision was filed’ before;>the Jolt Secretary who held that as the status of the property had >not been determined he had no jurisdiction in the matter. The respondent No.l was again, approached by< the petitioner and by order, dated 15-2-1977 he refused to withdraw or- cancel his previous order, dated, 25-5-1976. The petitioner has therefore* challenged these orders in this petition. Petition No. has. been.filed by Bashir Ahmed who is respondent No.3 in Petition.- He has pleaded that he and his late father were residing in a portion of the first floor of property No.RC12/37A bearing No. and he is carrying on business in a portion of the property on the first floor’ fac mg the main road for the last 30 years. It has been pleaded that these "properties were trust properties, and could not be transferred by the Settlement Department* nor could be taken in compensation and Rehabilitation Pool It-is further, pleaded that his father was occupy mg portion of. plot No.R.C. A and has. applied for transfer of property, but as it was evacuee trust property application was not entertained. It is further stated that his possession was regularized on 6-2-1976* but Abdul Bali predecessor of. Abdul Had! Khan respondent. No.3 (petitioner in Petition No. ) filed an appeal which was allowed. Thereafter an appeal was filed which was allowed in favor, of Bashir, it has been pleaded that PTO has been illegally obtained by late Abdul Bali Khan. On the application of the Deputy Administrator Evacuee Property respondent No.2 the Chairman Evacuee Trust, Property decided the matter by order dated 29-1-1978 holding that R.C. 12/37A was evacuee. Trust property and declared it to be evacuee trust property under section 8 of, Act XIII. of 1975. Bashir has also challenged that the PTO and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): Deputy Administrator Evacuee Property respondent No.2 the Chairman Evacuee Trust, Property decided the matter by order dated 29-1-1978 holding that R.C. 12/37A was evacuee. Trust property and declared it to be evacuee trust property under section 8 of, Act XIII. of 1975. Bashir has also challenged that the PTO and site plan issued in favor of Abdul Bali is illegal and void. It has been further prayed that orders dated 29-1-78 and 27-11-1978 are illegal and erroneous. I ‘' The admitted position seems to be that both the parties now agree that the property is an evacuee trust property. There is no dispute on this post, and therefore, all objections in that regard-raised by the petitioner MN Petition No. are of no consequence. As regards Petition No. the learned counsel for Abdul Bali has contended that Bashir has no locus standi as he is not a transferee of any portion of the property, and the. order dated 6-2-1975 was set aside by the Administrator and the respondent No.] also has not regularized his possession, nor there was any order by the Chairman in his favor and hence it is stated that the order passed by the respondent No.l] was merely on a compassionate ground and has no legal basis. From the statement of fact and the history of litigation it is plain that now the only dispute remains in respect of the portion of courtyard occupied by respondent No.3 Bashir* He has not made any claim of any nature whatsoever on the property transferred to the petitioner. Throughout the entire litigation he has resisted the claim of the petitioner in respect of portion of courtyard occupied by him. In these circumstances,v I do. not find much force in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent No.3 that Bashir is entitled to seek relief for the cancellation of P T 0 and other title* documents issued to the petitioner by the Settlement Authorities. Now coming to the disputed land the courtyard there seems to be conflicting claims. Bashir has stated that his father was residing on the first floor and that he had been occupying the land for the last 30 years. He has also stated that he had applied for its transfer, but in fact no document of any nature was produced whatsoever at any stage and the only finding in his favor given by the respondent No.1 is that he is' occupying a very small corner portion of the courtyard for carrying on his business. The respondent No.2 before whom the matter was proceeding had inspected the site and even considered the rival claims as the possession of Bashir had been regularized ex parte. He had come to the conclusion that the two properties and 12/37A were two distinct and different properties. He had also noted that the record was silent about the possession of. the respondent No.1 on the disputed portion of the courtyard. Bashir (Respondent No.3) only resided with his father on the first floor

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): to the conclusion that the two properties and 12/37A were two distinct and different properties. He had also noted that the record was silent about the possession of. the respondent No.1 on the disputed portion of the courtyard. Bashir (Respondent No.3) only resided with his father on the first floor and therefore, it was held that the respondent No.3 does not have any locus standi. The respondent No.l, however summarized the situation in the following manner:- "It has been established that tenements G/l and G/2 have been transferred to Mr. Abdul Bali Khan, or it may be said that Mr. Abdul Bali is the occupant of the said two tenements in property No. 12/37A. Mr. Irshad Hussain TS the occupant of tenement No.G/3,in the same building. There is more than one ( family residing on the first floor of this property and among them Mr. Allah Baths, the petitioner's father. The existence of this tenant in the building is proved by the record and the fact that he has paid rent for several years. Photographs have been placed on record confirming that ramshackle structures have been set by people who. live on the first floor. The fact remains that there are people who do live there. The entrance to the house is through the courtyard where Mr. Muhammad Bashir occupies a smalbycorner. and through the front verandah’ where the stairs to the. first floor are located. Thai courtyard, has therefore to be considered a* place, for the common use of all those who, live in the building, Mr. Muhammad Bashir therefore as one of the occupants has the right to use the courtyard as much as the other tenant, Mr;Abdul Bali Khan, of his tenancy is disputed, his father's occupation of a part of the main building has been established. Thong;sh’Mr. Bashir has -filed affidavits of local occupants to; support ‘his tenancy his claim to use the courtyard for work is supported by his father's presence in the building. This occupation AR\d used of this'portion by Mr. Bashir is subject to the bye-laws of the Karachi Municipal Corporation. But there is] hardly any, justification, under the circumstances of the case to prevent him from using the small\ nook in the courtyard for4 earning his live. The appears therefore disposed of accordingly.11 ': I. 1114 J he. main ground, for. granting permission’ to Bashir to. Use the courtyard for business purposes seems to be that, his father was. occupy NG a tenement on. The first floor. In fact, it was.a teacher on the roof:BF G/3 and therefore. it.was observed; :that every party. who has; been residing is. Entitled to a-right to'use the courtyard. The report proceeded further that the respondent No.3 should be allowed to continue to earn his; livelihood. The order seems to be completely contradictory, inasmuch as the only night if at all conferred on Bashir,> the respondent to.3s by virtue of his father's possession of a tenement on the first floor in which he is alleged for reside

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): should be allowed to continue to earn his; livelihood. The order seems to be completely contradictory, inasmuch as the only night if at all conferred on Bashir,> the respondent to.3s by virtue of his father's possession of a tenement on the first floor in which he is alleged for reside is that he; can use the courtyard like other allottees and transferees’ residing in different tenements. The permission to use the portion of courtyard to 'carry on business does not seem.to have any legal justification. In titfer second‘order. dated 15-2-1977 ’the respondent No.] has proceeded,on completely different grounds' relating to the declaration’ of the status of property.’ In view of these facts the order, dated 25-5-1976 granting respondent No.3 Mohammad "Bashir a right to occupy and carry in business in a portion of the courtyard was passed without lawful Authority. To that extent the Petition Nb. is allowed and the Petition Nb. is dismissed; with no order as to cost. I\Part‘.1

Question: What is case 1984 MLD 607 about?
Answer: Case 1984 MLD 607 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-05-13. The case involved ABDUL HANNAN KHAN PETITIONER VERSUS CHAIRMAN EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (I OF 1981) - ARTICLE 9. The case was heard by IBADAT YAR KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: In case 1984 MLD 607, the court applied the following statutes: PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (I OF 1981) - ARTICLE 9. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-05-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 MLD 607 were: MANZOOR-UL-HAQ FOR PETITIONER.S.H.MUJTABA FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: IBADAT YAR KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 MLD 607 were: ABDUL HANNAN KHAN PETITIONER VERSUS CHAIRMAN EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 MLD 607.
Answer: *. Petitioner Abdul Hanna migrated to Pakistan from India in 1947 in the wake of partition. He tried to establish himself by obtain possession of a Shop No.N.P/101/II(GI-VL,) Napier Quarters, Sara fa Bazaar, Method, Karachi. Formally the' shop was occupied by Hindu Evacuee, who were running the business of Sweetmeat in TT. Thus, it was used as a Hallie shop. After the Hindus migrated to India, petitioners possession was regularized by an allotment order from the Rent Controller, Karachi who in those early days was the competent authority to issue allotments. The petitioner started paying rents to the Custodian as the shop was treated as Evacuee Property. Sometimes in 1963 the Evacuee Trust Property Committee raised- a claim that the shop was a Trust Property and forced the petitioner to pay rents to them. This resulted in a clash of merest between the Settlement Authority who were treating the property as Evacuee Property acquired by the Government under section 3 of the Displaced Persons Rehabilitation and Settlement Act, and the Evacuee Trust Property Committee who were claiming that it was a property belonging to a Hindu Trust. ms,3yan$ :order dated '7L21968-i thDeputySettiem rafted rite‘to fife '‘antirust Property wfisotfeldthat ¥iricW1936it« Wade'the Sr6p8rt$iofKilivisual o and after* the'ET‘M'gptftioVi8Srit‘J was Created as'l facile *-Broperty1 11 was fort HEV? EF trial the* *-prop'efriywas 'fife q re if b y t* fire Government((Under sections 3-tpf the'edit-placedPeWdns G64 flpeHsafton*” oTrr*d Rehabilitation Act and formed a part of the Compensate Tigris-p 661 available for disposal according to law. The,petitioner'was;interested purchasing Owners OE VEST SY iji-m1& v.".5yt>s 1--".* ° this property. The Settlement authorities agreed to dispose of the Pprbpertytt to.the petitioner* The petitioner paid Rs. 1,89,072 to ‘the Settlement Department, and they transferred the property to the petitioner. The petitioner thus became a full-fledged owner of the shop and has been and continues MTB be-in-possession of the same till now. - Some time in 1982 the respondents*! moved the respondent No,2 to treat the property as Evacuee Trust Property:. The petitioner received a notice of hearing of ‘the case and ANJ 25-10-1982. The petitioner V w appeared before the;respondent Nb.|v? \Who JhefirdHthe parties and closed the. case the same day. Request of the petitioner for further time to produce more evidence was reefed' and the respondent-No.] after closing the J RFL{TR -mJjilwHDfuS-S Tupi >/3.3 JU31 }iris/up order was communicated to the respondent No.2 who of his letter dated 15-2-1983, informed t'\spirit'Io.ti?Bertha'.t the case at Lahore and_the property was held,to be an Evacuee. Jr rust Property. ‘The petitioner received this information on 6r2-1983. A1photo color herder passed by respondent No.l was >also.enclosed GK YFAFIW. UiCflHw Norma noise j.< UNC> OTN petitioner {.wanted paravail thirty,Pi.diBrssitiey [deposited a.sum(EDF «RsU30qgiteNMibnaHB‘funk-of Paris?an> omit'x2f198.3iyDn 1222:198*3> he Hettie'after copies and.enclaedbthe/treGeipt'tofj sBQ0slecdpyinchiiargeS which he" FIA'd obtained from the Bank. The petitioner.receivedthfe,certifie,d at Copy of, 77715 "TEF'7 1. (A FM Jars.7- 'Ms*1 A'U's*,u?r',ci'( the order dated 10-1-1983 from Lahore on,10-4.-1983.;, FRT,>is\ in, V* -4 Walsh FIV In the meantime, without waiting, furl the-certified Copy-from Lahore, the petitioner rely mg on thephqstatrcopy of the order, despatched the revision to the respondent to on 8-3-1983;- In this revision he explained; why uncertified'BPY; of )*the' order"was tot enclosed - and NDT'Ki tojifttenthefia-nice *as soonfcasit was recetvedfrom Lahore ?v AS stated;* above an application for certified, copy had,already, been sent t.o Lahore ‘along with the Bank receipt,the um. of Rs,30 being the'copying charges. This.certified,copy _was received,byt!TNE.;petitioner on 10-41983 )and before4 the" petitioner could despatch} TT to Respondent No. in terms of the. Undertakings in the revision, he had : filed before fit*!. Vi *Jj494 J f J 'SSW 2.101 m ft v J '‘« W* <1 J f3? Ms R,e:visionHEetitionhas,rtheen presented'Lomé today 5IET P Lahore s RS - dated,-;loth? January’ 1983regarding the « status "of property bearing -p.y; Git yr? Jury,eyTr- Np.;V/101htM -situated fire Sara fa'iBtfZ&rva'Rey'dhotis given;IFP Petition're-hdtdOrivincing'! It is not possible for me to entertain it at this stage. The Revision Petition is dismissed on the grounds of being time-barred. Parties to be formed." The perusal of the above order would show that the respondent No.3 has failed to bestow the attention and the care that the situation demanded. In para. of the Revision filed before him and quoted in this petition the petitioner had detailed the circumstances under which the Revision was being filed before the respondent No.3. The respondent No.3 seems to have completely ignored that the order passed on 10-1- 1983 was served on the petitioner on 16- 2-1983. The respondent also has failed to notice that the petitioner deposited the copying fee in the IBANK on 21-2-1983 and in spite of curfew in the city and without waiting for the certified copy filed the Revision on 8-3-1984. The certified copy of order which, according to the rules is a necessary requirement for pursuing the remedy of Revision was not available to the petitioner till 10-4- 1983. K There is force in the contention of the learned counsel that time should commence from, the date when the certified copy of the order was received by the petitioner at Lahore and not from 10-1-1983 when the order was passed. In this view of the matter the Revision is not only with time but has been filed premature. The only time that can be counted against the petitioner is between 16-2-1983. When he received the order dated 10-1;-1983 and 22-2-1983 when he applied for certified copy. Limitation would remain suspended till the certified copy is delivered to petitioner. And admittedly this was not delivered to the petitioner before 10-4-1983. But the petitioner had long before filed HIA Revision on 8-3- 1983. The respondent No. has unfortunately taken a very harsh and injudicious view, and this view is against law and equity. The Petition is, therefore, allowed. The order passed by respondent No.3 is quashed. The respondent -No.3 is directed to dispose of the Revision on merits after allowing full opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. Petition is allowed. Case remanded to the respondent No.3 for early disposal according to law. MLL Petition allowed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 607 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-05-13): *. Petitioner Abdul Hanna migrated to Pakistan from India in 1947 in the wake of partition. He tried to establish himself by obtain possession of a Shop No.N.P/101/II(GI-VL,) Napier Quarters, Sara fa Bazaar, Method, Karachi. Formally the' shop was occupied by Hindu Evacuee, who were running the business of Sweetmeat in TT. Thus, it was used as a Hallie shop. After the Hindus migrated to India, petitioners possession was regularized by an allotment order from the Rent Controller, Karachi who in those early days was the competent authority to issue allotments. The petitioner started paying rents to the Custodian as the shop was treated as Evacuee Property. Sometimes in 1963 the Evacuee Trust Property Committee raised- a claim that the shop was a Trust Property and forced the petitioner to pay rents to them. This resulted in a clash of merest between the Settlement Authority who were treating the property as Evacuee Property acquired by the Government under section 3 of the Displaced Persons Rehabilitation and Settlement Act, and the Evacuee Trust Property Committee who were claiming that it was a property belonging to a Hindu Trust. ms,3yan$ :order dated '7L21968-i thDeputySettiem rafted rite‘to fife '‘antirust Property wfisotfeldthat ¥iricW1936it« Wade'the Sr6p8rt$iofKilivisual o and after* the'ET‘M'gptftioVi8Srit‘J was Created as'l facile *-Broperty1 11 was fort HEV? EF trial the* *-prop'efriywas 'fife q re if b y t* fire Government((Under sections 3-tpf the'edit-placedPeWdns G64 flpeHsafton*” oTrr*d Rehabilitation Act and formed a part of the Compensate Tigris-p 661 available for disposal according to law. The,petitioner'was;interested purchasing Owners OE VEST SY iji-m1& v.".5yt>s 1--".* ° this property. The Settlement authorities agreed to dispose of the Pprbpertytt to.the petitioner* The petitioner paid Rs. 1,89,072 to ‘the Settlement Department, and they transferred the property to the petitioner. The petitioner thus became a full-fledged owner of the shop and has been and continues MTB be-in-possession of the same till now. - Some time in 1982 the respondents*! moved the respondent No,2 to treat the property as Evacuee Trust Property:. The petitioner received a notice of hearing of ‘the case and ANJ 25-10-1982. The petitioner V w appeared before the;respondent Nb.|v? \Who JhefirdHthe parties and closed the. case the same day. Request of the petitioner for further time to produce more evidence was reefed' and the respondent-No.] after closing the J RFL{TR -mJjilwHDfuS-S Tupi >/3.3 JU31 }iris/up order was communicated to the respondent No.2 who of his letter dated 15-2-1983, informed t'\spirit'Io.ti?Bertha'.t the case at Lahore and_the property was held,to be an Evacuee. Jr rust Property. ‘The petitioner received this information on 6r2-1983. A1photo color herder passed by respondent No.l was >also.enclosed GK YFAFIW. UiCflHw Norma noise j.< UNC> OTN petitioner {.wanted paravail thirty,Pi.diBrssitiey [deposited a.sum(EDF «RsU30qgiteNMibnaHB‘funk-of Paris?an> omit'x2f198.3iyDn 1222:198*3> he Hettie'after copies and.enclaedbthe/treGeipt'tofj sBQ0slecdpyinchiiargeS which he" FIA'd obtained from the Bank. The petitioner.receivedthfe,certifie,d at Copy of, 77715 "TEF'7 1. (A FM Jars.7- 'Ms*1 A'U's*,u?r',ci'( the order dated 10-1-1983 from Lahore on,10-4.-1983.;, FRT,>is\ in, V* -4 Walsh FIV In the meantime, without waiting, furl the-certified Copy-from Lahore, the petitioner

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 607 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-05-13): 1222:198*3> he Hettie'after copies and.enclaedbthe/treGeipt'tofj sBQ0slecdpyinchiiargeS which he" FIA'd obtained from the Bank. The petitioner.receivedthfe,certifie,d at Copy of, 77715 "TEF'7 1. (A FM Jars.7- 'Ms*1 A'U's*,u?r',ci'( the order dated 10-1-1983 from Lahore on,10-4.-1983.;, FRT,>is\ in, V* -4 Walsh FIV In the meantime, without waiting, furl the-certified Copy-from Lahore, the petitioner rely mg on thephqstatrcopy of the order, despatched the revision to the respondent to on 8-3-1983;- In this revision he explained; why uncertified'BPY; of )*the' order"was tot enclosed - and NDT'Ki tojifttenthefia-nice *as soonfcasit was recetvedfrom Lahore ?v AS stated;* above an application for certified, copy had,already, been sent t.o Lahore ‘along with the Bank receipt,the um. of Rs,30 being the'copying charges. This.certified,copy _was received,byt!TNE.;petitioner on 10-41983 )and before4 the" petitioner could despatch} TT to Respondent No. in terms of the. Undertakings in the revision, he had : filed before fit*!. Vi *Jj494 J f J 'SSW 2.101 m ft v J '‘« W* <1 J f3? Ms R,e:visionHEetitionhas,rtheen presented'Lomé today 5IET P Lahore s RS - dated,-;loth? January’ 1983regarding the « status "of property bearing -p.y; Git yr? Jury,eyTr- Np.;V/101htM -situated fire Sara fa'iBtfZ&rva'Rey'dhotis given;IFP Petition're-hdtdOrivincing'! It is not possible for me to entertain it at this stage. The Revision Petition is dismissed on the grounds of being time-barred. Parties to be formed." The perusal of the above order would show that the respondent No.3 has failed to bestow the attention and the care that the situation demanded. In para. of the Revision filed before him and quoted in this petition the petitioner had detailed the circumstances under which the Revision was being filed before the respondent No.3. The respondent No.3 seems to have completely ignored that the order passed on 10-1- 1983 was served on the petitioner on 16- 2-1983. The respondent also has failed to notice that the petitioner deposited the copying fee in the IBANK on 21-2-1983 and in spite of curfew in the city and without waiting for the certified copy filed the Revision on 8-3-1984. The certified copy of order which, according to the rules is a necessary requirement for pursuing the remedy of Revision was not available to the petitioner till 10-4- 1983. K There is force in the contention of the learned counsel that time should commence from, the date when the certified copy of the order was received by the petitioner at Lahore and not from 10-1-1983 when the order was passed. In this view of the matter the Revision is not only with time but has been filed premature. The only time that can be counted against the petitioner is between 16-2-1983. When he received the order dated 10-1;-1983 and 22-2-1983 when he applied for certified copy. Limitation would remain suspended till the certified copy is delivered to petitioner. And admittedly this was not delivered to the petitioner before 10-4-1983. But the petitioner had long before filed HIA Revision on 8-3- 1983. The respondent No. has unfortunately taken a very harsh and injudicious view, and this view is against law

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 607 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-05-13): suspended till the certified copy is delivered to petitioner. And admittedly this was not delivered to the petitioner before 10-4-1983. But the petitioner had long before filed HIA Revision on 8-3- 1983. The respondent No. has unfortunately taken a very harsh and injudicious view, and this view is against law and equity. The Petition is, therefore, allowed. The order passed by respondent No.3 is quashed. The respondent -No.3 is directed to dispose of the Revision on merits after allowing full opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. Petition is allowed. Case remanded to the respondent No.3 for early disposal according to law. MLL Petition allowed

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT on 1983-05-25. The case involved IN RE : THE EVACUEE PROPERTYAND DISPLACED PERSONS LAWS (REPEAL) ACT (XIV OF 1975). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 203-D. The case was heard by AFTAB HUSSAIN, C. J. ALI HUSSAIN QAZILBASH, CH. MUHAMMAD SIDDIQ AND MALIK GHULAM ALI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 203-D. This case was heard in FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT and decided on 1983-05-25.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT : IFTIKHAR HUSSAIN CHAUDHRY.. The judges presiding were: AFTAB HUSSAIN, C. J. ALI HUSSAIN QAZILBASH, CH. MUHAMMAD SIDDIQ AND MALIK GHULAM ALI.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: IN RE : THE EVACUEE PROPERTYAND DISPLACED PERSONS LAWS (REPEAL) ACT (XIV OF 1975). This case was heard in FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: Aftab Hussain, C. J——The Act repealed the following Acts and Regulations - (0 t*LC Registration of Claims (Displaced Persons) Act, 1956 (Act III of 1956).; (‘0 the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 ; (Hi) the Pakistan (Administration OL Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 ('»’) thcDisplaccd Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, (v) the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 ; (vi) the Scrutiny of Claims (Evacuee Property) Regulation, 1961 ; and (v/7) the Price of Evacuee Property and Public Dues (Recovery) Peculation, 1971. b It 1s for this reason that none of these Acts were examined. Any examination OL the Laws which arc no longer a part of the statute book would be an exercise in futility. Moreover, the Constitution provides for the examination of existing laws and not of the laws which are no longer in force., Objects were received from Mr. Affair Ali and Raja Muhammad trees Khan against the repealing Act. Mr. Affair Ali has referred only to some fraudulent transfers which arc beyond the scope of our examination and entry. Raja Muhammad IDDEES says that except the first five laws referred to above which were according to the Qur’an and Sunnah, the Regulation of 1961 was against Sharia while the Regulation of 1971 was unnecessary. His objection is that the first 5 laws should remain on the Statute Book and the continuance of the repealing Law which violates the objective of Sharia would amount to acting in a manner repugnant to the Qur’an and Sunnah. The objection is not sound since obviously the object of these laws was to rehabilitate and settle displaced persons. By their very nature these laws could not be permanent. It was for the Government to consider whether the stage had reached for withdrawing them. The Government has, therefore, acted within the scope of its authority by repealing them. The Act is not in any way repugnant to the Qur’an and Sunnah. Order accordingly.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 1983-05-25): Aftab Hussain, C. J——The Act repealed the following Acts and Regulations - (0 t*LC Registration of Claims (Displaced Persons) Act, 1956 (Act III of 1956).; (‘0 the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 ; (Hi) the Pakistan (Administration OL Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 ('»’) thcDisplaccd Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, (v) the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 ; (vi) the Scrutiny of Claims (Evacuee Property) Regulation, 1961 ; and (v/7) the Price of Evacuee Property and Public Dues (Recovery) Peculation, 1971. b It 1s for this reason that none of these Acts were examined. Any examination OL the Laws which arc no longer a part of the statute book would be an exercise in futility. Moreover, the Constitution provides for the examination of existing laws and not of the laws which are no longer in force., Objects were received from Mr. Affair Ali and Raja Muhammad trees Khan against the repealing Act. Mr. Affair Ali has referred only to some fraudulent transfers which arc beyond the scope of our examination and entry. Raja Muhammad IDDEES says that except the first five laws referred to above which were according to the Qur’an and Sunnah, the Regulation of 1961 was against Sharia while the Regulation of 1971 was unnecessary. His objection is that the first 5 laws should remain on the Statute Book and the continuance of the repealing Law which violates the objective of Sharia would amount to acting in a manner repugnant to the Qur’an and Sunnah. The objection is not sound since obviously the object of these laws was to rehabilitate and settle displaced persons. By their very nature these laws could not be permanent. It was for the Government to consider whether the stage had reached for withdrawing them. The Government has, therefore, acted within the scope of its authority by repealing them. The Act is not in any way repugnant to the Qur’an and Sunnah. Order accordingly.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR on 1983-12-14. The case involved FAZAL DAD VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN. EVACUEE PROPERTY (AJ K) AND THREE OTHERS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTIONAL JURISDICTION EVACUEE PROPERTY. The case was heard by RAJA MUHAMMAD KHURSHID KHAN, CJ. AND SHER ZAMAN CHAUDHARY.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTIONAL JURISDICTION EVACUEE PROPERTY. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR and decided on 1983-12-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANT : QAZI ABDUL GHAFOOR, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENTS NO. TO : CH. SHAHWALI, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. 4: MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. : NEMO.. The judges presiding were: RAJA MUHAMMAD KHURSHID KHAN, CJ. AND SHER ZAMAN CHAUDHARY.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: FAZAL DAD VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN. EVACUEE PROPERTY (AJ K) AND THREE OTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: sarjssaaSssKar",:SS versyarestd TrT3 11’ ““ Which have given rise to the control-. of village Kubrick,’ These'Minus "losUhTSkSthVe116 property. The claim was base dona document FM Pr to u evacuee ITT “d no EWDENC'E 'sumps’S 'giant‘d thel1'«'“f* try(Mg’” fit! Julio”” EXCEPTION “,heSe find''GS who,e missing The S 4. Leave was granted to consider whether document Ex. PC was correctly excluded out of the evidence by all the Courts below. 5. Nazi Abdul Neighbor, the learned counsel for the appellant, in support of the appeal reagitated the same points on which he sought to challenge the order of the Custodian in the High Court. He submitted that the finding given by the Custodian with regard to the nature of the property, in view of the document Ex. PC, was not correct and the orders of the Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian, having been passed without evidence, were label to be quashed by the High Court in exercise of extraordinary writ jurisdiction. 6. The argument is misconceived. On going through the record we find that the learned Custodian has advanced cogent reasons to hold that the document, Ex. PC, does not transfer any title in the land to the appellant. The appellant’s case was that the suit land was purchased by Noor Adam, his father, from Ram Baja Shah, a non-Muslim evacuee, in Dogma Regime vide agreement Ex. PC. In the first stance he claimed title on the basis of this document and in alternate claimed adverse possession. Both the pleas have been correctly over-ruled by the learned Custodian. The Kitara Girafarig per taming to the Dogma Regime entered Ram Baja Shah, non-Muslim, as owner and Noor Adam is shown as a tenant. Similarly, Kara Girafarig pertaining to the year 1996 Bk. carries the entry of the suit land in the name of Noor Adam ONT e basis fan oral sale. Obviously this entry is n departure to the plea of the appellant. The above would show that the conclusion drawn by the learned Custodian can safely be derived from the state of evidence. 7. The oral evidence in support of the claim does not inspire evidence for the reasons stated in the Custodian’s order. The lacuna in the Revenue Record with regard to the title o1 the appellant has rightly been taken by all the Courts as to have created no title for the appellant. 8. Besides, whether this evidence should have been believed or not is entirely a different matter. The Custodian having disbelieved the evidence the High Court could not go beyond the finding of fact in a Constitutional petition unless it could be shown that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the matter. De Smith on the Concept of Jurisdiction in Judicial Review of Administrative Action, at pages 66 and 67 beautifully says : — ‘Jurisdiction means authority to decide. Whenever a judicial Tribunal is empowered or required to inquire into a question of law or fact for the purpose of giving a decision on TT, its findings thereon cannot be impeached collaterally or on an application for certiorari but are binding until reversed on appeal. Where a Court has jurisdiction to entertain an application, it does not lose its jurisdiction by coming to a wrong conclusion, whether it was wrong in Jaw or in fact. It does not lose its jurisdiction even it its conclusion on any aspect of its proper field of inquiry is entirely without evidential support. The question whether Tribunal has jurisdiction depends not on the truth or falsehood of the facts into which it has to inquire, or upon the correctness of its findings on these facts, but upon their nature, and TT is determinable at the commencement, not at the conclusion of the inquiry. Thus, a Tribunal empowered to determine claims for compensation for loss of office has jurisdiction to determine all questions of law and fact relating to the measure of compensation and the tenure of the office, and it does not exceed its jurisdiction by determine any of those questions incorrectly ; but it has no jurisdiction to entertain a claim for reinstatement or damages for wrongful dismissal, and it will exceed its jurisdiction if it makes an order in such terms, for it has no legal power to give any decision whatsoever on those matters. A Tribunal may also lack jurisdiction if it is improperly constituted, or (possibly) if it fails to observe certain essential preliminaries to the inquiry. But it does not exceed its jurisdiction by basing its decision upon an incorrect determination of any question that it is empowered or required (1.e. has jurisdiction). Here in this case it is nobody’s case that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to entertain the matter. The learned counsel also failed to point out that the finding recorded by the learned Custodian is passed on no evidence. The ports canvassed by the learned counsel, therefore, have no substance. The appeal, therefore, stands dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1983-12-14): sarjssaaSssKar",:SS versyarestd TrT3 11’ ““ Which have given rise to the control-. of village Kubrick,’ These'Minus "losUhTSkSthVe116 property. The claim was base dona document FM Pr to u evacuee ITT “d no EWDENC'E 'sumps’S 'giant‘d thel1'«'“f* try(Mg’” fit! Julio”” EXCEPTION “,heSe find''GS who,e missing The S 4. Leave was granted to consider whether document Ex. PC was correctly excluded out of the evidence by all the Courts below. 5. Nazi Abdul Neighbor, the learned counsel for the appellant, in support of the appeal reagitated the same points on which he sought to challenge the order of the Custodian in the High Court. He submitted that the finding given by the Custodian with regard to the nature of the property, in view of the document Ex. PC, was not correct and the orders of the Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian, having been passed without evidence, were label to be quashed by the High Court in exercise of extraordinary writ jurisdiction. 6. The argument is misconceived. On going through the record we find that the learned Custodian has advanced cogent reasons to hold that the document, Ex. PC, does not transfer any title in the land to the appellant. The appellant’s case was that the suit land was purchased by Noor Adam, his father, from Ram Baja Shah, a non-Muslim evacuee, in Dogma Regime vide agreement Ex. PC. In the first stance he claimed title on the basis of this document and in alternate claimed adverse possession. Both the pleas have been correctly over-ruled by the learned Custodian. The Kitara Girafarig per taming to the Dogma Regime entered Ram Baja Shah, non-Muslim, as owner and Noor Adam is shown as a tenant. Similarly, Kara Girafarig pertaining to the year 1996 Bk. carries the entry of the suit land in the name of Noor Adam ONT e basis fan oral sale. Obviously this entry is n departure to the plea of the appellant. The above would show that the conclusion drawn by the learned Custodian can safely be derived from the state of evidence. 7. The oral evidence in support of the claim does not inspire evidence for the reasons stated in the Custodian’s order. The lacuna in the Revenue Record with regard to the title o1 the appellant has rightly been taken by all the Courts as to have created no title for the appellant. 8. Besides, whether this evidence should have been believed or not is entirely a different matter. The Custodian having disbelieved the evidence the High Court could not go beyond the finding of fact in a Constitutional petition unless it could be shown that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the matter. De Smith on the Concept of Jurisdiction in Judicial Review of Administrative Action, at pages 66 and 67 beautifully says : — ‘Jurisdiction means authority to decide. Whenever a judicial Tribunal is empowered or required to inquire into a question of law or fact for the purpose of giving a decision on TT,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 1983-12-14): the Concept of Jurisdiction in Judicial Review of Administrative Action, at pages 66 and 67 beautifully says : — ‘Jurisdiction means authority to decide. Whenever a judicial Tribunal is empowered or required to inquire into a question of law or fact for the purpose of giving a decision on TT, its findings thereon cannot be impeached collaterally or on an application for certiorari but are binding until reversed on appeal. Where a Court has jurisdiction to entertain an application, it does not lose its jurisdiction by coming to a wrong conclusion, whether it was wrong in Jaw or in fact. It does not lose its jurisdiction even it its conclusion on any aspect of its proper field of inquiry is entirely without evidential support. The question whether Tribunal has jurisdiction depends not on the truth or falsehood of the facts into which it has to inquire, or upon the correctness of its findings on these facts, but upon their nature, and TT is determinable at the commencement, not at the conclusion of the inquiry. Thus, a Tribunal empowered to determine claims for compensation for loss of office has jurisdiction to determine all questions of law and fact relating to the measure of compensation and the tenure of the office, and it does not exceed its jurisdiction by determine any of those questions incorrectly ; but it has no jurisdiction to entertain a claim for reinstatement or damages for wrongful dismissal, and it will exceed its jurisdiction if it makes an order in such terms, for it has no legal power to give any decision whatsoever on those matters. A Tribunal may also lack jurisdiction if it is improperly constituted, or (possibly) if it fails to observe certain essential preliminaries to the inquiry. But it does not exceed its jurisdiction by basing its decision upon an incorrect determination of any question that it is empowered or required (1.e. has jurisdiction). Here in this case it is nobody’s case that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to entertain the matter. The learned counsel also failed to point out that the finding recorded by the learned Custodian is passed on no evidence. The ports canvassed by the learned counsel, therefore, have no substance. The appeal, therefore, stands dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1984-08-22. The case involved EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD VERSUS MUHAMMAD SHARIF. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185 (3). The case was heard by MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH AND M.S.H. QURAISHI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185 (3). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1984-08-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE PETITIONER: FAZAL-I-HUSSAIN, ADVOCATE SUPREME - COURT WITH CH. MUHAMMAD ASLAM, AOR.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH AND M.S.H. QURAISHI.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD VERSUS MUHAMMAD SHARIF. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: Mohammad Axial Collab, J—Leave to appeal has been sought from judgment dated 6-? -1981 of the Lahore High Court, whereby AAAF Appeal No. 25 of 1969, was dismissed. 2. The petitioner (Evacuee Irssi Board) had raised a question before a Settlement Commissioner through reference regarding the status of the property in dispute as an evacuee Trust Property because as asserted, it was a Jane Gear. The Settlement WW. Commissioner alter afford due opportunity to the petitioner held that the building in question which appeared to be a house, was not an evacuee Trust Property. On appeal a learned Judge in the High Court affirmed the finding of fact reached by the Settlement Commissioner. Therefore now the Evacuee Trust Board has sought leave to appeal, 3. Learned counsel has raised two-fold contentions. One, relating to the merits of the concurrent findings of fact challenged in this petition, and secondly, that the petitioner wanted to adduce additional evidence at the appellate stage which opportunity was denied to it. 4. Learned counsel has brought to our notice the material on the basis of which according to his submission the property could have been treated as belonging to an Evacuee Trust. It includes certain photographs of the front part of the house showing that it was used as a Jane Gear. It has also been pointed out by the learned counsel that one of the rooms in the building, was being used as office of an Evacuee Trust, but it could be as a tenant of the Owner. 5. Be that as it may the concurrent findings of fact impugned before us do not suffer from any legal defect. The observation of the High Court that the mere use of the property as Jane Gear would not transform it to a" Trust Property, in our view is UN- exceptionable. Learned counsel tried to rely on some judgments where the use of the word Dormant Sold led to the presumption that it was a Trust Property, but he could not press the arguments any further, when it was posted out that the expression Dharma Sold in its connotation dependency upon the circumstances of each case is totally different from the connotation of the expression Jan; Gear. Regarding the additional evidence suffice it to observe that even if it had been admitted, it would Dot have made any difference with regard to the findings of fact. Secondly, it cannot be said that the petitioner had not sufficient opportunity to adduce evidence which was sought to be led at the appellate stage. This petition accordingly fails and is dismissed. Petition dismissed. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1984-08-22): Mohammad Axial Collab, J—Leave to appeal has been sought from judgment dated 6-? -1981 of the Lahore High Court, whereby AAAF Appeal No. 25 of 1969, was dismissed. 2. The petitioner (Evacuee Irssi Board) had raised a question before a Settlement Commissioner through reference regarding the status of the property in dispute as an evacuee Trust Property because as asserted, it was a Jane Gear. The Settlement WW. Commissioner alter afford due opportunity to the petitioner held that the building in question which appeared to be a house, was not an evacuee Trust Property. On appeal a learned Judge in the High Court affirmed the finding of fact reached by the Settlement Commissioner. Therefore now the Evacuee Trust Board has sought leave to appeal, 3. Learned counsel has raised two-fold contentions. One, relating to the merits of the concurrent findings of fact challenged in this petition, and secondly, that the petitioner wanted to adduce additional evidence at the appellate stage which opportunity was denied to it. 4. Learned counsel has brought to our notice the material on the basis of which according to his submission the property could have been treated as belonging to an Evacuee Trust. It includes certain photographs of the front part of the house showing that it was used as a Jane Gear. It has also been pointed out by the learned counsel that one of the rooms in the building, was being used as office of an Evacuee Trust, but it could be as a tenant of the Owner. 5. Be that as it may the concurrent findings of fact impugned before us do not suffer from any legal defect. The observation of the High Court that the mere use of the property as Jane Gear would not transform it to a" Trust Property, in our view is UN- exceptionable. Learned counsel tried to rely on some judgments where the use of the word Dormant Sold led to the presumption that it was a Trust Property, but he could not press the arguments any further, when it was posted out that the expression Dharma Sold in its connotation dependency upon the circumstances of each case is totally different from the connotation of the expression Jan; Gear. Regarding the additional evidence suffice it to observe that even if it had been admitted, it would Dot have made any difference with regard to the findings of fact. Secondly, it cannot be said that the petitioner had not sufficient opportunity to adduce evidence which was sought to be led at the appellate stage. This petition accordingly fails and is dismissed. Petition dismissed. WW.

Question: What is case 1984 PLD 81 about?
Answer: Case 1984 PLD 81 was decided by PESHAWAR HIGH COURT on 1983-02-02. The case involved GUL HAQ AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20. The case was heard by INAYAT ELAHI KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: In case 1984 PLD 81, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20. This case was heard in PESHAWAR HIGH COURT and decided on 1983-02-02.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 PLD 81 were: SARDAR KHAN FOR PETITIONERS. KH. NAZIR AHMAD FOR RESPONDENT NOS. TO 4.8. SAFDAR HUSSAIN FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 12.Z, MAHFOOZ KHAN FOR THE REMAINING RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: INAYAT ELAHI KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 PLD 81 were: GUL HAQ AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in PESHAWAR HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 PLD 81.
Answer: Judgment The dispute in this writ petition relates to agricultural land situated in village Patti Pagan Thesis and District Peshawar. According to the petitioners Hassan Jan and Noor Muhammad sons of Sultan and one Fatal Had purchased /6th share of the agricultural land, comprising That Nos. 30 and 31 of the Jacaranda of the year 1936-37 measuring 626 canals 13 Marley and 391 canals 17 mar las, respectively, from one Johan Singh vide registered sale-deed dated 29-8-1938, The aforesaid Hats were numbered as 31 and 32, in the Jacaranda of the year 1940-41. The other /6th share of Ram Singh in the aforesaid K_ hats is also alleged to have been purchased by them with possession on the basis fan oral sale. In support of this sale reliance is placed on a receipt m ‘Gurmukhi executed by Ram SMG whereby be had acknowledged the receipt of the sale consideration of Rs. 2,500. It is further alleged that AAUP Singh another co-sharer in the two Hats sold his /6th share in favor of one Abdul Jail. This sale was successfully pre-empted by Ram Singh who obtained a decree on 25-9-1942. The petitioners claimed to have been I'm continuous possession of the land in dispute without interruption. It is alleged that Ram Singh had himself appeared before the Atari on 1-7-1947 and by admitting the sale in favor of the petitioners got entered mutation No. 154 which was rejected in the first instance but on appeal was attested on 10-3-1948. The petitioners allege to be in peaceful possession of the land when in 1960, inquiry was initiated by the Special Police Establishment MTO the transfer of land of Ram Singh m their favor. On 7-1- 1961 petitioners made an application to the Deputy Custodian under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act (Act XII of 1957) clamming declaration of their ownership and possession regarding /3rd out of 626 canals 13 Marley in That No. 31 and 65 canals 5 Marley put of 391 canals 17 Marley of land TP That No, 32 as entered in the Jacaranda of the year 1940-41. The Deputy Custodian recommended their case to the Custodian for approval of the sale vide Reference No. 47 of 1969, but the reference was rejected by the Custodian vide order dated 3-9-1961 holding the land to be evacuee property. On 5-2-1962 the petitioners instituted a suit for a declaration that the property was not evacuee and was sold to them by Ram Singh evacuee. In the suit reliance was also placed on mutation No. 154 entered on 2-7- 1947 and attested on 10-3-1948 in the favor. The suit was dismissed on 19-3-1966 by the civil Court for want of jurisdiction. The petitioners appeal before the District Judge also failed vide order dated 4-10-1966. The petitioners then filed R. S. A. in the High Court but without any success which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. They then moved petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 70-P of 1970 before the Supreme Court which was also dismissed on 11-12-1972. Thereafter WW. the petitioners challenged the order of the Custodian in Writ Petition No. 92 of 1973 in this Court but since Custodian was not imp leaded as a party they were allowed to withdraw the writ petition with permission to bring a fresh one subject to deposit of Rs. 1,000 as cost. It was then on 9-9-1974 that the present writ petition was filed in this Court pleading Custodian Evacuee Property as respondent No. 1. 2. The learned counsel for the respondents raised an objection that the petition was not maintainable as it was barred by laches since the order of the Custodian dated 3C-9-1961 was being challenged in the writ petition filed on 9-9-1974. From the material available in the case it appears that a equity was initiated in 1960-61 by the Special Police Establishment into the transfer of the land in favor of the petitioners. They promptly filed an application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 on 7-1-1961 before the Deputy Custodian. The Deputy Custodian vide order dated 2-6-1961 treated the land as non-evacuee property and thus made a reference to the Custodian for his approval but since the approval was not accorded by the Custodian vide order dated 30-9-1961, the petitioners filed a declaratory suit in the civil Court on 5-2-1962 which was dismissed on 19-3-1966 by the Senior Civil Judge, Peshawar, for want of jurisdiction. Their appeal before the District Judge having been dismissed, they approached the High Court by filing R. S. A. No. 357 of 1966 which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. The petitioner then filed a petition for Special Leave to Appeal before the Supreme Court, but the leave was refused on 11-12-1972 with the observations that the petitioners remedy was by way of filing a writ petition against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property. Thereafter the petitioners fired Writ Petition No. 92 of 1973 which was allowed to be withdrawn on 2-7-1974 with the permission to file a fresh writ petition. Thus on 9-9-1974 the present writ petition was died in this Court. From the facts stated above it is obvious that the! petitioners have all along been pursuing their remedy with diligence since 1961.U The petitioners have never been negligent in seeking their remedy. In Muhammad Khan v. Shamsuddin it was held that where the petitioner has been bona fide pursuing his remedy in the civil Courts, the fact that the writ petition was filed against the impugned order after the lapse of 8 years, would not disentitle the petitioner to the grant of equitable relief on the ground of laches. In Pakistan v. Sheikh Abdul Hamid (2) it was observed that “the delay was of no consequence as the petitioner had diligently been making representations to the Government all through from 1949 before film the writ petition in the High Court in 1957. WW. In Mohammad Umar Khan v. Pakistan (3) (1) 1969 S CM R212 2) PLD 1961 SC 105 (3) PLD 1982 Push. it was held that “there was no Imitation on the discretion of the Court in granting relief and no hard and fast rule can be laid down as to what m particular circumstances would constitute laches”. The delay alone was held not sufficient to non-suit the petitioner or to constitute condonable laches, the delay must be coupled with other conduct of the petitioner amounting to estoppel etc. In this view of the matter the objection with regard to Lachesis cannot prevail in this case. 3. So far as /6th share of Johan Singh sold in favor of the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest is concerned there appears to be no dispute between the parties, as the sale was effected on the basis of a registered sale-deed dated 29-8-1938, and it was duly incorporated in the revenue record. \ Regarding /6th share of Ram Singh in the land in dispute which was obtained by him in the preemption Suit No. instituted on 4-1-1942 and decreed in his favor on 26-9- 1942, it may be mentioned that the petitioners have not specifically clammed ownership thereof: Although the said portion is also alleged to be in their possession. In the civil litigation the aforesaid I/6th share which was subject-matter of the preemption suit was claimed by the petitioners for the reason that Ram Singh was a ‘Beamier’ and in fact he had instituted the preemption suit for their benefit. This contention however, did not prevail with the learned District Judge who came to the conclusion that Ram Singh was the exclusive owner of the aforesaid /6th share in the land. In this writ petition no such contention has been raised by the petitioners. The learned counsel for the petitioners has mainly relied on the other /6th share of Ram Singh which is alleged to have been sold by him in favor of the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest for a consideration of Rs. 2,500 paid by means of a receipt executed by Ram Singh in ‘Gurmukhi in the year 1998 Vikram corresponding to the year 1941-42. It is urged that the possession of the aforesaid land was also given to the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest and in consequence Mutation No. 154 was entered at the instance of Ram Singh on 2-7-1947. This mutation was rejected on 5-10-1947 since ban has been imposed by the Provincial Government on transfer of Evacuee Property of non-Muslims. However, on appeal this mutation was ordered to be attested by the Collector Peshawar on 10-3-1948. The learned counsel urged that this mutation was entered pursuant to the oral sale effected by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners which was duly evidenced by the aforesaid receipt and since the WW. sale in question took place prior to 28-2-1947 it did not require any confirmation by the Custodian under section 20 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957). However, a reference to Mutation No. 154 would show that in the note of the Atari dated 2-7-1947 there is no mention of the aforesaid receipt of the fact that the sale had already been effected by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners prior to 28-2- 1947. The note of the Atari is in the following terms It is difficult to draw an inference from the aforesaid note of the Atari that the sale had taken place earlier than 28-2-1947 as it leads to the inference that soon after the oral sale the Atari was informed for enter mg the mutation. Even if the principle, that a mutation takes effect from the date of entry and not from the date of its attestation, is kept in view, it is evident that the sale in question, having taken place in the month of July, 1947, was within the mischief of section 20 of the Act XII 1957 and would not confer q any valid title on the petitioners unless accepted by the Custodian as required by law. About the receipt relied upon by the petitioners it may also be mentioned that the same being not registered could not be looked into. The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that it did not require registration as it was a simple receipt for payment of money would not prevail as it is clear from the contents of the receipt that the amount of Rs. 2,500 was received by Ram Singh as a consideration for the transfer of land where he also agreed to execute a registered sale-deed subsequently in favor of vendees. The aforesaid document if considered as a conveyance of title would obviously require registration but if the document is taken as an agreement to sell it would not confer any title on the vendees unless it was specifically enforced and a registered sale-deed duly executed in favor of the petitioners. The learned counsel then argued that the petitioners are recorded in possession of the land as owners. It is not disputed that Ram Singh was a co-sharer in the land along with the petitioners and the mere possession by one co-sharer would not amount to ouster in the absence of an overt act or assertion of hostile title. The contention of the learned counsel that the petitioners are recorded in the relevant Jamabandies as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bar is not well-founded because from the perusal of the Jamabandies of 1940-41 and 1946-47 it appears that Ram Singh himself and also along with other co-sharers is shown MN possession of a portion of the land in dispute and there is no entry excepting for Kara Nos. 348-79 and 331 in the Jacaranda of 1946-47, showing the petitioners in possession of the land as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bar’. The entry regarding the aforesaid three Kara numbers in the Jacaranda of 1946-47 showing the petitioner as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bai’ would be of no consequence as there exists no basis in the revenue record for incorporating the aforesaid entry. Such like entries in the Jamabandies after 1946-47 would be of no avail as by operation of law the evacuee interest in the land stood vested in the Custodian since 1-3-1947. Thus it is evident that the oral sale or the receipt executed by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners was not given D effect to in the revenue record. There is nothing to prove that on the basis of the alleged sale of /6th share in favor of the petitioners or their predecessor-in- interest, they remained in exclusive possession thereof and the interest of the evacuee co- sharer stood extinguished. 4. It was next argued that the property BMG joint could not have been transferred to the allottees unless partitioned. Reliance is placed on Mehran v. The Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner In the cited case the land on which the property in dispute was constructed was ‘Shamilat-1-Deh’ and the evacuee interest could not be separated without partition. It was thus observed that the appellant who was a co-sharer in the ‘Shamika-i-Deh land was entitled to maintain his possession undisturbed until partition and that the land on which the property in dispute was situated being ‘Shamika-i-Deh’ and being a joint property could not be declared as evacuee property. In the case in hand it is not shown that the land in dispute is Shamika-i-Deh or that it has been constructed upon. Rather there is evidence to show that symbolic possession of the land belonging to the evacuee was taken by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Department through the Revenue Officer on 28-2-1961. The report of the Atari in this regard would show (1) P LD 1974 S C 193 that symbolic possession of specified Kara numbers out of various Bats was taken from the petitioners. This fact would indicate that the share of the non-Muslim Evacuee is identifiable and can be taken possession of separately from the joint property. Therefore, this objection of the learned counsel appears to be without any substance. The learned counsel then argued that after 1-1-1957 the property in dispute could not have been treated as evacuee property under section 3(1) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. 1957 (Act XII of 1957). But it is evident that clause (b) of section 3(2) of the Act is in the nature of an exception to the aforesaid provision of Saw thereunder the Custodian had the authority to treat the property as evacuee in cases covered by section 3(2) Thus, obviously where any evacuee property is occupied, supervised, or managed by a person whose right or authority in this regard F has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian, the same can be treated as evacuee property by the Custodian even after 1-1-1957. In Maj. Mehta Khan v. The Rehabilitation Authority (1) it was observed that the protection granted by subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of WW. 1957 is not available to properties occupied, supervised or managed by persons whose authority or right so to do after the 28th day of February, 1947 has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian of Evacuee Property and that these words are wide enough to include cases of vendees of the evacuee properties where the sale were effected after the 28th day of February, 1947, and they have been confirmed by the Custodian as required by section 20 of the Act. The petitioners having failed to prove a valid sale in their favor prior to q 1-3-1947, were obviously occupying the property whose right so to do was never accepted or approved by the Custodian. 5. For the aforesaid reasons, no exception can be taken to the order of the Custodian treating the land in dispute as evacuee property. Therefore, H the writ petition being without any substance is hereby dismissed. with no order as to costs. M. Y. h. Petition dismissed. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): Judgment The dispute in this writ petition relates to agricultural land situated in village Patti Pagan Thesis and District Peshawar. According to the petitioners Hassan Jan and Noor Muhammad sons of Sultan and one Fatal Had purchased /6th share of the agricultural land, comprising That Nos. 30 and 31 of the Jacaranda of the year 1936-37 measuring 626 canals 13 Marley and 391 canals 17 mar las, respectively, from one Johan Singh vide registered sale-deed dated 29-8-1938, The aforesaid Hats were numbered as 31 and 32, in the Jacaranda of the year 1940-41. The other /6th share of Ram Singh in the aforesaid K_ hats is also alleged to have been purchased by them with possession on the basis fan oral sale. In support of this sale reliance is placed on a receipt m ‘Gurmukhi executed by Ram SMG whereby be had acknowledged the receipt of the sale consideration of Rs. 2,500. It is further alleged that AAUP Singh another co-sharer in the two Hats sold his /6th share in favor of one Abdul Jail. This sale was successfully pre-empted by Ram Singh who obtained a decree on 25-9-1942. The petitioners claimed to have been I'm continuous possession of the land in dispute without interruption. It is alleged that Ram Singh had himself appeared before the Atari on 1-7-1947 and by admitting the sale in favor of the petitioners got entered mutation No. 154 which was rejected in the first instance but on appeal was attested on 10-3-1948. The petitioners allege to be in peaceful possession of the land when in 1960, inquiry was initiated by the Special Police Establishment MTO the transfer of land of Ram Singh m their favor. On 7-1- 1961 petitioners made an application to the Deputy Custodian under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act (Act XII of 1957) clamming declaration of their ownership and possession regarding /3rd out of 626 canals 13 Marley in That No. 31 and 65 canals 5 Marley put of 391 canals 17 Marley of land TP That No, 32 as entered in the Jacaranda of the year 1940-41. The Deputy Custodian recommended their case to the Custodian for approval of the sale vide Reference No. 47 of 1969, but the reference was rejected by the Custodian vide order dated 3-9-1961 holding the land to be evacuee property. On 5-2-1962 the petitioners instituted a suit for a declaration that the property was not evacuee and was sold to them by Ram Singh evacuee. In the suit reliance was also placed on mutation No. 154 entered on 2-7- 1947 and attested on 10-3-1948 in the favor. The suit was dismissed on 19-3-1966 by the civil Court for want of jurisdiction. The petitioners appeal before the District Judge also failed vide order dated 4-10-1966. The petitioners then filed R. S. A. in the High Court but without any success which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. They then moved petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 70-P of 1970 before

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): of jurisdiction. The petitioners appeal before the District Judge also failed vide order dated 4-10-1966. The petitioners then filed R. S. A. in the High Court but without any success which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. They then moved petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 70-P of 1970 before the Supreme Court which was also dismissed on 11-12-1972. Thereafter WW. the petitioners challenged the order of the Custodian in Writ Petition No. 92 of 1973 in this Court but since Custodian was not imp leaded as a party they were allowed to withdraw the writ petition with permission to bring a fresh one subject to deposit of Rs. 1,000 as cost. It was then on 9-9-1974 that the present writ petition was filed in this Court pleading Custodian Evacuee Property as respondent No. 1. 2. The learned counsel for the respondents raised an objection that the petition was not maintainable as it was barred by laches since the order of the Custodian dated 3C-9-1961 was being challenged in the writ petition filed on 9-9-1974. From the material available in the case it appears that a equity was initiated in 1960-61 by the Special Police Establishment into the transfer of the land in favor of the petitioners. They promptly filed an application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 on 7-1-1961 before the Deputy Custodian. The Deputy Custodian vide order dated 2-6-1961 treated the land as non-evacuee property and thus made a reference to the Custodian for his approval but since the approval was not accorded by the Custodian vide order dated 30-9-1961, the petitioners filed a declaratory suit in the civil Court on 5-2-1962 which was dismissed on 19-3-1966 by the Senior Civil Judge, Peshawar, for want of jurisdiction. Their appeal before the District Judge having been dismissed, they approached the High Court by filing R. S. A. No. 357 of 1966 which was also dismissed on 9-4-1970. The petitioner then filed a petition for Special Leave to Appeal before the Supreme Court, but the leave was refused on 11-12-1972 with the observations that the petitioners remedy was by way of filing a writ petition against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property. Thereafter the petitioners fired Writ Petition No. 92 of 1973 which was allowed to be withdrawn on 2-7-1974 with the permission to file a fresh writ petition. Thus on 9-9-1974 the present writ petition was died in this Court. From the facts stated above it is obvious that the! petitioners have all along been pursuing their remedy with diligence since 1961.U The petitioners have never been negligent in seeking their remedy. In Muhammad Khan v. Shamsuddin it was held that where the petitioner has been bona fide pursuing his remedy in the civil Courts, the fact that the writ petition was filed against the impugned order after the lapse of 8 years, would not disentitle the petitioner to the grant of equitable relief on the ground of laches. In Pakistan v. Sheikh Abdul Hamid

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): been bona fide pursuing his remedy in the civil Courts, the fact that the writ petition was filed against the impugned order after the lapse of 8 years, would not disentitle the petitioner to the grant of equitable relief on the ground of laches. In Pakistan v. Sheikh Abdul Hamid (2) it was observed that “the delay was of no consequence as the petitioner had diligently been making representations to the Government all through from 1949 before film the writ petition in the High Court in 1957. WW. In Mohammad Umar Khan v. Pakistan (3) (1) 1969 S CM R212 2) PLD 1961 SC 105 (3) PLD 1982 Push. it was held that “there was no Imitation on the discretion of the Court in granting relief and no hard and fast rule can be laid down as to what m particular circumstances would constitute laches”. The delay alone was held not sufficient to non-suit the petitioner or to constitute condonable laches, the delay must be coupled with other conduct of the petitioner amounting to estoppel etc. In this view of the matter the objection with regard to Lachesis cannot prevail in this case. 3. So far as /6th share of Johan Singh sold in favor of the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest is concerned there appears to be no dispute between the parties, as the sale was effected on the basis of a registered sale-deed dated 29-8-1938, and it was duly incorporated in the revenue record. \ Regarding /6th share of Ram Singh in the land in dispute which was obtained by him in the preemption Suit No. instituted on 4-1-1942 and decreed in his favor on 26-9- 1942, it may be mentioned that the petitioners have not specifically clammed ownership thereof: Although the said portion is also alleged to be in their possession. In the civil litigation the aforesaid I/6th share which was subject-matter of the preemption suit was claimed by the petitioners for the reason that Ram Singh was a ‘Beamier’ and in fact he had instituted the preemption suit for their benefit. This contention however, did not prevail with the learned District Judge who came to the conclusion that Ram Singh was the exclusive owner of the aforesaid /6th share in the land. In this writ petition no such contention has been raised by the petitioners. The learned counsel for the petitioners has mainly relied on the other /6th share of Ram Singh which is alleged to have been sold by him in favor of the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest for a consideration of Rs. 2,500 paid by means of a receipt executed by Ram Singh in ‘Gurmukhi in the year 1998 Vikram corresponding to the year 1941-42. It is urged that the possession of the aforesaid land was also given to the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest and in consequence Mutation No. 154 was entered at the instance of Ram Singh on 2-7-1947. This mutation was rejected on 5-10-1947 since ban has been imposed by the Provincial Government

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): It is urged that the possession of the aforesaid land was also given to the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest and in consequence Mutation No. 154 was entered at the instance of Ram Singh on 2-7-1947. This mutation was rejected on 5-10-1947 since ban has been imposed by the Provincial Government on transfer of Evacuee Property of non-Muslims. However, on appeal this mutation was ordered to be attested by the Collector Peshawar on 10-3-1948. The learned counsel urged that this mutation was entered pursuant to the oral sale effected by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners which was duly evidenced by the aforesaid receipt and since the WW. sale in question took place prior to 28-2-1947 it did not require any confirmation by the Custodian under section 20 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957). However, a reference to Mutation No. 154 would show that in the note of the Atari dated 2-7-1947 there is no mention of the aforesaid receipt of the fact that the sale had already been effected by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners prior to 28-2- 1947. The note of the Atari is in the following terms It is difficult to draw an inference from the aforesaid note of the Atari that the sale had taken place earlier than 28-2-1947 as it leads to the inference that soon after the oral sale the Atari was informed for enter mg the mutation. Even if the principle, that a mutation takes effect from the date of entry and not from the date of its attestation, is kept in view, it is evident that the sale in question, having taken place in the month of July, 1947, was within the mischief of section 20 of the Act XII 1957 and would not confer q any valid title on the petitioners unless accepted by the Custodian as required by law. About the receipt relied upon by the petitioners it may also be mentioned that the same being not registered could not be looked into. The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that it did not require registration as it was a simple receipt for payment of money would not prevail as it is clear from the contents of the receipt that the amount of Rs. 2,500 was received by Ram Singh as a consideration for the transfer of land where he also agreed to execute a registered sale-deed subsequently in favor of vendees. The aforesaid document if considered as a conveyance of title would obviously require registration but if the document is taken as an agreement to sell it would not confer any title on the vendees unless it was specifically enforced and a registered sale-deed duly executed in favor of the petitioners. The learned counsel then argued that the petitioners are recorded in possession of the land as owners. It is not disputed that Ram Singh was a co-sharer in the land along with the petitioners and the mere

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): specifically enforced and a registered sale-deed duly executed in favor of the petitioners. The learned counsel then argued that the petitioners are recorded in possession of the land as owners. It is not disputed that Ram Singh was a co-sharer in the land along with the petitioners and the mere possession by one co-sharer would not amount to ouster in the absence of an overt act or assertion of hostile title. The contention of the learned counsel that the petitioners are recorded in the relevant Jamabandies as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bar is not well-founded because from the perusal of the Jamabandies of 1940-41 and 1946-47 it appears that Ram Singh himself and also along with other co-sharers is shown MN possession of a portion of the land in dispute and there is no entry excepting for Kara Nos. 348-79 and 331 in the Jacaranda of 1946-47, showing the petitioners in possession of the land as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bar’. The entry regarding the aforesaid three Kara numbers in the Jacaranda of 1946-47 showing the petitioner as ‘Bill Logan Banana Bai’ would be of no consequence as there exists no basis in the revenue record for incorporating the aforesaid entry. Such like entries in the Jamabandies after 1946-47 would be of no avail as by operation of law the evacuee interest in the land stood vested in the Custodian since 1-3-1947. Thus it is evident that the oral sale or the receipt executed by Ram Singh in favor of the petitioners was not given D effect to in the revenue record. There is nothing to prove that on the basis of the alleged sale of /6th share in favor of the petitioners or their predecessor-in- interest, they remained in exclusive possession thereof and the interest of the evacuee co- sharer stood extinguished. 4. It was next argued that the property BMG joint could not have been transferred to the allottees unless partitioned. Reliance is placed on Mehran v. The Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner In the cited case the land on which the property in dispute was constructed was ‘Shamilat-1-Deh’ and the evacuee interest could not be separated without partition. It was thus observed that the appellant who was a co-sharer in the ‘Shamika-i-Deh land was entitled to maintain his possession undisturbed until partition and that the land on which the property in dispute was situated being ‘Shamika-i-Deh’ and being a joint property could not be declared as evacuee property. In the case in hand it is not shown that the land in dispute is Shamika-i-Deh or that it has been constructed upon. Rather there is evidence to show that symbolic possession of the land belonging to the evacuee was taken by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Department through the Revenue Officer on 28-2-1961. The report of the Atari in this regard would show (1) P LD 1974 S C 193 that symbolic possession of specified Kara numbers out of various Bats was taken from the petitioners. This fact would indicate that the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 81?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 81 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1983-02-02): the Settlement and Rehabilitation Department through the Revenue Officer on 28-2-1961. The report of the Atari in this regard would show (1) P LD 1974 S C 193 that symbolic possession of specified Kara numbers out of various Bats was taken from the petitioners. This fact would indicate that the share of the non-Muslim Evacuee is identifiable and can be taken possession of separately from the joint property. Therefore, this objection of the learned counsel appears to be without any substance. The learned counsel then argued that after 1-1-1957 the property in dispute could not have been treated as evacuee property under section 3(1) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. 1957 (Act XII of 1957). But it is evident that clause (b) of section 3(2) of the Act is in the nature of an exception to the aforesaid provision of Saw thereunder the Custodian had the authority to treat the property as evacuee in cases covered by section 3(2) Thus, obviously where any evacuee property is occupied, supervised, or managed by a person whose right or authority in this regard F has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian, the same can be treated as evacuee property by the Custodian even after 1-1-1957. In Maj. Mehta Khan v. The Rehabilitation Authority (1) it was observed that the protection granted by subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of WW. 1957 is not available to properties occupied, supervised or managed by persons whose authority or right so to do after the 28th day of February, 1947 has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian of Evacuee Property and that these words are wide enough to include cases of vendees of the evacuee properties where the sale were effected after the 28th day of February, 1947, and they have been confirmed by the Custodian as required by section 20 of the Act. The petitioners having failed to prove a valid sale in their favor prior to q 1-3-1947, were obviously occupying the property whose right so to do was never accepted or approved by the Custodian. 5. For the aforesaid reasons, no exception can be taken to the order of the Custodian treating the land in dispute as evacuee property. Therefore, H the writ petition being without any substance is hereby dismissed. with no order as to costs. M. Y. h. Petition dismissed. WW.

Question: What is case 1984 PLD 33 about?
Answer: Case 1984 PLD 33 was decided by FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT on 1983-05-25. The case involved IN RE : THE EVACUEE PROPERTYAND DISPLACED PERSONS LAWS (REPEAL) ACT (XIV OF 1975). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 203-D EVACUEE PROPERTYAND DISPLACED PERSONS LAWS (REPEAL) ACT (XTV OF 1975). The case was heard by AFTAB HUSSAIN, C. J,, ALI HUSSAIN QAZILBASH,CH. MUHAMMAD SIDDIQ AND MALIK GHULAM ALI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 PLD 33?
Answer: In case 1984 PLD 33, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 203-D EVACUEE PROPERTYAND DISPLACED PERSONS LAWS (REPEAL) ACT (XTV OF 1975). This case was heard in FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT and decided on 1983-05-25.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 PLD 33?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 PLD 33 were: IFTIKHAR HUSSAIN CH. FOR THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.. The judges presiding were: AFTAB HUSSAIN, C. J,, ALI HUSSAIN QAZILBASH,CH. MUHAMMAD SIDDIQ AND MALIK GHULAM ALI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 PLD 33?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 PLD 33 were: IN RE : THE EVACUEE PROPERTYAND DISPLACED PERSONS LAWS (REPEAL) ACT (XIV OF 1975). This case was heard in FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 PLD 33.
Answer: Judgment Aftab Hussain, C J.-The Act repealed the following Acts and Regulations (0 the Registration of Claims (Displaced Persons) Act, 1956 (Act IL of 1956). (i) the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, (IFF) the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, A (iv) the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, (v) the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, (vi) the Scrutiny of Claims (Evacuee Property) Regulation, 1961, and (vi7) the Price of Evacuee Property and Public Dues (Recovery) Regulation, 1971. It is for this reason that none of these Acts were examined. Any examination of the Laws which are no longer a part of the statute book would be an exercise in futility. Moreover, the Constitution provides for the examination of existing laws and not of the laws which are no longer in force? Objections were received from Mr. Affair Ali and Raja Muhammad Forces Khan against the repealing Act. Mr. Affair Ah has referred only to some fraudulent transfers which are beyond the scope of our examination and equerry. Raja Muhammad IDDEES says that except the first five laws referred to above which were according to the Qur’an and Sunna, the Regulation of 1961 was against Sharia while the Regulation of 1971 was unnecessary. His objection is that the first 5 laws should remain on the Statute Book and the continuance of the repealing Law which violates the objective of Sharia would amount to acting m a manner repugnant to the Qur’an and Sunnah. The objection is not sound since obviously the object of these laws was to rehabilitate and settle displaced persons. By their very nature these laws could not be permanent. It was for the Government to consider whether the stage had reached for withdrawing them. The Government has, therefore, acted within the scope of its authority by repealing them. The Act is not in any way repugnant to the Qur’an and Sunnah. z- M. Order accordingly

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 PLD 33?
Answer: From case 1984 PLD 33 (FEDERAL SHARIAT COURT, 1983-05-25): Judgment Aftab Hussain, C J.-The Act repealed the following Acts and Regulations (0 the Registration of Claims (Displaced Persons) Act, 1956 (Act IL of 1956). (i) the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956, (IFF) the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, A (iv) the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, (v) the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, (vi) the Scrutiny of Claims (Evacuee Property) Regulation, 1961, and (vi7) the Price of Evacuee Property and Public Dues (Recovery) Regulation, 1971. It is for this reason that none of these Acts were examined. Any examination of the Laws which are no longer a part of the statute book would be an exercise in futility. Moreover, the Constitution provides for the examination of existing laws and not of the laws which are no longer in force? Objections were received from Mr. Affair Ali and Raja Muhammad Forces Khan against the repealing Act. Mr. Affair Ah has referred only to some fraudulent transfers which are beyond the scope of our examination and equerry. Raja Muhammad IDDEES says that except the first five laws referred to above which were according to the Qur’an and Sunna, the Regulation of 1961 was against Sharia while the Regulation of 1971 was unnecessary. His objection is that the first 5 laws should remain on the Statute Book and the continuance of the repealing Law which violates the objective of Sharia would amount to acting m a manner repugnant to the Qur’an and Sunnah. The objection is not sound since obviously the object of these laws was to rehabilitate and settle displaced persons. By their very nature these laws could not be permanent. It was for the Government to consider whether the stage had reached for withdrawing them. The Government has, therefore, acted within the scope of its authority by repealing them. The Act is not in any way repugnant to the Qur’an and Sunnah. z- M. Order accordingly

Question: What is case 1983 CLC 1181 about?
Answer: Case 1983 CLC 1181 was decided by SC(AJ&K on 1978-07-04. The case involved GHULAM MUHAMMAD (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS R RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 42 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT CXIIT OF 1957) - S. INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XIII OF 1957) - S. (2) AZAD JAMMU AND https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1983/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1983_1181.html 1/5 28/10/2025, 01:35 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1983/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1983_1181.html KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (XIII OF 1974) -S. 44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. The case was heard by ABDUL MAJEED MALLICK.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 CLC 1181?
Answer: In case 1983 CLC 1181, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 42 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT CXIIT OF 1957) - S. INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XIII OF 1957) - S. (2) AZAD JAMMU AND https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1983/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1983_1181.html 1/5 28/10/2025, 01:35 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1983/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1983_1181.html KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (XIII OF 1974) -S. 44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. This case was heard in SC(AJ&K and decided on 1978-07-04.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 CLC 1181?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 CLC 1181 were: RAJA MUHAMMAD HANIF KHAN> ADVOCATE FOR PETITIONER. M, S. FAROOQI, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.SH. ABDUL AZIZ, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.RAJA MUHAMMAD AKRAM KHAN, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENTS NOS, AND 4.. The judges presiding were: ABDUL MAJEED MALLICK.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 CLC 1181?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 CLC 1181 were: GHULAM MUHAMMAD (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS R RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SC(AJ&K.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 CLC 1181.
Answer: An evacuee shop No. 148, situate in Muzaffarabad City, is the bone of contention between the parties. The shop was allotted to one Muhammad Iqbal, who surrendered it in favor of the petitioner for a sum of Rs. 5,500, on which Rehabilitation Commissioner allotted the shop to the petitioner on 16th October, 1969. Aziz Din, non-petitioner No. 2, who was also interested in the allotment, immediately after knowing the order# preferred revision against the allotment order before the Custodian. The learned Custodian accepted the petition and discharged the order of allotment. The revision petition was instituted on 12th August, 1972 and disposed of on 8th September, 1973, The petitioner sought abashment of the order of Custodian by invoking special jurisdiction of the High Court in a writ petition. The learned Single Judge refused to interfere with the impugned order. Now leave Is sought to impeach that order of the High Court. 2. The main objection raised in the petition TS that the learned] Custodian had no jurisdiction to decide the question of allotment as Qq\A the day of his appointment he did not possess requisite qualifications to* be a Custodian. 3. It is admitted in para. of the petition that Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan, Custodian (as he then was), was apported AIs Additional Judge of the High Court in between 13th February, 1971 and 26th November, 1973. In addition to that in his affidavit and written objections Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan expressly stated that he was appointed as Additional Judge of the High Court much before his appointment as Custodian. The affidavit and written objections were not repudiated by a counter-affidavit or other evidence. Thus the facts brought on the record sufficiently proved that Mr. Justice Muhammad Islam Khan was appointed Additional Judge of the High] Court prior to his appointment as Custodian. 4. The qualifications for the appointment of the Custodian are described under section 6 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, as adapted in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. It is provided that the uvruuuiol tutti actual UUC UI Mure persons as musician of a nutation in the official Gazette. Subsection (2) of section 6 provides that any person, who is or has been a Judge of the High Court, is qualified to be appointed as Custodian. The objection is that Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan was not qualified for the post as on the date of his appointment he was neither a sitting nor a retired Judge of the High Court. In my opinion the suggestion of the learned counsel for the petitioner is untenable. 5. In order to ascertain the meaning and scope of the term ‘Judge*, we have to advert to the relevant law. Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan was apported as Custodian oh 13th February, 1971 and the law IQ force at the relevant time was Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government Act, 1970, Courts and Laws Code Act; 1949 and Kashmir Service Regulations. Section 25 of the Azad Jammu Kashmir Government Act, 1970, pertains to High Court. Government Act, 1970 and Courts and Laws Code Act, 1949 are silent on the definition of ‘Judges. However, in the Kashmir Service Regulations, Vol. II, at page 154, Appendix XX ‘Judges’ are shown to include Additional Judges of the High Court. Government Act of 1970 was amended in August, 1971, by amendment Act of 1971, whereby subsections (4) to (8) were added to section 25 of the Government Act of 1970. Subsection (7) of section 25 contained a provision that if at any time a Judge of the High Court was absent or unable to perform his functions due to illness or for other cause, any person qualified to be appointed as Judge of the High Court shall be appointed Additional Judge for the purpose or period for which the Judge is absent or otherwise unable to perform functions. By repeal and with certain modifications of Government Act, 1970, the Legislature reenacted the Act, called as “The Azad Jammu Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974”. Under section 2, relating to definition, the term ‘Judge’ in relation to the High Court, includes the Chief Justice and an Additional Judge of the High Court. From the aforesaid provisions of law it is reflected that the term ‘Judge3 includes an Additional Judge. An identical provision exists in the Constitution of Pakistan. It is also noted that qualifications for the appointment of the Judge or Additional Judge of the High Court are the same. Thus in standard and status a person who is m possession of qualifications requisite for the appointment( of an Additional Judge TS qualified to be appointed as Judge of the High Court. 6. It is well-accepted rule of construction that words and terms are given the meaning assigned to them under the definition clause of a statute. Departure or transgression from such meaning is not permitted.l} Apply mg the principle to the start case it is seen that the term ‘Adding tonal Judge* has no other meaning except the one given in the relevant! law. The qualifications contamed in section 6 of the Administration BFL Evacuee Property Act clearly indicate that a person, who is or has been a Judge of the High Court, is eligible to be apported as Custodian.! The Legislature used the language of the section with the intention to! prescribe qualifications to Custodian identical to those for the Judge of! the High Court. The object was to have a person apported as Custodian! of the same qualifications and status as that of Judge of High Court. One! of the rules of interpretation is that nothing is to be imported or added! to the text of statute or obliterated as surplus age. On this principle ITL cannot be allowed to suggest that the words ‘has been" are equivalent! to the term ‘retired9. Its play meaning is, and it includes a person who! has functioned as Judge of the High Court or held the post of Judge of the High Court, respective of period or limitation or number of cased decided by him. In my view, a person who held the assignment of a Judge of High Court even for a day and left it on account of some other assignment, was competent to be appointed as Custodian. In the circumstances, I find no reason to disagree with the learned Single Judge and hold that the learned Custodian, who recorded the impugned judgment, was qualified and competent to be apported as Custodian and in consequence thereof invested with the jurisdiction to record the impugned order. 7. The other aspect of the case resulting in refusal to grant leave is that objection to his jurisdiction for want of requisite qualifications for his appointment, was not raised before the Custodian. The petitioner partier patted in the proceedings before him and it was only when the decision went against him that he invoked special jurisdiction by writ to draw attention of the High Court to the alleged usurpation of jurisdiction. The consensus in Indo-Pak is that objection to jurisdiction of a Tribunal can only be raised in a writ petition when such an objection was also raised before the concerned Tribunal. The rule was introduced by the English Courts, but it has been consistently adhered to in. Indo-Pak. The grievance TQ usurpation of jurisdiction cannot be allowed to be raised in a writ petition unless certain objection to jurisdiction is taken before the Tribunal whose order is being challenged. The object is that the High Court is entitled to know as to what the Tribunal has to say about its jurisdiction. The other aspect of the rule is that the party who participated in to proceed ings without objection acquiesced by its behavior, although by acquires~ hence or waiver no jurisdiction is conferred on the Tribunal. This view finds support in Ghulam Moored- Din9 s case (1) and G.M*T. Society v. Bombay State Precisely on this principle failure of a party to raise post of jurisdiction before the Tribunal precludes it from claiming abashment of proceedings by extraordinary remedy of writ in the instant case objection to jurisdiction, admittedly, was not raised before the Custodian. In case the Custodian would have recorded order of allotment in favor of th4 petitioner, the High Court or this Court least could have heard of grievance of the petitioner. The grievance was brought to the notice of the High Court and this Court as the decision is. recorded against the petitioner. The learned Single Judge of the High Court has rightly refused to quash the impugned order. £8. Leave is granted when an important matter of public policy Of law post necessitating decision of this Court is raised. In the instant case, on facts, it is established that Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan was qualified to be appointed as Custodian. For the reason discussed, above there is no substance in the petition to grant leave. The petition is therefore, dismissed. Y. M. Grant of leave-refused WWW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1181?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1181 (SC(AJ&K, 1978-07-04): An evacuee shop No. 148, situate in Muzaffarabad City, is the bone of contention between the parties. The shop was allotted to one Muhammad Iqbal, who surrendered it in favor of the petitioner for a sum of Rs. 5,500, on which Rehabilitation Commissioner allotted the shop to the petitioner on 16th October, 1969. Aziz Din, non-petitioner No. 2, who was also interested in the allotment, immediately after knowing the order# preferred revision against the allotment order before the Custodian. The learned Custodian accepted the petition and discharged the order of allotment. The revision petition was instituted on 12th August, 1972 and disposed of on 8th September, 1973, The petitioner sought abashment of the order of Custodian by invoking special jurisdiction of the High Court in a writ petition. The learned Single Judge refused to interfere with the impugned order. Now leave Is sought to impeach that order of the High Court. 2. The main objection raised in the petition TS that the learned] Custodian had no jurisdiction to decide the question of allotment as Qq\A the day of his appointment he did not possess requisite qualifications to* be a Custodian. 3. It is admitted in para. of the petition that Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan, Custodian (as he then was), was apported AIs Additional Judge of the High Court in between 13th February, 1971 and 26th November, 1973. In addition to that in his affidavit and written objections Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan expressly stated that he was appointed as Additional Judge of the High Court much before his appointment as Custodian. The affidavit and written objections were not repudiated by a counter-affidavit or other evidence. Thus the facts brought on the record sufficiently proved that Mr. Justice Muhammad Islam Khan was appointed Additional Judge of the High] Court prior to his appointment as Custodian. 4. The qualifications for the appointment of the Custodian are described under section 6 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, as adapted in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. It is provided that the uvruuuiol tutti actual UUC UI Mure persons as musician of a nutation in the official Gazette. Subsection (2) of section 6 provides that any person, who is or has been a Judge of the High Court, is qualified to be appointed as Custodian. The objection is that Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan was not qualified for the post as on the date of his appointment he was neither a sitting nor a retired Judge of the High Court. In my opinion the suggestion of the learned counsel for the petitioner is untenable. 5. In order to ascertain the meaning and scope of the term ‘Judge*, we have to advert to the relevant law. Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan was apported as Custodian oh 13th February, 1971 and the law IQ force at the relevant time was Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government Act, 1970, Courts and Laws Code Act; 1949 and Kashmir Service Regulations. Section 25 of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1181?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1181 (SC(AJ&K, 1978-07-04): advert to the relevant law. Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan was apported as Custodian oh 13th February, 1971 and the law IQ force at the relevant time was Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government Act, 1970, Courts and Laws Code Act; 1949 and Kashmir Service Regulations. Section 25 of the Azad Jammu Kashmir Government Act, 1970, pertains to High Court. Government Act, 1970 and Courts and Laws Code Act, 1949 are silent on the definition of ‘Judges. However, in the Kashmir Service Regulations, Vol. II, at page 154, Appendix XX ‘Judges’ are shown to include Additional Judges of the High Court. Government Act of 1970 was amended in August, 1971, by amendment Act of 1971, whereby subsections (4) to (8) were added to section 25 of the Government Act of 1970. Subsection (7) of section 25 contained a provision that if at any time a Judge of the High Court was absent or unable to perform his functions due to illness or for other cause, any person qualified to be appointed as Judge of the High Court shall be appointed Additional Judge for the purpose or period for which the Judge is absent or otherwise unable to perform functions. By repeal and with certain modifications of Government Act, 1970, the Legislature reenacted the Act, called as “The Azad Jammu Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974”. Under section 2, relating to definition, the term ‘Judge’ in relation to the High Court, includes the Chief Justice and an Additional Judge of the High Court. From the aforesaid provisions of law it is reflected that the term ‘Judge3 includes an Additional Judge. An identical provision exists in the Constitution of Pakistan. It is also noted that qualifications for the appointment of the Judge or Additional Judge of the High Court are the same. Thus in standard and status a person who is m possession of qualifications requisite for the appointment( of an Additional Judge TS qualified to be appointed as Judge of the High Court. 6. It is well-accepted rule of construction that words and terms are given the meaning assigned to them under the definition clause of a statute. Departure or transgression from such meaning is not permitted.l} Apply mg the principle to the start case it is seen that the term ‘Adding tonal Judge* has no other meaning except the one given in the relevant! law. The qualifications contamed in section 6 of the Administration BFL Evacuee Property Act clearly indicate that a person, who is or has been a Judge of the High Court, is eligible to be apported as Custodian.! The Legislature used the language of the section with the intention to! prescribe qualifications to Custodian identical to those for the Judge of! the High Court. The object was to have a person apported as Custodian! of the same qualifications and status as that of Judge of High Court. One! of the rules of interpretation is that nothing is to be imported or added! to the text of statute or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1181?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1181 (SC(AJ&K, 1978-07-04): the Judge of! the High Court. The object was to have a person apported as Custodian! of the same qualifications and status as that of Judge of High Court. One! of the rules of interpretation is that nothing is to be imported or added! to the text of statute or obliterated as surplus age. On this principle ITL cannot be allowed to suggest that the words ‘has been" are equivalent! to the term ‘retired9. Its play meaning is, and it includes a person who! has functioned as Judge of the High Court or held the post of Judge of the High Court, respective of period or limitation or number of cased decided by him. In my view, a person who held the assignment of a Judge of High Court even for a day and left it on account of some other assignment, was competent to be appointed as Custodian. In the circumstances, I find no reason to disagree with the learned Single Judge and hold that the learned Custodian, who recorded the impugned judgment, was qualified and competent to be apported as Custodian and in consequence thereof invested with the jurisdiction to record the impugned order. 7. The other aspect of the case resulting in refusal to grant leave is that objection to his jurisdiction for want of requisite qualifications for his appointment, was not raised before the Custodian. The petitioner partier patted in the proceedings before him and it was only when the decision went against him that he invoked special jurisdiction by writ to draw attention of the High Court to the alleged usurpation of jurisdiction. The consensus in Indo-Pak is that objection to jurisdiction of a Tribunal can only be raised in a writ petition when such an objection was also raised before the concerned Tribunal. The rule was introduced by the English Courts, but it has been consistently adhered to in. Indo-Pak. The grievance TQ usurpation of jurisdiction cannot be allowed to be raised in a writ petition unless certain objection to jurisdiction is taken before the Tribunal whose order is being challenged. The object is that the High Court is entitled to know as to what the Tribunal has to say about its jurisdiction. The other aspect of the rule is that the party who participated in to proceed ings without objection acquiesced by its behavior, although by acquires~ hence or waiver no jurisdiction is conferred on the Tribunal. This view finds support in Ghulam Moored- Din9 s case (1) and G.M*T. Society v. Bombay State Precisely on this principle failure of a party to raise post of jurisdiction before the Tribunal precludes it from claiming abashment of proceedings by extraordinary remedy of writ in the instant case objection to jurisdiction, admittedly, was not raised before the Custodian. In case the Custodian would have recorded order of allotment in favor of th4 petitioner, the High Court or this Court least could have heard of grievance of the petitioner. The grievance was brought to the notice

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1181?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1181 (SC(AJ&K, 1978-07-04): the instant case objection to jurisdiction, admittedly, was not raised before the Custodian. In case the Custodian would have recorded order of allotment in favor of th4 petitioner, the High Court or this Court least could have heard of grievance of the petitioner. The grievance was brought to the notice of the High Court and this Court as the decision is. recorded against the petitioner. The learned Single Judge of the High Court has rightly refused to quash the impugned order. £8. Leave is granted when an important matter of public policy Of law post necessitating decision of this Court is raised. In the instant case, on facts, it is established that Mr. Justice Malik Muhammad Islam Khan was qualified to be appointed as Custodian. For the reason discussed, above there is no substance in the petition to grant leave. The petition is therefore, dismissed. Y. M. Grant of leave-refused WWW.

Question: What is case 1983 CLC 1963 about?
Answer: Case 1983 CLC 1963 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1982-11-17. The case involved JANOO AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY SIND AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) -§. 22. The case was heard by Z. C. VALIANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 CLC 1963?
Answer: In case 1983 CLC 1963, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) -§. 22. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1982-11-17.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 CLC 1963?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 CLC 1963 were: A: F. AF. MOKHARAM FOR PETITIONERS.GULAB M. RANG FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: Z. C. VALIANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 CLC 1963?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 CLC 1963 were: JANOO AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY SIND AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 CLC 1963.
Answer: Judgment The petitioners have filed the above petition for declaring the order dated 27th June, 1974, of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, on respondent’s appeal, filed against rejection of his application under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act (XII of 1957) by the learned Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property, Khairpur Division, at Sukkur, vide order dated 19th February, 1974, as illegal, null and void on the facts and grounds mentioned in the above petition. 2. However, the learned Advocate for the petitioners in support off the. Above petition submitted, that the respondent No. 1, while disposing of appeal No. did not take into consideration the important legal fact, that the respondent’s application moved before the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, against the order dated 20th January, 1970 was hopelessly time-barred by period of nearly 2 years and as such ought to have been dismissed on the said ground alone. 3. The learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No. on the other hand submitted, that the point of limitation was neither raised before the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property nor before the Custodian and as such the same cannot be raised in the above petition, as both the learned lower Courts have deemed to have condoned such delay, while disposing of respondents application and appeal on merits. In support of this contention, the learned Advocate for the respondent relied upon Full Bench decision of the High Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir, reported in P D 1981 Azad J K 21. In addition to this the learned Advocate for the respondent No. submitted, that the learned Custodian m his impugned order has clearly held, that the properties in question were acquired by respondent No. in the year 1940, by Registered sale-deed and as such the said transaction did not require confirm-; ton. The learned Custodian has further held in his impugned order, that in the year 1959 Assistant Custodian, Nawabshah had held the respondent No. as non-evacuee and as such the properties’ in question should not have been declared as evacuee and as a matter of fact the respondent No. 2’s properties were not treated as evacuee properties before 1st January, 1957. The learned Advocate for the respondent No. further submitted, that these are the questions of fact, which have been considered by the learned Custodian, while disposing of the respondent’s appeal No. and as such in the absence of any other illegality and/or material irregularity or want of jurisdiction in the impugned order of the learned Custodian, the said order which is also based on facts on record, cannot be interfered with in this writ jurisdiction. The learned Advocate for the respondent further submitted, that the learned Advocate for the petitioners, except on the point of limitation, was unable to challenge the order of the Custodian and as such the above petition is label to be dismissed. WW. /* 14, T have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned Advocates before me. I called upon the learned Advocate for the petitioners to post out to me any order or document by which respondent No. 2’s properties were treated and/or declared as evacuee before IST'January, 1957, but he was unable to post out any such document and/or order. In view of this and since the question of limitation regarding the maintainability of respondent No. 2’s application under section 22 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, XII of 1957 was not raised or agitated either before the learned Deputy Custodian or the Custodian of Evacuee Property, in my opinion the same cannot be now considered by me in the above petition. In this view of mine, I am supported by the decision of Full Bench of High Court of Azad Jammu Kashmir ( PLD 1981 Azad J KL21, and I am in respectful agreement with the said judgment for the reasons given in the said judgment and since I find no illegality in the impugned order of the learned respondent No. 1,1 dismiss the above petition. However, in view of the facts and circumstances of the present petition*. I would pass no orders as to costs. m. y. m. Petition dismissed. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1963?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1963 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-17): Judgment The petitioners have filed the above petition for declaring the order dated 27th June, 1974, of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, on respondent’s appeal, filed against rejection of his application under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act (XII of 1957) by the learned Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property, Khairpur Division, at Sukkur, vide order dated 19th February, 1974, as illegal, null and void on the facts and grounds mentioned in the above petition. 2. However, the learned Advocate for the petitioners in support off the. Above petition submitted, that the respondent No. 1, while disposing of appeal No. did not take into consideration the important legal fact, that the respondent’s application moved before the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, against the order dated 20th January, 1970 was hopelessly time-barred by period of nearly 2 years and as such ought to have been dismissed on the said ground alone. 3. The learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No. on the other hand submitted, that the point of limitation was neither raised before the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property nor before the Custodian and as such the same cannot be raised in the above petition, as both the learned lower Courts have deemed to have condoned such delay, while disposing of respondents application and appeal on merits. In support of this contention, the learned Advocate for the respondent relied upon Full Bench decision of the High Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir, reported in P D 1981 Azad J K 21. In addition to this the learned Advocate for the respondent No. submitted, that the learned Custodian m his impugned order has clearly held, that the properties in question were acquired by respondent No. in the year 1940, by Registered sale-deed and as such the said transaction did not require confirm-; ton. The learned Custodian has further held in his impugned order, that in the year 1959 Assistant Custodian, Nawabshah had held the respondent No. as non-evacuee and as such the properties’ in question should not have been declared as evacuee and as a matter of fact the respondent No. 2’s properties were not treated as evacuee properties before 1st January, 1957. The learned Advocate for the respondent No. further submitted, that these are the questions of fact, which have been considered by the learned Custodian, while disposing of the respondent’s appeal No. and as such in the absence of any other illegality and/or material irregularity or want of jurisdiction in the impugned order of the learned Custodian, the said order which is also based on facts on record, cannot be interfered with in this writ jurisdiction. The learned Advocate for the respondent further submitted, that the learned Advocate for the petitioners, except on the point of limitation, was unable to challenge the order of the Custodian and as such the above petition is label to be dismissed. WW. /* 14, T have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned Advocates before me.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1963?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1963 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-17): that the learned Advocate for the petitioners, except on the point of limitation, was unable to challenge the order of the Custodian and as such the above petition is label to be dismissed. WW. /* 14, T have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned Advocates before me. I called upon the learned Advocate for the petitioners to post out to me any order or document by which respondent No. 2’s properties were treated and/or declared as evacuee before IST'January, 1957, but he was unable to post out any such document and/or order. In view of this and since the question of limitation regarding the maintainability of respondent No. 2’s application under section 22 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, XII of 1957 was not raised or agitated either before the learned Deputy Custodian or the Custodian of Evacuee Property, in my opinion the same cannot be now considered by me in the above petition. In this view of mine, I am supported by the decision of Full Bench of High Court of Azad Jammu Kashmir ( PLD 1981 Azad J KL21, and I am in respectful agreement with the said judgment for the reasons given in the said judgment and since I find no illegality in the impugned order of the learned respondent No. 1,1 dismiss the above petition. However, in view of the facts and circumstances of the present petition*. I would pass no orders as to costs. m. y. m. Petition dismissed. WW.

Question: What is case 1983 CLC 2363 about?
Answer: Case 1983 CLC 2363 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1983-02-20. The case involved CHAUDHRY MEHR DIN (PETITIONER) VERSUS WEST PAKISTAN ENEMY PROPERTY MANAGEMENT BOARD AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include ENEMY PROPERTY (CONTINUANCE OF EMERGENCY PROVISIONS) ORDINANCE (XXXIV OF 1977) - S. ENEMY PROPERTY (CONTINUANCE OF EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)ORDINANCE (I OF 1969) - S. CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 83 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XXIII, R. 1. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD ZAFARULLAH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 CLC 2363?
Answer: In case 1983 CLC 2363, the court applied the following statutes: ENEMY PROPERTY (CONTINUANCE OF EMERGENCY PROVISIONS) ORDINANCE (XXXIV OF 1977) - S. ENEMY PROPERTY (CONTINUANCE OF EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)ORDINANCE (I OF 1969) - S. CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 83 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XXIII, R. 1. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1983-02-20.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 CLC 2363?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 CLC 2363 were: HAJI GHIAS MUHAMMAD AND RAJA ABDUL RAZZAQ FOR PETITIONER. M. A. REHMAN, M.A. ZAFAR, S. MUNIR HUSSAIN AND IFTIKHAT AHMAD DAR FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD ZAFARULLAH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 CLC 2363?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 CLC 2363 were: CHAUDHRY MEHR DIN (PETITIONER) VERSUS WEST PAKISTAN ENEMY PROPERTY MANAGEMENT BOARD AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 CLC 2363.
Answer: Kara Flour and General Mills Ltd. Amritsar located at Kara was declared an enemy property after the war between Pakistan and India of 1965. This property has been under the management of different authorities from time to time and according to present arrangements the Mills stand transferred to the National Police Foundation through a registered sale-deed executed between Additional Custodian of Enemy Property and the National Police Foundation on 12th May, 1981. The petitioner, who claims to be a shareholder in the company, challenges the orders of the sale to the National Police Foundation and further disposal of the assets of the company by the National Police Foundation. 2. This matter came to High Court twice before. Writ Petition No. moved by S. A. Raft a shareholder and Deputy General Manager, and the company was dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court on 4th July, 1972. These orders were challenged in the Supreme Court in Civil Petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 334 of 1972, but it was dismissed on 29th August, 1972. Subsequently Meir Din, the present petitioner and two others brought writ petition No. 1436 of 1972 to the High Court. It was dismissed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court on 24th October, 1973 on the ground that it was barred by res judicata. These orders were challenged in a Letters Patent Appeal No. which was, however, dismissed as withdrawn on 19th December, 1980. This is now a third writ petition in the High Court on the same subject, brought this TME by Meir Din alone. It is argued on his behalf that earlier decisions do not bar the present writ petition, as the parties are not the same and that there is a fresh cause of action. » « 3. As stated above, the Mills were taken over by the Government as enemy property in 1965 and the petitioner does not question the take-over. His contention is that after the repeal of the emergency legislation and revocation of the proclamation of emergency the promulgation Ordinance I of 1969 and Ordinance XXXIV of 1977 which give continuance to the emergency provisions relating to enemy property, is unconstitutional. It is argued that a law justifying a particular emergency without reference to the emergency is a colorable legislation. 4. There is no denying the fact that action in respect of the Kara Flour and General Mills was taken under rules 181 and 182 of the Defense of Pakistan Rules, 1965 which were promulgated in pursuance of a proclamation of emergency but the right to deal with enemy property does not flow from or is in any way dependent on a proclamation of emergency. This; depends entirely on the relations between. Two countries and whether they are in a state of war. Under the constitution, CERTAM extraordinary powers can be assumed by the Government in an emergency covering a vast field of activity and this may include enemy property, but it is wrong to assume that an emergency has to be proclaimed before matters relating to enemy property can be legislated upon. Defense of Pakistan Rules, relating to enemy property, were only incidental to the emergency. Therefore the subsequent legislation continuing these provisions is not unconstitutional. 5. The learned counsel for the petitioner has also argued that the Government could not order the transfer of. The property to the National Police. Foundation, as the property vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property. There is no force in this argument. Firstly, the property has been conveyed by the Custodian and not the Government and secondly, the Custodian was holding the property only on behalf of the Government. 6. The question of maintainability of the wet petition was seriously raised by the respondents and there is no question about the bar to these proceedings under section 83 of the C. P. C. This has already been so held by the Supreme Court NC. P. S. L.A. No. moved on behalf of the Company and S. A. Raft, a shareholder of the Company. The present petitioner who also claims to be a shareholder in the Company, isl not free of the bar, for the reason that what cannot be achieved directly! cannot be achieved indirectly. V 7. The present petition TS also barred in view of the provisions of Order XXIII, rule of the C. P. C. No permission was sought or granted. to bring a fresh petition when L. P. A. No. was dismissed as withdrawn. In fact, it was specifically mentioned that no advantage will be taken of the order of 9th December, 1980 permitting the withdrawal. The. petitioner, however, seeks to justify the present action on grounds of AJ fresh cause of action, which according to him, has arisen, on account of} the change in mode of transfer, from auction, to an outright sale. I Ami afraid, this is not a justification enough to permit a fresh action, as the] change in mode of transfer cannot be a fresh cause, when the petitioned questions the very authority of the respondents to deal with the property! in question, which gave him cause bringing a writ petition in 1972 along! with two others and in 1969 to the Company and to S. A. Raft, a share-1 holder of the Company. ? S. In view of the above considerations, there is no merit in this writ petition. It is dismissed with costs. SK.MA. Writ edition dismissed WWW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2363?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2363 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-20): Kara Flour and General Mills Ltd. Amritsar located at Kara was declared an enemy property after the war between Pakistan and India of 1965. This property has been under the management of different authorities from time to time and according to present arrangements the Mills stand transferred to the National Police Foundation through a registered sale-deed executed between Additional Custodian of Enemy Property and the National Police Foundation on 12th May, 1981. The petitioner, who claims to be a shareholder in the company, challenges the orders of the sale to the National Police Foundation and further disposal of the assets of the company by the National Police Foundation. 2. This matter came to High Court twice before. Writ Petition No. moved by S. A. Raft a shareholder and Deputy General Manager, and the company was dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court on 4th July, 1972. These orders were challenged in the Supreme Court in Civil Petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 334 of 1972, but it was dismissed on 29th August, 1972. Subsequently Meir Din, the present petitioner and two others brought writ petition No. 1436 of 1972 to the High Court. It was dismissed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court on 24th October, 1973 on the ground that it was barred by res judicata. These orders were challenged in a Letters Patent Appeal No. which was, however, dismissed as withdrawn on 19th December, 1980. This is now a third writ petition in the High Court on the same subject, brought this TME by Meir Din alone. It is argued on his behalf that earlier decisions do not bar the present writ petition, as the parties are not the same and that there is a fresh cause of action. » « 3. As stated above, the Mills were taken over by the Government as enemy property in 1965 and the petitioner does not question the take-over. His contention is that after the repeal of the emergency legislation and revocation of the proclamation of emergency the promulgation Ordinance I of 1969 and Ordinance XXXIV of 1977 which give continuance to the emergency provisions relating to enemy property, is unconstitutional. It is argued that a law justifying a particular emergency without reference to the emergency is a colorable legislation. 4. There is no denying the fact that action in respect of the Kara Flour and General Mills was taken under rules 181 and 182 of the Defense of Pakistan Rules, 1965 which were promulgated in pursuance of a proclamation of emergency but the right to deal with enemy property does not flow from or is in any way dependent on a proclamation of emergency. This; depends entirely on the relations between. Two countries and whether they are in a state of war. Under the constitution, CERTAM extraordinary powers can be assumed by the Government in an emergency covering a vast field of activity and this may include enemy property, but it is wrong to assume

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2363?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2363 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-20): depends entirely on the relations between. Two countries and whether they are in a state of war. Under the constitution, CERTAM extraordinary powers can be assumed by the Government in an emergency covering a vast field of activity and this may include enemy property, but it is wrong to assume that an emergency has to be proclaimed before matters relating to enemy property can be legislated upon. Defense of Pakistan Rules, relating to enemy property, were only incidental to the emergency. Therefore the subsequent legislation continuing these provisions is not unconstitutional. 5. The learned counsel for the petitioner has also argued that the Government could not order the transfer of. The property to the National Police. Foundation, as the property vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property. There is no force in this argument. Firstly, the property has been conveyed by the Custodian and not the Government and secondly, the Custodian was holding the property only on behalf of the Government. 6. The question of maintainability of the wet petition was seriously raised by the respondents and there is no question about the bar to these proceedings under section 83 of the C. P. C. This has already been so held by the Supreme Court NC. P. S. L.A. No. moved on behalf of the Company and S. A. Raft, a shareholder of the Company. The present petitioner who also claims to be a shareholder in the Company, isl not free of the bar, for the reason that what cannot be achieved directly! cannot be achieved indirectly. V 7. The present petition TS also barred in view of the provisions of Order XXIII, rule of the C. P. C. No permission was sought or granted. to bring a fresh petition when L. P. A. No. was dismissed as withdrawn. In fact, it was specifically mentioned that no advantage will be taken of the order of 9th December, 1980 permitting the withdrawal. The. petitioner, however, seeks to justify the present action on grounds of AJ fresh cause of action, which according to him, has arisen, on account of} the change in mode of transfer, from auction, to an outright sale. I Ami afraid, this is not a justification enough to permit a fresh action, as the] change in mode of transfer cannot be a fresh cause, when the petitioned questions the very authority of the respondents to deal with the property! in question, which gave him cause bringing a writ petition in 1972 along! with two others and in 1969 to the Company and to S. A. Raft, a share-1 holder of the Company. ? S. In view of the above considerations, there is no merit in this writ petition. It is dismissed with costs. SK.MA. Writ edition dismissed WWW.

Question: What is case 1983 CLC 2504 about?
Answer: Case 1983 CLC 2504 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1982-10-24. The case involved FAZAL DIN SONS (PETITIONER) VERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (I OF 1981) - ARTICLE DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY ATTACHED TO CHARITABLE, RELIGIOUS OR EDUCATIONAL TRUSTS OR INSTITUTIONS, 1960 - PARAGRAPH 18. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD AFZAL LORN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 CLC 2504?
Answer: In case 1983 CLC 2504, the court applied the following statutes: PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (I OF 1981) - ARTICLE DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY ATTACHED TO CHARITABLE, RELIGIOUS OR EDUCATIONAL TRUSTS OR INSTITUTIONS, 1960 - PARAGRAPH 18. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1982-10-24.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 CLC 2504?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 CLC 2504 were: SH. MUHAMMAD HANIFV, EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST. BOARD 1980 CLC 105 REUSMUM TAZ HUSSAIN FOR PETITIONER. ZAFAR IQBAL KHAN FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD AFZAL LORN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 CLC 2504?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 CLC 2504 were: FAZAL DIN SONS (PETITIONER) VERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 CLC 2504.
Answer: Judgment. t This judgment shall dispose of Writ Petitions Nos. 22/R-71, 78/R-71 and 431/R-71, as common questions of law and facts are involved therein. It shall however, remain on the file of Writ Petition No. 22/R-71. M 2. The petitioners are in possession of certain business premises, in Sir Gang Ram Building, Shahrah-i-Quaid-1-Azam, Lahore as tenants under the Evacuee Trust Board. They are aggrieved by an order passed by the Chairman of the Board which was communicated to them under the Board letter No. GR-T/, dated 19th November, 1970 whereby with effect from IST July, 1969, the rent of the first floor was fixed at the rate of Re. per sq. ft. and of the basement, gallery, stores, etc. at the rate of Re. per sq. ft. Earlier some tenants under the Board called* GED the fixation of the rent of the demised premises through vocation of writ jurisdiction. These writ petitions were disposed of by order dated 13th June, 1969 and the case remanded to the Chairman of the Board. It was under these circumstances that the latter in exercise of the powers vested in him under Para. 18 of the Scheme known as ‘scheme for the Management and Disposal of Property attached to Charitable, Religious or Educational Trusts or Institutions (1960)’, passed the impugned order, enhancing the rent. t 2. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties. No one has entered appearance on behalf of the petitioners in W. P. No. 431/R-71. However, instead of dismissing the same in default it is also decided on merits. 3. It has been argued on behalf of the petitioners that para. 18 does not confer any power on the Chairman to enhance the rent. A reference was also made to section 16-A (1) of the Displaced Persons (Com- " sensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 to contend that according to the connotation of the terms administration* and ‘management* as given in the Black’s Law Dictionary* the power to enhance the rent cannot be spelt out therefrom. Likewise the dictionary meaning of the expression, namely, ‘efficient maintenance, control, administration’ employed in para. 18 of the Scheme were relied upon, to highlight the submission that the respondents, assumption of power to increase the rent was without lawful a authority, Mr. Mumbai Hussain;.who argued the main case also drew a comparison between the powers of the Board under Scheme and the Evacuee Trust Property {Management and-Disposal) Act. 1975 and posted out that the powers to assess and reassess the rent which previously was not available to the Board, for the first time, was WW. specifically conferred on it under clause of subsection (2) of section of the Act and richly laid hand on the rule laid down in Heydon’s case, The learned counsel also express SED a grievance that the impugned order does not disclose any basis for! assessment of the rent and the assessment made by the Excise and Taxa-J ton Department was unjustifiably ignored. It was also urged that the direct tons given by the High Court in the order dated 13th June, 1969 were complied with; b 4. This judgment need not be burdened with the dictionary meaning of the expressions used in section 16*A and Para. 18 of the Scheme, or the discussion of the rule of construction of Statute referred to by the learned counsel. The question as to the Board’s authority to enhance the rent under Para. 18, was examined in detail by Aftab Hussain 3, in Sh. Muhammad Han if v> Evacuee Property "Trust Board (1) wherein it was maintained that: “This Beng so Efficient administration* will include management of the property NBA manner so as to clog all loopholes which may causeless of income or damage to the property and to take steps for improving inter alia its income, no doubt without adopting a posture of harshness and mercilessness towards the tenants. The power of enhancing the rent thus emanates from the efficient administration of the property. It is not, therefore, correct to say that the Board had no power under that £>heme the enhance the rent/*- I have'hot been persuaded to differ with the view takes 1o this judgment and respectfully agree with the same. ? 5. The learned counsel could not refer to any provision of law to show that the assessment made under the Urban Immovable Properties Tax Act, is binding on the Board; As regards the basis of the assessment it in obvious from the impugned order that thee rent of one of the premises I'm the same building, fetched through auction, was on the higher side.JJ Though this could legitimately serve as criterion Tor, Sing the rent for) other premises, yet the respondent chose to adhere to the commitment made by the Department before the High Court m the order dated 13th June, 1969. There is also no merit in the submission, that this order was not complied with. It is thus clear that the impugned order was passed with lawful authority. There is no merit in these writ petitions which are dismissed but with no order as to costs, m K.M'A« Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2504?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2504 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1982-10-24): Judgment. t This judgment shall dispose of Writ Petitions Nos. 22/R-71, 78/R-71 and 431/R-71, as common questions of law and facts are involved therein. It shall however, remain on the file of Writ Petition No. 22/R-71. M 2. The petitioners are in possession of certain business premises, in Sir Gang Ram Building, Shahrah-i-Quaid-1-Azam, Lahore as tenants under the Evacuee Trust Board. They are aggrieved by an order passed by the Chairman of the Board which was communicated to them under the Board letter No. GR-T/, dated 19th November, 1970 whereby with effect from IST July, 1969, the rent of the first floor was fixed at the rate of Re. per sq. ft. and of the basement, gallery, stores, etc. at the rate of Re. per sq. ft. Earlier some tenants under the Board called* GED the fixation of the rent of the demised premises through vocation of writ jurisdiction. These writ petitions were disposed of by order dated 13th June, 1969 and the case remanded to the Chairman of the Board. It was under these circumstances that the latter in exercise of the powers vested in him under Para. 18 of the Scheme known as ‘scheme for the Management and Disposal of Property attached to Charitable, Religious or Educational Trusts or Institutions (1960)’, passed the impugned order, enhancing the rent. t 2. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties. No one has entered appearance on behalf of the petitioners in W. P. No. 431/R-71. However, instead of dismissing the same in default it is also decided on merits. 3. It has been argued on behalf of the petitioners that para. 18 does not confer any power on the Chairman to enhance the rent. A reference was also made to section 16-A (1) of the Displaced Persons (Com- " sensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 to contend that according to the connotation of the terms administration* and ‘management* as given in the Black’s Law Dictionary* the power to enhance the rent cannot be spelt out therefrom. Likewise the dictionary meaning of the expression, namely, ‘efficient maintenance, control, administration’ employed in para. 18 of the Scheme were relied upon, to highlight the submission that the respondents, assumption of power to increase the rent was without lawful a authority, Mr. Mumbai Hussain;.who argued the main case also drew a comparison between the powers of the Board under Scheme and the Evacuee Trust Property {Management and-Disposal) Act. 1975 and posted out that the powers to assess and reassess the rent which previously was not available to the Board, for the first time, was WW. specifically conferred on it under clause of subsection (2) of section of the Act and richly laid hand on the rule laid down in Heydon’s case, The learned counsel also express SED a grievance that the impugned order does not disclose any basis for! assessment of the rent and the assessment made by the Excise and Taxa-J ton Department was unjustifiably ignored. It was also urged that the direct

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2504?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2504 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1982-10-24): the rule laid down in Heydon’s case, The learned counsel also express SED a grievance that the impugned order does not disclose any basis for! assessment of the rent and the assessment made by the Excise and Taxa-J ton Department was unjustifiably ignored. It was also urged that the direct tons given by the High Court in the order dated 13th June, 1969 were complied with; b 4. This judgment need not be burdened with the dictionary meaning of the expressions used in section 16*A and Para. 18 of the Scheme, or the discussion of the rule of construction of Statute referred to by the learned counsel. The question as to the Board’s authority to enhance the rent under Para. 18, was examined in detail by Aftab Hussain 3, in Sh. Muhammad Han if v> Evacuee Property "Trust Board (1) wherein it was maintained that: “This Beng so Efficient administration* will include management of the property NBA manner so as to clog all loopholes which may causeless of income or damage to the property and to take steps for improving inter alia its income, no doubt without adopting a posture of harshness and mercilessness towards the tenants. The power of enhancing the rent thus emanates from the efficient administration of the property. It is not, therefore, correct to say that the Board had no power under that £>heme the enhance the rent/*- I have'hot been persuaded to differ with the view takes 1o this judgment and respectfully agree with the same. ? 5. The learned counsel could not refer to any provision of law to show that the assessment made under the Urban Immovable Properties Tax Act, is binding on the Board; As regards the basis of the assessment it in obvious from the impugned order that thee rent of one of the premises I'm the same building, fetched through auction, was on the higher side.JJ Though this could legitimately serve as criterion Tor, Sing the rent for) other premises, yet the respondent chose to adhere to the commitment made by the Department before the High Court m the order dated 13th June, 1969. There is also no merit in the submission, that this order was not complied with. It is thus clear that the impugned order was passed with lawful authority. There is no merit in these writ petitions which are dismissed but with no order as to costs, m K.M'A« Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1983 CLC 1829 about?
Answer: Case 1983 CLC 1829 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2016-10-29. The case involved ZAHOOR HUSSAIN PETITIPNERVERSUS S, EVXCU.EE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND AMOTHBR RESPOADENTS. The relevant statutes include CIVIL SERVANTS ACT (LXXI OF 1973) - S. 11 TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT RULES, 1965 - R. 4(1) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN.(1973) - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by IRSHAD HASAN KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 CLC 1829?
Answer: In case 1983 CLC 1829, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL SERVANTS ACT (LXXI OF 1973) - S. 11 TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT RULES, 1965 - R. 4(1) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN.(1973) - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2016-10-29.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 CLC 1829?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 CLC 1829 were: MALIKSAEED HASSAN FOR PETITIONER. CH. FAZAL-E-HUSSAIN FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: IRSHAD HASAN KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 CLC 1829?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 CLC 1829 were: ZAHOOR HUSSAIN PETITIPNERVERSUS S, EVXCU.EE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND AMOTHBR RESPOADENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 CLC 1829.
Answer: Judgment / This Writ petition calls in question the order dated 20th November, 1968 of the Secretary, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan, Lahore. I. » « 2. The facts relevant for the disposal of the writ petition may be briefly stated. The petitioner was under temporary employment of Evacuee Property Trust Board, WW. Government of Pakistan, Lahore. His services were terminated w. e. f 24th May, 1967 on account of misappropriation of Evacuee Trust Board's money and willful absence from duty (Annexure ‘]’). Subsequently, it appears that he was appointed as Sub-Inspector against a newly created temporary post in the District Evacuee Trust Committee, Hyderabad in the scale of 125-7-275. w, e. £ 1st July, 1968. His appointment was. On purely temporary basis and terminable at any tine. Without assigning any reason therefor. Four months thereafter, his services were again terminated by order, dated 20th November, 1968 of the Secretary of the respondent Bout (Annexure ‘J'). The termination order, reads A thus;- “The services of Mr. Yahoo Hussain, Sub-Inspector, District Evacuee Trust Committee, Hyderabad are ho longer required and are Nearby terminated. in accordance with the terms and Conditions of his services with immediate effect.'* 3. It is admitted by the learned counsel for the parties that the terms and conditions of persons in the temporary employment of the respondent Board were to be regulated by the provisions of the Temporary Employment Rules, 1965. These rules were adopted by the Evacuee Trust Property Board pending the framing of regulations by the respondent Board. Rules 4(1) provides that the Government may terminate the services of temporary employee at any time without assigning any reason by giving a notice m writing or a sum equivalent to his pay for fourteen days or for the period by which the notice falls short of fourteen days. 4. The sole grievance of the petitioner is that the impugned order Of] termination was not a termination simpliciter but contamed a stigma and, therefore, the respondent ought to have conducted an inquiry before inflicting the major penalty. Malik Saeed Hassan learned course for the petitioner submitted that in determine the question as to whether the impugned termination order was termination simplicity or by way of penalty, the Court should not confine itself to the impugned order alone, but take into consideration the previous history of the case coupled with the written statement filed by respondent Board. Learned counsel submitted that in the first instance, the respondent illegally term mated the services of the petitioner on account of charge of mis-appropriation, and later with male FIDE intention re-employed him and again term mated: his services by way of stigma. It is submitted that if the petitioner was really guilty of misappropriation’ there was no occasion to re-employ a corrupt man under the employment of the Board. In this connection reference may be made to the averments made in paragraph 10 of the wrt petition which roads thus B “That the petitioner Adam made representation against the termination order dated. Ist November, 1967. That the respondent No. WW. returned the petitioner by appointing him as Sub-Inspector District Con)* mitten, Hyderabad from, IST July, 1968 but services were again terminated on 20th November, 1968 without giving any notice whatsoever and providing any reasonable opportunity of explaining the position, and is attached. As Annexure-J’.”’. The respondent's reply as given in the written statement reads thus : “It is submitted that the appointment as Sub-Inspector was purely temporary and fresh appointment terminable at any time. Without notice or assigning any reason. The petitioner Adam committed misappropriation of public money during the period he remained at Hyderabad. His Services were again terminated in accordance with the terms of his appointment." VK 3 ? « A 5, Learned counsel respectfully submitted that a bare. perusal of the impugned order read with the reply to paragraph 10 of the written statement would show that the impugned order was not an order of termination simpliciter, but on account of alleged misconduct and, therefore, the petitioner ought to have been provided an opportunity to show cause against the penalty imposed upon him as envisaged by the Rules. He further submitted that the writ petition did not suffer from laches and that it is a fit case for condoning the delay as the petitioner had been bona fide. pursuing the departmental remedies and every time the representation was made by him, the respondent Board gave him the hope that his case was uncle consideration. In this connection, referee? way be made to paragraph 13 of thewritpetition where the petitioner specifically stated that he has been making repeated applications for the redress of his grievance. The reply of the respondent to para. 13 as given in the writ petition may also be reproduced as under “TT is submitted that the petitioner did not make any representation against the order dated IST November, 1967, The petitioner, however, filed a belated appeal before the Secretary, Government of Pakistan, Rehabilitation and Works Division, Islamabad, on 30th June, 1971. His appeal was considered and was filed by the Government, and he was informed accordingly. Later on after three years he represented his case to the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board on 24th July, 1973, 4th October, 1973 and 27th November, 1974. After due consideration the representations were consigned to record, and he was duly informed vide letter Nos. E- /66, dated 19th January, 1974 and 15th January, 1975 (copy enclosed)*". The learned counsel strongly placed reliance on The Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan, Lahore v. WW. Muhammad Nawab The precedent case was also of temporary employee of the Evacuee Trust Property Board, The ratio of the case is that where termination of service of a temporary employee was based on a finding of misconduct which leaves a stigma on recumbent, then the Board must follow the prescribed procedure before Imposing a penalty. 6. CFT. Female-Hussain learned counsel for the contesting respondent vehemently contended that the services of the petitioner were terminated by the respondent Board strictly in accordance with his terms and conditions of his service without any stigma and no allegation of male FIDE has been specifically pleaded in the writ petition. Therefore, a presumption is attached to the impugned order of termination in terms of section 114 of the Evidence Act that all official acts are presumed to have been regularly performed. He further submits that no allegations of male FIDE have been pleaded in the writ petition and, therefore, on the basis of bald allegation made for the first time mm writ jurisdiction, the validity of the impugned order cannot be tested on the ground of male FIDE. Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner failed to prove the onus which lay heavily on him that the impugned order was passed male FIDE or by way of penalty and, therefore, in view of the ratio laid down in The Federation of Pakistan v, Saeed Ahmad Khan and others (2) that the Courts should not hold any inquiry on the basis of vague allegations of male FIDE Revelled for the first time during the course of arguments before this Court. He further submitted that the petitioner is not an aggrieved person within the meaning of Article 199 of the 1973 Constitution, in that, a temporary employee has no vested right to continue in. the service of the Board and even assuming but not conceding that the order of termination was passed illegally, or it suffered from any legal defect, the petitioner cannot competently invoice the constitutional jurisdiction of this Court and the only remedy for him would be to file a suit for damages. ? 7. have given my anxious consideration to the submission. Made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record with the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties. It is clear from the previous history of the case and the events preceding the final termination’ order that the alleged charge of misappropriation of public money played, part in the decision of the respondent Board while passing the impugned order of termination. This being so, the termination is clearly by way of) penalty and not in accordance with the terms and conditions of the employ-1 meet of the petitioner. This, being so, the impugned order of termination} is liable to be struck down not because the same was passed ex parte but on the ground that the authority concerned has abused the power vested in it to teammate the temporary employment of the petitioner by way of penalty without giving a show-cause notice. This view finds support from the authoritative pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Muhammad Ibrahim v. Government of Pakistan The relevant portion at page 336 reads thus “Government has the legal authority to terminate an officiating appointment at any time, and it may do so for any reason relatable to exigencies of service. No show-cause notice is necessary in such a case. But if it is intended to revert an officer to an inferior post by way of penalty, a show-cause notice is necessary notwithstanding that the appointment to the superior post was in an officiating capacity. Reversion in that case amounts to reduction in rank within Art. 177(1)(&). Equally if an order of reversion is made male FIDE, Courts will strike it down not because no show-cause notice was given, but on the ground that the authority concerned has abused the power vested in the Government to terminate an officiating appointment without giving a show-cause notice. Neither condition is fulfilled in the present case.” 8. As regards the question of laches, the respondent Board has admitted in the written statement that every time the representation was! made by the petitioner, the same was considered and the final representation! was rejected on [5th January, 1975. Thereafter, the writ petition was filed! in this Court on 11th May, 1975. In the facts and circumstances of the] case, I am, therefore, inclined to condone the laches in filing the writ! petition before this Court. For the reasons stated above, the impugned order dated 20th November, 1968 terminating the services of the petitioner is hereby declared as without lawful authority and of no legal effect. The writ petition is accepted with costs- K. M. a. Writ Petit Free Prada tabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1829?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1829 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2016-10-29): Judgment / This Writ petition calls in question the order dated 20th November, 1968 of the Secretary, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan, Lahore. I. » « 2. The facts relevant for the disposal of the writ petition may be briefly stated. The petitioner was under temporary employment of Evacuee Property Trust Board, WW. Government of Pakistan, Lahore. His services were terminated w. e. f 24th May, 1967 on account of misappropriation of Evacuee Trust Board's money and willful absence from duty (Annexure ‘]’). Subsequently, it appears that he was appointed as Sub-Inspector against a newly created temporary post in the District Evacuee Trust Committee, Hyderabad in the scale of 125-7-275. w, e. £ 1st July, 1968. His appointment was. On purely temporary basis and terminable at any tine. Without assigning any reason therefor. Four months thereafter, his services were again terminated by order, dated 20th November, 1968 of the Secretary of the respondent Bout (Annexure ‘J'). The termination order, reads A thus;- “The services of Mr. Yahoo Hussain, Sub-Inspector, District Evacuee Trust Committee, Hyderabad are ho longer required and are Nearby terminated. in accordance with the terms and Conditions of his services with immediate effect.'* 3. It is admitted by the learned counsel for the parties that the terms and conditions of persons in the temporary employment of the respondent Board were to be regulated by the provisions of the Temporary Employment Rules, 1965. These rules were adopted by the Evacuee Trust Property Board pending the framing of regulations by the respondent Board. Rules 4(1) provides that the Government may terminate the services of temporary employee at any time without assigning any reason by giving a notice m writing or a sum equivalent to his pay for fourteen days or for the period by which the notice falls short of fourteen days. 4. The sole grievance of the petitioner is that the impugned order Of] termination was not a termination simpliciter but contamed a stigma and, therefore, the respondent ought to have conducted an inquiry before inflicting the major penalty. Malik Saeed Hassan learned course for the petitioner submitted that in determine the question as to whether the impugned termination order was termination simplicity or by way of penalty, the Court should not confine itself to the impugned order alone, but take into consideration the previous history of the case coupled with the written statement filed by respondent Board. Learned counsel submitted that in the first instance, the respondent illegally term mated the services of the petitioner on account of charge of mis-appropriation, and later with male FIDE intention re-employed him and again term mated: his services by way of stigma. It is submitted that if the petitioner was really guilty of misappropriation’ there was no occasion to re-employ a corrupt man under the employment of the Board. In this connection reference may be made to the averments made in paragraph 10 of the wrt petition which roads thus B “That the petitioner Adam made representation against the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1829?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1829 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2016-10-29): was really guilty of misappropriation’ there was no occasion to re-employ a corrupt man under the employment of the Board. In this connection reference may be made to the averments made in paragraph 10 of the wrt petition which roads thus B “That the petitioner Adam made representation against the termination order dated. Ist November, 1967. That the respondent No. WW. returned the petitioner by appointing him as Sub-Inspector District Con)* mitten, Hyderabad from, IST July, 1968 but services were again terminated on 20th November, 1968 without giving any notice whatsoever and providing any reasonable opportunity of explaining the position, and is attached. As Annexure-J’.”’. The respondent's reply as given in the written statement reads thus : “It is submitted that the appointment as Sub-Inspector was purely temporary and fresh appointment terminable at any time. Without notice or assigning any reason. The petitioner Adam committed misappropriation of public money during the period he remained at Hyderabad. His Services were again terminated in accordance with the terms of his appointment." VK 3 ? « A 5, Learned counsel respectfully submitted that a bare. perusal of the impugned order read with the reply to paragraph 10 of the written statement would show that the impugned order was not an order of termination simpliciter, but on account of alleged misconduct and, therefore, the petitioner ought to have been provided an opportunity to show cause against the penalty imposed upon him as envisaged by the Rules. He further submitted that the writ petition did not suffer from laches and that it is a fit case for condoning the delay as the petitioner had been bona fide. pursuing the departmental remedies and every time the representation was made by him, the respondent Board gave him the hope that his case was uncle consideration. In this connection, referee? way be made to paragraph 13 of thewritpetition where the petitioner specifically stated that he has been making repeated applications for the redress of his grievance. The reply of the respondent to para. 13 as given in the writ petition may also be reproduced as under “TT is submitted that the petitioner did not make any representation against the order dated IST November, 1967, The petitioner, however, filed a belated appeal before the Secretary, Government of Pakistan, Rehabilitation and Works Division, Islamabad, on 30th June, 1971. His appeal was considered and was filed by the Government, and he was informed accordingly. Later on after three years he represented his case to the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board on 24th July, 1973, 4th October, 1973 and 27th November, 1974. After due consideration the representations were consigned to record, and he was duly informed vide letter Nos. E- /66, dated 19th January, 1974 and 15th January, 1975 (copy enclosed)*". The learned counsel strongly placed reliance on The Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan, Lahore v. WW. Muhammad Nawab The precedent case was also of temporary employee of the Evacuee Trust Property Board, The ratio of the case is that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1829?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1829 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2016-10-29): 19th January, 1974 and 15th January, 1975 (copy enclosed)*". The learned counsel strongly placed reliance on The Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan, Lahore v. WW. Muhammad Nawab The precedent case was also of temporary employee of the Evacuee Trust Property Board, The ratio of the case is that where termination of service of a temporary employee was based on a finding of misconduct which leaves a stigma on recumbent, then the Board must follow the prescribed procedure before Imposing a penalty. 6. CFT. Female-Hussain learned counsel for the contesting respondent vehemently contended that the services of the petitioner were terminated by the respondent Board strictly in accordance with his terms and conditions of his service without any stigma and no allegation of male FIDE has been specifically pleaded in the writ petition. Therefore, a presumption is attached to the impugned order of termination in terms of section 114 of the Evidence Act that all official acts are presumed to have been regularly performed. He further submits that no allegations of male FIDE have been pleaded in the writ petition and, therefore, on the basis of bald allegation made for the first time mm writ jurisdiction, the validity of the impugned order cannot be tested on the ground of male FIDE. Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner failed to prove the onus which lay heavily on him that the impugned order was passed male FIDE or by way of penalty and, therefore, in view of the ratio laid down in The Federation of Pakistan v, Saeed Ahmad Khan and others (2) that the Courts should not hold any inquiry on the basis of vague allegations of male FIDE Revelled for the first time during the course of arguments before this Court. He further submitted that the petitioner is not an aggrieved person within the meaning of Article 199 of the 1973 Constitution, in that, a temporary employee has no vested right to continue in. the service of the Board and even assuming but not conceding that the order of termination was passed illegally, or it suffered from any legal defect, the petitioner cannot competently invoice the constitutional jurisdiction of this Court and the only remedy for him would be to file a suit for damages. ? 7. have given my anxious consideration to the submission. Made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record with the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties. It is clear from the previous history of the case and the events preceding the final termination’ order that the alleged charge of misappropriation of public money played, part in the decision of the respondent Board while passing the impugned order of termination. This being so, the termination is clearly by way of) penalty and not in accordance with the terms and conditions of the employ-1 meet of the petitioner. This, being so, the impugned order of termination} is liable to be struck down not because the same was passed ex parte

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1829?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1829 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2016-10-29): termination. This being so, the termination is clearly by way of) penalty and not in accordance with the terms and conditions of the employ-1 meet of the petitioner. This, being so, the impugned order of termination} is liable to be struck down not because the same was passed ex parte but on the ground that the authority concerned has abused the power vested in it to teammate the temporary employment of the petitioner by way of penalty without giving a show-cause notice. This view finds support from the authoritative pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Muhammad Ibrahim v. Government of Pakistan The relevant portion at page 336 reads thus “Government has the legal authority to terminate an officiating appointment at any time, and it may do so for any reason relatable to exigencies of service. No show-cause notice is necessary in such a case. But if it is intended to revert an officer to an inferior post by way of penalty, a show-cause notice is necessary notwithstanding that the appointment to the superior post was in an officiating capacity. Reversion in that case amounts to reduction in rank within Art. 177(1)(&). Equally if an order of reversion is made male FIDE, Courts will strike it down not because no show-cause notice was given, but on the ground that the authority concerned has abused the power vested in the Government to terminate an officiating appointment without giving a show-cause notice. Neither condition is fulfilled in the present case.” 8. As regards the question of laches, the respondent Board has admitted in the written statement that every time the representation was! made by the petitioner, the same was considered and the final representation! was rejected on [5th January, 1975. Thereafter, the writ petition was filed! in this Court on 11th May, 1975. In the facts and circumstances of the] case, I am, therefore, inclined to condone the laches in filing the writ! petition before this Court. For the reasons stated above, the impugned order dated 20th November, 1968 terminating the services of the petitioner is hereby declared as without lawful authority and of no legal effect. The writ petition is accepted with costs- K. M. a. Writ Petit Free Prada tabase.com

Question: What is case 1983 CLC 2023 about?
Answer: Case 1983 CLC 2023 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1982-10-14. The case involved WALI MUHAMMAD THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 EVIDENCE ACT (I OF 1872) -S. 61 PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY RULES, 1950 - RR. 12(5) AND 13(4) PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22 ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 22 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1983/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1983_2023.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:36 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1983/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1983_2023.html. The case was heard by K. A. GHANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: In case 1983 CLC 2023, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 EVIDENCE ACT (I OF 1872) -S. 61 PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY RULES, 1950 - RR. 12(5) AND 13(4) PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22 ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 22 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1983/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1983_2023.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:36 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1983/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1983_2023.html. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1982-10-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 CLC 2023 were: MEH TAB KHAN V. REHABILITATION AUTHORITY PLD 1973 S C 451 REF.RASHIDUDDIN FOR PETITIONER. MAZHAR ALI CHOHAN FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. 2,3 AND 4.NEMO FOR THE REMAINING RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: K. A. GHANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 CLC 2023 were: WALI MUHAMMAD THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 CLC 2023.
Answer: Judgment By this Writ Petition filed under Article 199 of the then Constitution of Pakistan 1973, the petitioner seeks to challenge the order dated 11th February, 1974 passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property declaring City Survey Numbers A-237 and A-249 corresponding to D. S. No. IJ-C-360 and 354 situated at Shahdadpur to be non-evacuee property and thereby allowing the revision application filed against the order dated 30th April, 1965 passed by the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property. The brief facts of the case are that the petitioner at the auction sale held on IST May, 1960 by the settlement authorities purchased the above-mentioned two survey numbers by offer mg the highest bid which was accepted and on confirmation of the same, transfer documents were issued in his favor. According to petitioner No. on receipt of P. T. D. he approached the Chief Officer Municipal Committee, Shahdadpur, for necessary mutation in his favor which by order dated 2nd July, 1965 was allowed. Copy of the order dated 2nd July, 1965 of the Chief Officer directing that the name of the Hindu owner be deleted from the record and the name of petitioner No. be entered in the Municipal record as owner of the aforesaid house bear mg Municipal No. H-2239 City Survey No. 249 (Custodian No. II-C-354) Shahdadpur, has been produced. It may be mentioned here that the P. T. D. had been issued in favor of petitioner No. in respect of the above-mentioned house on 2nd May, 1965 and the mutation was allowed in favor of petitioner No. in respect of City Survey No. A-249 by. order dated 2nd July, 1965 as mentioned above. The other plot City Survey No. 2241 Custodian No. II-C-360 was purchased by petitioner No. Rashiduddin. 2. After the above proceedings, petitioner No. served notice under section 30 of the then Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act of 1958 upon the respondent Shankar and others intimating about the transfer and calling upon them to pay rent to him. Since no rent was paid, petitioner No. filed an application for ejectment (Case No. ) in the Court of the Rent Controller for eviction of occupants/respondents Nos. to 6. The ejectment case was contested by these respondents who claimed to be the owners of the property in question. On an issue framed as to the existence of the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties, the learned Rent Controller dismissed the said application with the observation that title was in dispute and that the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties was not proved. 3. At this stage, I would like to mention here that according to the petitioner in 1951 the property was surveyed by the Custodian authorities when the predecessor of respondents Nos. to 6 signed the inquiry form of the office of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, as an occupant. Certified copy of the said equity form has been produced which according to the petitioners, was signed by the occupant Walk Muhammad, son of Sanatoria. Thereafter, the abovementioned property was included for disposal according to earmarking scheme as the occupant had not applied for its transfer. In the earmarking list, this property is shown at S. No. 216 as bearing Municipal No. 354> name of the owner is shown as Bhopal Johanan and the occupant thereof is shown to be Walk Muhammad Sanatoria. Copy of the relevant entry wherein the property is shown as included in the earmarking list, has been produced as Annexure (B’ to the petition. According to the petitioner the properties however were not disposed of under the earmarking scheme but were ultimately offered for sale by public auction which took place on IST May, 1960 at which the petitioners were the successful bidders. P. T. D. issued on 2nd May, 1965 showed the properties bearing No. 11-354 and 360 transferred to the petitioners Nos. and 2 respectively. 4. Subsequent to the order of the Rent Controller referred in para. above, appeal bearing No. Additional Settlement/KHP/71-73 was filed before the Additional Settlement Commissioner, Khairpur Division, by Basket Hussain and others, the L. Rs. of Walk Muhammad Sanatoria, claiming to be the owners of the properties and for cancellation of the transfer of the above-mentioned properties in favor of the petitioners, on the plea, that the said properties are private properties owned by Walk Muhammad, son of Sanatoria. Certain evidence was produced and site was also inspected by the Additional Settlement Commissioner who held that claim of Wal Muhammad that the House No. 2239 corresponding to D. S. No. IJ C-331 was his private property, could not be accepted. It was further held that the Custodian department undertook the survey in 1951 when Walk Mohammad, signed the inquiry card and thus subscribed to the fact of the property being evacuee property. It was also held that the same was the position in respect of departmental survey No. II-C-360 which corresponds to the Property No. 2241 in WW. Municipal record with these observations the Additional Settlement Commissioner dismissed the appeal as misconceived. It was also observed that their property is situated elsewhere, and they should get their property located by the City Survey Office. This order was passed on IST February, 1963. 5. After passing of the above order no action was taken by respondents Nos. to 6, the legal representatives of Walk Muhammad son of Sanatoria, until 12th September, 1964 when an application under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act of 1957 was filed for declaration that the full share in the houses mentioned above situated in Shahdadpur are non evacuee properties belonging to the applicants/respondents Nos. to 6 and that their rights are not affected by the transfer of the said houses in favor the petitioners. In this application the respondents while contending that the above-mentioned properties belonged to their ancestor Walk Muhammad 'Sanatoria who died in 1959, submitted that the same were not evacuee properties. Reliance was placed upon documentary evidence which consisted of Municipal record and the tax paid to the Municipality by them. According to the said respondents as pleaded in para. of the said application, owing to some misunderstanding and error the two houses were considered as evacuee properties left by Hindu owners and were put to auction by Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Nawabshah and were purchased by petitioners Nos* and 2 respectively. According to the respondents they came to know for the first time of such a transfer in favor of the petitioners through a notice dated 29th July, 1963 sent by petitioner No. I through his Advocate informing them of the transfer whereupon they moved the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Nawabshah praying for cancellation of the transfer of the two houses made in favor of the petitioners, but the said application was disallowed. Thereupon appeal was preferred by them to the Additional Settlement Commissioner Khairpur Division but the same was dismissed on IST February, 1963 with the observations and instructions to approach the Custodian authorities to get the declaration that the properties involved are non-evacuee properties. The respondents also pleaded that due to wrong advice given by their counsel and under a bona fide mistake of law and mistaken belief instead of seeking their remedy before the Custodian authorities they filed revision application before the Settlement Commissioner, Khairpur which was probably transferred to Settlement Commissioner, Sukkur where the last date of harem was 19th July, 1963, but they could not know the fate of the said WW. revision petition and probably the petition was decided ex parte in their absence on that date or on some other date thereafter and that no copy of the said order could be obtained in spite of their efforts as the record was shifted to Karachi. Accordingly TT was contended that in the circumstances, the above application under section 22 of the Act No. 12 of 1957 was moved on 12th September, 1964 “taking cause of action from the order dated IST February, 1963 passed by the Additional Settlement Commissioner’ and requesting for condonation of delay in filing the application. Notices were issued to the present petitioners who appeared before the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property before whom Shankar Hussain one of the L. Rs. of the deceased Walk Muhammad Sanatoria (the present respondent No. 2) was examined and cross-examined. The Additional Custodian after recording evidence produced on behalf of the L. Rs. of Walk Muhammad Sanatoria and harem the Advocates for the parties held that they failed to prove their ownership of the properties in dispute and that the same were rightly auctioned by the Settlement Authorities. It was further observed that the application was barred by time, there was no sound reason to condone the delay as applicants/ respondents Nos. to 6 were specifically directed to seek declaration as far back as IST February, 1963 by the Additional Settlement Commissioner and there was no proof that they had filed written objections before the Settlement Commissioner, Khairpur; The application was thus dismissed. 6. An appeal against the aforesaid order was filed before the Custodian of Evacuee Properties under section 43 of the Act No. 12 of 1957. Before the Custodian, the respondents sought to produce CERTAM documents a list of which was filed but according to the petitioners, in spite of the promise on the part of the Advocate for the respondents ND copies were supplied to him though a reminder to that effect was sent in writing on 28th August, 1971 by the Advocate for the petitioners. The counsel for the petitioners further stated that on the date fixed of hearing, he pointed out that no copies of the documents sought to be produced had been supplied to him and that it was argued by him that the application made under section 22 was barred by time, that the property had gone out of the Evacuee/compensation pool and thus ceased to *be evacuee A property whereby the Custodian was left with no jurisdiction to declare the property as non-evacuee property. According to the learned counsel these pleas were totally ignored by the Custodian who by order passed on 11th February, 1974 allowed the said appeal and declared that the WW. inclusion of the property in the evacuee pool and its subsequent auction were illegal on the ground that the property never belonged to an evacuee. The order of the Additional Custodian was accordingly set aside, and the revision application was allowed. 7. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order the petitioners moved this Court by filing the petition under Article 199 of the Constitution of 1973. 8. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties I find considerable force in the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners to the effect that before passing the impugned order dated 11th February, 1974 notice ought to have been issued by the Custodian to the Rehabilitate ton authority. Rule 12 (5) of the Administration of Evacuee Property! Rules. 1950, which is reproduced herein below provides that:- “Rule 12 (5).- The Custodian shall cause a notice to be served on the respondent, and the. Rehabilitation Authority of the area in which the property is situated, and on any other person likely to be interested in or affected by the result of the application, and may also cause a public notice to be published Ina Newspaper at the expense of the applicant”. « While deal mg with application made under section 22 (which corresponded to section 18 of the repealed Ordinance of 1949), the Custodian similarly was required to cause notice to be served upon the parties interested and the Rehabilitation Authority, vide Rule 13 (4) of the above-mentioned Rules which provided as under:- ? ‘4Rule 13 (4).-The provisions of sub-rules (4) and (5) of rule \2S shall apply mutatis mutandis to an application under subsection (4) of section 18 ” $ * The learned counsel for the petitioners rightly urged that the omission on the part of the Custodian to give the notice as required by the above quoted rules and failure to give opportunity to them, to rebut the additional documentary evidence produced and taken into consideration without any formal proof, resulted in serious prejudice to the petitioners and vitiated the proceeding. There is yet another aspect of the case, which ought to have been taken into consideration by the Custodian while passing the impugned order. The Additional Custodian (J) while rejecting the application filed by the respondents Nos. 2. to 6 by order dated 30th April, 1965 while! holding that they hack failed to prove their ownership of the property me dispute which had thus been rightly disposed by the Settlement authorities, also held that the application was barred by time and there was no 5 decided it on merits it must be taken that he had also condoned the delay held:- "it is clear, therefore, that whether the plea of WW. imitation was raised or not, it was the duty of the Settlement Court, to notice the post of limitation. A waiver of the question of limitation is not permissible, even where the period of limitation is prescribed by a special or a local law. It has also been held by this Court in several cases that mere disposal of the appeal on merits is not sufficient to lead to the faience that the delay must have been condoned. There must be something in the order or judgment itself to show that the Court concerned was conscious of the fact that the proceeding was out of time and had applied TTS mind to the question of limitation before dealing with the proceeding on merits.” 9. Lastly reference may also be made to the case of Mehta Khan v. Rehabilitation Authority on which reliance was placed \?y the learned counsel for the petitioners in support of the plea that the Custodian was left with no jurisdiction to grant the declaration after the property in question had been acquired and had ceased to be evacuee property. 1» 10. The above questions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners no doubt are material and vital which go to the root of the controversy involved but were omitted from consideration while passing the impugned order. The learned counsel for the respondents Nos. to 6 was unable to show anything which could justify the pass mg of the impugned order without first deciding the question of limitation and disposing of the other issues thus raised. In the circumstances following the case of AHSA Alt. I set aside the impugned order dated lath February, 1974 passed by the Custodian and remand the case to the Custodian/authorized officer for disposal of the appeal in accordance with the law after giving notice to Rehabilitation Authority/notified officer adequate opportunity to the parties for adducing evidence on question of title as well as Imitation and representing their case. I The petition was disposed of by short order passed on 17th August, 1982. The above are the reasons for the same. K. M, A. Petition disposed of. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2023 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-10-14): Judgment By this Writ Petition filed under Article 199 of the then Constitution of Pakistan 1973, the petitioner seeks to challenge the order dated 11th February, 1974 passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property declaring City Survey Numbers A-237 and A-249 corresponding to D. S. No. IJ-C-360 and 354 situated at Shahdadpur to be non-evacuee property and thereby allowing the revision application filed against the order dated 30th April, 1965 passed by the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property. The brief facts of the case are that the petitioner at the auction sale held on IST May, 1960 by the settlement authorities purchased the above-mentioned two survey numbers by offer mg the highest bid which was accepted and on confirmation of the same, transfer documents were issued in his favor. According to petitioner No. on receipt of P. T. D. he approached the Chief Officer Municipal Committee, Shahdadpur, for necessary mutation in his favor which by order dated 2nd July, 1965 was allowed. Copy of the order dated 2nd July, 1965 of the Chief Officer directing that the name of the Hindu owner be deleted from the record and the name of petitioner No. be entered in the Municipal record as owner of the aforesaid house bear mg Municipal No. H-2239 City Survey No. 249 (Custodian No. II-C-354) Shahdadpur, has been produced. It may be mentioned here that the P. T. D. had been issued in favor of petitioner No. in respect of the above-mentioned house on 2nd May, 1965 and the mutation was allowed in favor of petitioner No. in respect of City Survey No. A-249 by. order dated 2nd July, 1965 as mentioned above. The other plot City Survey No. 2241 Custodian No. II-C-360 was purchased by petitioner No. Rashiduddin. 2. After the above proceedings, petitioner No. served notice under section 30 of the then Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act of 1958 upon the respondent Shankar and others intimating about the transfer and calling upon them to pay rent to him. Since no rent was paid, petitioner No. filed an application for ejectment (Case No. ) in the Court of the Rent Controller for eviction of occupants/respondents Nos. to 6. The ejectment case was contested by these respondents who claimed to be the owners of the property in question. On an issue framed as to the existence of the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties, the learned Rent Controller dismissed the said application with the observation that title was in dispute and that the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties was not proved. 3. At this stage, I would like to mention here that according to the petitioner in 1951 the property was surveyed by the Custodian authorities when the predecessor of respondents Nos. to 6 signed the inquiry form of the office of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, as an occupant. Certified copy of the said equity form has been produced which according to the petitioners, was signed by the occupant Walk Muhammad, son

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2023 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-10-14): the Custodian authorities when the predecessor of respondents Nos. to 6 signed the inquiry form of the office of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, as an occupant. Certified copy of the said equity form has been produced which according to the petitioners, was signed by the occupant Walk Muhammad, son of Sanatoria. Thereafter, the abovementioned property was included for disposal according to earmarking scheme as the occupant had not applied for its transfer. In the earmarking list, this property is shown at S. No. 216 as bearing Municipal No. 354> name of the owner is shown as Bhopal Johanan and the occupant thereof is shown to be Walk Muhammad Sanatoria. Copy of the relevant entry wherein the property is shown as included in the earmarking list, has been produced as Annexure (B’ to the petition. According to the petitioner the properties however were not disposed of under the earmarking scheme but were ultimately offered for sale by public auction which took place on IST May, 1960 at which the petitioners were the successful bidders. P. T. D. issued on 2nd May, 1965 showed the properties bearing No. 11-354 and 360 transferred to the petitioners Nos. and 2 respectively. 4. Subsequent to the order of the Rent Controller referred in para. above, appeal bearing No. Additional Settlement/KHP/71-73 was filed before the Additional Settlement Commissioner, Khairpur Division, by Basket Hussain and others, the L. Rs. of Walk Muhammad Sanatoria, claiming to be the owners of the properties and for cancellation of the transfer of the above-mentioned properties in favor of the petitioners, on the plea, that the said properties are private properties owned by Walk Muhammad, son of Sanatoria. Certain evidence was produced and site was also inspected by the Additional Settlement Commissioner who held that claim of Wal Muhammad that the House No. 2239 corresponding to D. S. No. IJ C-331 was his private property, could not be accepted. It was further held that the Custodian department undertook the survey in 1951 when Walk Mohammad, signed the inquiry card and thus subscribed to the fact of the property being evacuee property. It was also held that the same was the position in respect of departmental survey No. II-C-360 which corresponds to the Property No. 2241 in WW. Municipal record with these observations the Additional Settlement Commissioner dismissed the appeal as misconceived. It was also observed that their property is situated elsewhere, and they should get their property located by the City Survey Office. This order was passed on IST February, 1963. 5. After passing of the above order no action was taken by respondents Nos. to 6, the legal representatives of Walk Muhammad son of Sanatoria, until 12th September, 1964 when an application under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act of 1957 was filed for declaration that the full share in the houses mentioned above situated in Shahdadpur are non evacuee properties belonging to the applicants/respondents Nos. to 6 and that their rights are not affected by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2023 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-10-14): an application under section 22 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act of 1957 was filed for declaration that the full share in the houses mentioned above situated in Shahdadpur are non evacuee properties belonging to the applicants/respondents Nos. to 6 and that their rights are not affected by the transfer of the said houses in favor the petitioners. In this application the respondents while contending that the above-mentioned properties belonged to their ancestor Walk Muhammad 'Sanatoria who died in 1959, submitted that the same were not evacuee properties. Reliance was placed upon documentary evidence which consisted of Municipal record and the tax paid to the Municipality by them. According to the said respondents as pleaded in para. of the said application, owing to some misunderstanding and error the two houses were considered as evacuee properties left by Hindu owners and were put to auction by Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Nawabshah and were purchased by petitioners Nos* and 2 respectively. According to the respondents they came to know for the first time of such a transfer in favor of the petitioners through a notice dated 29th July, 1963 sent by petitioner No. I through his Advocate informing them of the transfer whereupon they moved the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Nawabshah praying for cancellation of the transfer of the two houses made in favor of the petitioners, but the said application was disallowed. Thereupon appeal was preferred by them to the Additional Settlement Commissioner Khairpur Division but the same was dismissed on IST February, 1963 with the observations and instructions to approach the Custodian authorities to get the declaration that the properties involved are non-evacuee properties. The respondents also pleaded that due to wrong advice given by their counsel and under a bona fide mistake of law and mistaken belief instead of seeking their remedy before the Custodian authorities they filed revision application before the Settlement Commissioner, Khairpur which was probably transferred to Settlement Commissioner, Sukkur where the last date of harem was 19th July, 1963, but they could not know the fate of the said WW. revision petition and probably the petition was decided ex parte in their absence on that date or on some other date thereafter and that no copy of the said order could be obtained in spite of their efforts as the record was shifted to Karachi. Accordingly TT was contended that in the circumstances, the above application under section 22 of the Act No. 12 of 1957 was moved on 12th September, 1964 “taking cause of action from the order dated IST February, 1963 passed by the Additional Settlement Commissioner’ and requesting for condonation of delay in filing the application. Notices were issued to the present petitioners who appeared before the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property before whom Shankar Hussain one of the L. Rs. of the deceased Walk Muhammad Sanatoria (the present respondent No. 2) was examined and cross-examined. The Additional Custodian after recording evidence produced on behalf of the L. Rs. of Walk Muhammad Sanatoria

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2023 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-10-14): petitioners who appeared before the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property before whom Shankar Hussain one of the L. Rs. of the deceased Walk Muhammad Sanatoria (the present respondent No. 2) was examined and cross-examined. The Additional Custodian after recording evidence produced on behalf of the L. Rs. of Walk Muhammad Sanatoria and harem the Advocates for the parties held that they failed to prove their ownership of the properties in dispute and that the same were rightly auctioned by the Settlement Authorities. It was further observed that the application was barred by time, there was no sound reason to condone the delay as applicants/ respondents Nos. to 6 were specifically directed to seek declaration as far back as IST February, 1963 by the Additional Settlement Commissioner and there was no proof that they had filed written objections before the Settlement Commissioner, Khairpur; The application was thus dismissed. 6. An appeal against the aforesaid order was filed before the Custodian of Evacuee Properties under section 43 of the Act No. 12 of 1957. Before the Custodian, the respondents sought to produce CERTAM documents a list of which was filed but according to the petitioners, in spite of the promise on the part of the Advocate for the respondents ND copies were supplied to him though a reminder to that effect was sent in writing on 28th August, 1971 by the Advocate for the petitioners. The counsel for the petitioners further stated that on the date fixed of hearing, he pointed out that no copies of the documents sought to be produced had been supplied to him and that it was argued by him that the application made under section 22 was barred by time, that the property had gone out of the Evacuee/compensation pool and thus ceased to *be evacuee A property whereby the Custodian was left with no jurisdiction to declare the property as non-evacuee property. According to the learned counsel these pleas were totally ignored by the Custodian who by order passed on 11th February, 1974 allowed the said appeal and declared that the WW. inclusion of the property in the evacuee pool and its subsequent auction were illegal on the ground that the property never belonged to an evacuee. The order of the Additional Custodian was accordingly set aside, and the revision application was allowed. 7. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order the petitioners moved this Court by filing the petition under Article 199 of the Constitution of 1973. 8. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties I find considerable force in the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners to the effect that before passing the impugned order dated 11th February, 1974 notice ought to have been issued by the Custodian to the Rehabilitate ton authority. Rule 12 (5) of the Administration of Evacuee Property! Rules. 1950, which is reproduced herein below provides that:- “Rule 12 (5).- The Custodian shall cause a notice to be served on the respondent, and the. Rehabilitation Authority of the area

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2023 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-10-14): been issued by the Custodian to the Rehabilitate ton authority. Rule 12 (5) of the Administration of Evacuee Property! Rules. 1950, which is reproduced herein below provides that:- “Rule 12 (5).- The Custodian shall cause a notice to be served on the respondent, and the. Rehabilitation Authority of the area in which the property is situated, and on any other person likely to be interested in or affected by the result of the application, and may also cause a public notice to be published Ina Newspaper at the expense of the applicant”. « While deal mg with application made under section 22 (which corresponded to section 18 of the repealed Ordinance of 1949), the Custodian similarly was required to cause notice to be served upon the parties interested and the Rehabilitation Authority, vide Rule 13 (4) of the above-mentioned Rules which provided as under:- ? ‘4Rule 13 (4).-The provisions of sub-rules (4) and (5) of rule \2S shall apply mutatis mutandis to an application under subsection (4) of section 18 ” $ * The learned counsel for the petitioners rightly urged that the omission on the part of the Custodian to give the notice as required by the above quoted rules and failure to give opportunity to them, to rebut the additional documentary evidence produced and taken into consideration without any formal proof, resulted in serious prejudice to the petitioners and vitiated the proceeding. There is yet another aspect of the case, which ought to have been taken into consideration by the Custodian while passing the impugned order. The Additional Custodian (J) while rejecting the application filed by the respondents Nos. 2. to 6 by order dated 30th April, 1965 while! holding that they hack failed to prove their ownership of the property me dispute which had thus been rightly disposed by the Settlement authorities, also held that the application was barred by time and there was no 5 decided it on merits it must be taken that he had also condoned the delay held:- "it is clear, therefore, that whether the plea of WW. imitation was raised or not, it was the duty of the Settlement Court, to notice the post of limitation. A waiver of the question of limitation is not permissible, even where the period of limitation is prescribed by a special or a local law. It has also been held by this Court in several cases that mere disposal of the appeal on merits is not sufficient to lead to the faience that the delay must have been condoned. There must be something in the order or judgment itself to show that the Court concerned was conscious of the fact that the proceeding was out of time and had applied TTS mind to the question of limitation before dealing with the proceeding on merits.” 9. Lastly reference may also be made to the case of Mehta Khan v. Rehabilitation Authority on which reliance was placed \?y the learned counsel for the petitioners in support of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 2023?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 2023 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-10-14): time and had applied TTS mind to the question of limitation before dealing with the proceeding on merits.” 9. Lastly reference may also be made to the case of Mehta Khan v. Rehabilitation Authority on which reliance was placed \?y the learned counsel for the petitioners in support of the plea that the Custodian was left with no jurisdiction to grant the declaration after the property in question had been acquired and had ceased to be evacuee property. 1» 10. The above questions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners no doubt are material and vital which go to the root of the controversy involved but were omitted from consideration while passing the impugned order. The learned counsel for the respondents Nos. to 6 was unable to show anything which could justify the pass mg of the impugned order without first deciding the question of limitation and disposing of the other issues thus raised. In the circumstances following the case of AHSA Alt. I set aside the impugned order dated lath February, 1974 passed by the Custodian and remand the case to the Custodian/authorized officer for disposal of the appeal in accordance with the law after giving notice to Rehabilitation Authority/notified officer adequate opportunity to the parties for adducing evidence on question of title as well as Imitation and representing their case. I The petition was disposed of by short order passed on 17th August, 1982. The above are the reasons for the same. K. M, A. Petition disposed of. WW.

Question: What is case 1983 CLC 1946 about?
Answer: Case 1983 CLC 1946 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1982-12-14. The case involved ALLAH YAR (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EYACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22. The case was heard by SAEEDUZZAMAN SIDDIQUI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 CLC 1946?
Answer: In case 1983 CLC 1946, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1982-12-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 CLC 1946?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 CLC 1946 were: AZIZ SHAIKH FOR PETITIONER. IK. A. WAHAB FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SAEEDUZZAMAN SIDDIQUI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 CLC 1946?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 CLC 1946 were: ALLAH YAR (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EYACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 CLC 1946.
Answer: Judgment This petition is directed against the order of Deputy Custodian dated 23fd January. 1973 confirmed in revision by the Custodian of Evacuee Property by his order, dated 10th December, 1573. WW. « The dispute relates to. Agricola oral’ land bearing-Survey No. 108 measuring 2.3.3 acre-situated in Del Pariwfcr Tapes Biro, Talk Lori, » District Sukkur. It is the case of petitioner that this property was owned and possessed by one Hindu Change Ram who on the wake of the partition of subcontinent migrated to India and therefore the And became an evacuee property. This property was temporarily allotted to respondent 6 under the Rehabilitation Scheme and was later allotted to him in November, 1959 against his verified claim of agricultural land vide Platoon bear mg No. dated 6th November, 1959. This land was ultimately permanently settled in favor of respondent 6 in the year 1960. The petitioner claims to have purchased this land through a registered sale-deed dated 24th January, 1970 from respondent 6 and is in continuous and undisturbed possession of the land since the year 1959 when it was first allotted to respondent No. by the rehabilitation authority- It appears that on 7th August, 1972 respondents 3 to 5 moved an application before the Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property, Khairpur Division at Sukkur under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 on the allegation that the land in dispute was owned by their predecessor which was mortgaged with the Hindu Change Ram and therefore, they are entitled to redeem the same within a period of 60 years. The present petitioner who had purchased this land was however not imp leaded as a party in the case. This application was accepted by the Deputy Custodian and the property was allowed to be redeemed by Respondents 3 to 5 on account of the mortgage sum plus interest at the rate of 5%. The petitioner challenged the above order in revision before the Custodian of Evacuee Property which was dismissed on 12th October, 1979. The learned counsel for. the petitioner contends that the order of Deputy Custodian, dated 23rd January, 1973 is an order without jurisdiction as the petitioner who was a necessary party was condemned unheard. It is further contended that the hearing given to his client at the stage of revision is no hearing at all as neither the petitioner at that stage could produce any evidence nor he could cross-examine respondents who had appeared and deposed before Deputy Custodian on oath in support of their application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957. The contention of the learned counsel for -the petitioner is not without force. I find from the diary sheet of the case before the Deputy Custodian that on 27th September, 1972, respondents 3 to 5 had requested for issuance of notice of the application to the claimant’s Hard which was allowed, but no notice was issued to the Hard. Even notice to the. claimant who was party to the case does not appear to have been served on him after restoration of the case. The case Was decided by the Deputy WW. Custodian on the basis of evidence recorded ex parte. In these circumstances the contention of the learned counsel that subsequent hearing at the stage of revision cannot be regarded as sufficient is not without force as the petitioner neither had the opportunity to produce evidence in the revision nor he could call the respondents for cross-examination. I accordingly accept this petition, set aside the order of Deputy Custodian, dated 23rd January, 1973 and that of Custodian dated 10th December, 1973 but in the circumstances remand the case back to the authorized officer to decide the application of respondents 3 to 5 filed under section 22 of Act VII of 1957 after harem the petitioner and giving him an opportunity to cross-examine the respondents and to produce such evidence as he may desire in this regard. In the circumstances of the case, there will be WO'ULER WW amigo™

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1946?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1946 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-12-14): Judgment This petition is directed against the order of Deputy Custodian dated 23fd January. 1973 confirmed in revision by the Custodian of Evacuee Property by his order, dated 10th December, 1573. WW. « The dispute relates to. Agricola oral’ land bearing-Survey No. 108 measuring 2.3.3 acre-situated in Del Pariwfcr Tapes Biro, Talk Lori, » District Sukkur. It is the case of petitioner that this property was owned and possessed by one Hindu Change Ram who on the wake of the partition of subcontinent migrated to India and therefore the And became an evacuee property. This property was temporarily allotted to respondent 6 under the Rehabilitation Scheme and was later allotted to him in November, 1959 against his verified claim of agricultural land vide Platoon bear mg No. dated 6th November, 1959. This land was ultimately permanently settled in favor of respondent 6 in the year 1960. The petitioner claims to have purchased this land through a registered sale-deed dated 24th January, 1970 from respondent 6 and is in continuous and undisturbed possession of the land since the year 1959 when it was first allotted to respondent No. by the rehabilitation authority- It appears that on 7th August, 1972 respondents 3 to 5 moved an application before the Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property, Khairpur Division at Sukkur under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 on the allegation that the land in dispute was owned by their predecessor which was mortgaged with the Hindu Change Ram and therefore, they are entitled to redeem the same within a period of 60 years. The present petitioner who had purchased this land was however not imp leaded as a party in the case. This application was accepted by the Deputy Custodian and the property was allowed to be redeemed by Respondents 3 to 5 on account of the mortgage sum plus interest at the rate of 5%. The petitioner challenged the above order in revision before the Custodian of Evacuee Property which was dismissed on 12th October, 1979. The learned counsel for. the petitioner contends that the order of Deputy Custodian, dated 23rd January, 1973 is an order without jurisdiction as the petitioner who was a necessary party was condemned unheard. It is further contended that the hearing given to his client at the stage of revision is no hearing at all as neither the petitioner at that stage could produce any evidence nor he could cross-examine respondents who had appeared and deposed before Deputy Custodian on oath in support of their application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957. The contention of the learned counsel for -the petitioner is not without force. I find from the diary sheet of the case before the Deputy Custodian that on 27th September, 1972, respondents 3 to 5 had requested for issuance of notice of the application to the claimant’s Hard which was allowed, but no notice was issued to the Hard. Even notice to the. claimant who was party to the case does not appear to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 CLC 1946?
Answer: From case 1983 CLC 1946 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-12-14): Deputy Custodian that on 27th September, 1972, respondents 3 to 5 had requested for issuance of notice of the application to the claimant’s Hard which was allowed, but no notice was issued to the Hard. Even notice to the. claimant who was party to the case does not appear to have been served on him after restoration of the case. The case Was decided by the Deputy WW. Custodian on the basis of evidence recorded ex parte. In these circumstances the contention of the learned counsel that subsequent hearing at the stage of revision cannot be regarded as sufficient is not without force as the petitioner neither had the opportunity to produce evidence in the revision nor he could call the respondents for cross-examination. I accordingly accept this petition, set aside the order of Deputy Custodian, dated 23rd January, 1973 and that of Custodian dated 10th December, 1973 but in the circumstances remand the case back to the authorized officer to decide the application of respondents 3 to 5 filed under section 22 of Act VII of 1957 after harem the petitioner and giving him an opportunity to cross-examine the respondents and to produce such evidence as he may desire in this regard. In the circumstances of the case, there will be WO'ULER WW amigo™

Question: What is case 1983 SCMR 614 about?
Answer: Case 1983 SCMR 614 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1967-03-26. The case involved JALAL SHAH AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS.CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND 14 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.3 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3). The case was heard by A. R. CPRMLIUSJC. J. AND FAZLE AKBDR, J *.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 SCMR 614?
Answer: In case 1983 SCMR 614, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.3 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1967-03-26.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 SCMR 614?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 SCMR 614 were: ABDUR RASHEED, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT (MAQBOOL AHMAD SHEIKH, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH HIM) INSTRUCTED BYABDUL KARIM, ATTORNEY FOR PETITIONERS. 'NEMO FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: A. R. CPRMLIUSJC. J. AND FAZLE AKBDR, J *.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 SCMR 614?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 SCMR 614 were: JALAL SHAH AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS.CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND 14 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 SCMR 614.
Answer: . Order. Fable Akbar. 'J.-The dispute in this case is with respect to 1,418 Canals and 14 Marries of land of Khelat No. in Monza Ahmad Shah in the Thesis and District of Montgomery (Sahiwal). The said lands belonged to Hindus who became evacuees on Partition of India. The petitioners who own the lands of Khelat No; 1, are claiming title to the disputed lands by adverse possession for more than 12 years before March, 1947. In 1961, the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner out of the said land allotted 408 Canals and 5 Marla's to respondents Nos. to II. The petitioners then filed a petition under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XII of 1957) for a declaration that they were; owners of the said land and that it was not an evacuee property and their petition was accepted by the Deputy Custodian. On appeal by the allottees, the Custodian remanded the case to the Deputy Custodian who thereafter rejected the application and his order was also upheld on appeal by the Custodian. They then, moved a writ in. the High Court, but the same was dismissed. It may be mentioned here that their contention that the land not having been treated as evacuee property up to 1961 their possession was protected by section 3 of Act XII of 1957, was not at all considered by the Deputy Custodian or the Custodian. The learned Judges of the High Court found that the petitioners had failed to prove their adverse possession for more than 12 years before 1st March, 1947. They then, relying on the Full Bench decision of that Court in Syed Ali Tidal Shah and others v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan held that protection of section 3 was not available to parties who were in unauthorized possession or management of evacuee properties. Mr. Abdul Rasheed, the learned counsel, has contended, inter alia: that the finding that the petitioners had not perfected the title by adverse possession prior to 1st March, 1947, was not based on proper appreciation of the entries in the revenue records on which the petitioners relied, and (1i) that in view of the language of section 3 of the Act the High Court. was not justified in holding that the benefit of the said section was available only to persons who possessed the property under lawful authority. As the questions raised require interpretation of section 3 and some other sections of Act XJI of 1957, which are of public importance, we grant leave to appeal on the above as well as the other ports raised in the petition. Security for costs-Rs. 1,000. Stay already granted will continue till disposal of the appeal.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 SCMR 614?
Answer: From case 1983 SCMR 614 (SUPREME COURT, 1967-03-26): . Order. Fable Akbar. 'J.-The dispute in this case is with respect to 1,418 Canals and 14 Marries of land of Khelat No. in Monza Ahmad Shah in the Thesis and District of Montgomery (Sahiwal). The said lands belonged to Hindus who became evacuees on Partition of India. The petitioners who own the lands of Khelat No; 1, are claiming title to the disputed lands by adverse possession for more than 12 years before March, 1947. In 1961, the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner out of the said land allotted 408 Canals and 5 Marla's to respondents Nos. to II. The petitioners then filed a petition under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (XII of 1957) for a declaration that they were; owners of the said land and that it was not an evacuee property and their petition was accepted by the Deputy Custodian. On appeal by the allottees, the Custodian remanded the case to the Deputy Custodian who thereafter rejected the application and his order was also upheld on appeal by the Custodian. They then, moved a writ in. the High Court, but the same was dismissed. It may be mentioned here that their contention that the land not having been treated as evacuee property up to 1961 their possession was protected by section 3 of Act XII of 1957, was not at all considered by the Deputy Custodian or the Custodian. The learned Judges of the High Court found that the petitioners had failed to prove their adverse possession for more than 12 years before 1st March, 1947. They then, relying on the Full Bench decision of that Court in Syed Ali Tidal Shah and others v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan held that protection of section 3 was not available to parties who were in unauthorized possession or management of evacuee properties. Mr. Abdul Rasheed, the learned counsel, has contended, inter alia: that the finding that the petitioners had not perfected the title by adverse possession prior to 1st March, 1947, was not based on proper appreciation of the entries in the revenue records on which the petitioners relied, and (1i) that in view of the language of section 3 of the Act the High Court. was not justified in holding that the benefit of the said section was available only to persons who possessed the property under lawful authority. As the questions raised require interpretation of section 3 and some other sections of Act XJI of 1957, which are of public importance, we grant leave to appeal on the above as well as the other ports raised in the petition. Security for costs-Rs. 1,000. Stay already granted will continue till disposal of the appeal.

Question: What is case 1983 SCMR 1275 about?
Answer: Case 1983 SCMR 1275 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1979-11-24. The case involved THE EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS MUHAMMAD NAWAZ RESPONDENT ',. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - 185(3) GOVERNMENT SERVANTS (EFFICIENCY AND DISCIPLINE) RULES, 1960. The case was heard by KARAM ELAHEE CHAUHAN AND SHAFIUR RAHMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 SCMR 1275?
Answer: In case 1983 SCMR 1275, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - 185(3) GOVERNMENT SERVANTS (EFFICIENCY AND DISCIPLINE) RULES, 1960. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1979-11-24.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 SCMR 1275?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 SCMR 1275 were: MALIK MUHAMMAD AZAM RASUL, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND MUHAMMAD ASLAM, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONERS. NEMO FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: KARAM ELAHEE CHAUHAN AND SHAFIUR RAHMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 SCMR 1275?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 SCMR 1275 were: THE EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS MUHAMMAD NAWAZ RESPONDENT ',. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 SCMR 1275.
Answer: Karma Elaine Chauhan, J.-Muhammad Nawab (respondent) employee v/as employed as an Inspector on 1-7-1968, in the office of the District Evacuee Trust Committee, Multan. His service, however, was. Terminated on 7-1-1969, for misconduct on his part in not disclosing at the time of his aforesaid appointment that he was working as a Junior Clerk in the office of the Administrator,’ Evacuee Trust Property, Northern Zone. The respondent filed a civil suit, for a declaration that his removal from service in the aforesaid manner was illegal inasmuch as it was brought about without issuing to him any show-cause notice and without following the procedure laid down in the relevant rules on the subject. The learned Civil Judge after giving the finding that the removal was illegal nevertheless dismissed the suit by his. judgment, dated 10-3-1976 on the ground that he had no jurisdiction in cases of this type to grant the declaration mas much as the remedy of the employee was to approach the departmental authorities and in case of their failure to grant the reach he could approach the High Court by means of a writ petition and could, not have filed a civil suit. : 2. Respondent/employee filed an appeal. which was accepted by the ' learned Additional District; Judge on 12-11-1977, who reversed the order, of the learned Civil Judge and decreed the suit is prayed for. 3.' The department namely the Evacuee Trust Property. Board and. another. approached the. High Court.’ by.:. means Of a’ civil revision Application No. but without. any. success as the. same was dismissed by that Court on 13-3-1979. The. department has now come up m a petition. For special leave to appeal against the same to this Court. 's <77. 4. Learned counsel, for the petitioners has argued that even though I the removal ' or dismissal of. the employee, was illegal nevertheless, the employee at the. most could have sued for. damages for wrongful dismissal from service and could not have been granted a declaration of the. kind prayed for by- him. in the suit, because, according to the. learned counsel, the relationship between the petitioners and the employee was that of. a master and.servant-thereunder the service of the employee was in the pleasure, of the master ’which could riot be tampered' with. by decree of civil Court. In. this respect he referred to R. f H: Jana v. National Shipping Corporation (1) for? the proposition that ‘violation: of regulations. jpertaming.to the terms and conditions of employee of a corporate body, Were not actionable to claim a declaratory decree regarding validity of their - removal. _ The_'contention has no merit. In the aforesaid case the powers of the master to deaf with the service matters of his employee-were not regulated by statutory rules, whereas in - the instant case the subject-was covered arid controlled by regular rules on-the subject in the WW. form of Efficiency-and Discipline Rules which were adopted by the Evacuee Trust Property Board, as its own rules by mean sofa proper' resolution in their meeting of May, 1969. The matter was considered by a Bench of this. Court in C.; P. S. L. A. -titled the Chairman Evacuee, Trust Property Board Lahore, etc.: v. Noor Elah and C. P. L, S. A;, titled the Chairman Evacuee Trust Property Board Lahore, etc. V./Muhammad Roman. wherein it was held that dismissal in violation of those rules was illegal. ‘The actual passage in the judgment of this Court, dated 14-1 Ir!974 in the above cases reads as follows:- :‘ 1. ‘It appears from the order passed by the learned Chief Justice of the' High Court on the two Constitution Petitions that the Board at its v : 6th Meeting held in May 1969, Sassed the following resolution ' /‘Agreed. Central Government. Rules would apply to the Board’s - employees for all tents and purposes.” Under paragraph 43 of the scheme the Board 1s authorized to make: rules to carry out the/purposes BF the. scheme framed under sec. tori 16-A(i) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and. Rehabbing* ton) Act 1958) and under section 14(2) of the. Displaced ’Persons (Land Settlement) : Act.1958.; Paragraph. 16 of the Scheme provides that no employee of the : Board shall be dismissed or otherwise *V punished except in accordance. with the rules framed by the Board and approved by the Central Government. In. our opinion. the ' aforesaid resolution amounted to making of the rules by the Board. It was not disputed before the learned Chief Justice that till such - time the Board framed its own rules, the employees were governed. by the Efficiency and Discipline Rules 1960, framed by the Central Government. Admittedly these rules were not followed in the cases of the two respondents and, therefore, no fault can be found with the impugned. orders of the learned Chief Justice. Both the petitions are accordingly dismissed.” 5. Learned counsel has not been able to distinguish the present case from the precedent above-mentioned. Even otherwise it is well settled that where statutory rules govern the service conditions of an employee, then the pleasure of the master stands surrendered to the extent the matter is covered by the relevant rules. See Syed Akbar Ali Bokhara v. State Bank of Pakistan and 7 others 6. The result is that the impugned order BMG quite in conformity with the law on the subject the same calls for no interference by this Court. The petition has no merit and is dismissed. WW. M. z. M.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 SCMR 1275?
Answer: From case 1983 SCMR 1275 (SUPREME COURT, 1979-11-24): Karma Elaine Chauhan, J.-Muhammad Nawab (respondent) employee v/as employed as an Inspector on 1-7-1968, in the office of the District Evacuee Trust Committee, Multan. His service, however, was. Terminated on 7-1-1969, for misconduct on his part in not disclosing at the time of his aforesaid appointment that he was working as a Junior Clerk in the office of the Administrator,’ Evacuee Trust Property, Northern Zone. The respondent filed a civil suit, for a declaration that his removal from service in the aforesaid manner was illegal inasmuch as it was brought about without issuing to him any show-cause notice and without following the procedure laid down in the relevant rules on the subject. The learned Civil Judge after giving the finding that the removal was illegal nevertheless dismissed the suit by his. judgment, dated 10-3-1976 on the ground that he had no jurisdiction in cases of this type to grant the declaration mas much as the remedy of the employee was to approach the departmental authorities and in case of their failure to grant the reach he could approach the High Court by means of a writ petition and could, not have filed a civil suit. : 2. Respondent/employee filed an appeal. which was accepted by the ' learned Additional District; Judge on 12-11-1977, who reversed the order, of the learned Civil Judge and decreed the suit is prayed for. 3.' The department namely the Evacuee Trust Property. Board and. another. approached the. High Court.’ by.:. means Of a’ civil revision Application No. but without. any. success as the. same was dismissed by that Court on 13-3-1979. The. department has now come up m a petition. For special leave to appeal against the same to this Court. 's <77. 4. Learned counsel, for the petitioners has argued that even though I the removal ' or dismissal of. the employee, was illegal nevertheless, the employee at the. most could have sued for. damages for wrongful dismissal from service and could not have been granted a declaration of the. kind prayed for by- him. in the suit, because, according to the. learned counsel, the relationship between the petitioners and the employee was that of. a master and.servant-thereunder the service of the employee was in the pleasure, of the master ’which could riot be tampered' with. by decree of civil Court. In. this respect he referred to R. f H: Jana v. National Shipping Corporation (1) for? the proposition that ‘violation: of regulations. jpertaming.to the terms and conditions of employee of a corporate body, Were not actionable to claim a declaratory decree regarding validity of their - removal. _ The_'contention has no merit. In the aforesaid case the powers of the master to deaf with the service matters of his employee-were not regulated by statutory rules, whereas in - the instant case the subject-was covered arid controlled by regular rules on-the subject in the WW. form of Efficiency-and Discipline Rules which were adopted by the Evacuee Trust Property Board, as its own rules by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 SCMR 1275?
Answer: From case 1983 SCMR 1275 (SUPREME COURT, 1979-11-24): with the service matters of his employee-were not regulated by statutory rules, whereas in - the instant case the subject-was covered arid controlled by regular rules on-the subject in the WW. form of Efficiency-and Discipline Rules which were adopted by the Evacuee Trust Property Board, as its own rules by mean sofa proper' resolution in their meeting of May, 1969. The matter was considered by a Bench of this. Court in C.; P. S. L. A. -titled the Chairman Evacuee, Trust Property Board Lahore, etc.: v. Noor Elah and C. P. L, S. A;, titled the Chairman Evacuee Trust Property Board Lahore, etc. V./Muhammad Roman. wherein it was held that dismissal in violation of those rules was illegal. ‘The actual passage in the judgment of this Court, dated 14-1 Ir!974 in the above cases reads as follows:- :‘ 1. ‘It appears from the order passed by the learned Chief Justice of the' High Court on the two Constitution Petitions that the Board at its v : 6th Meeting held in May 1969, Sassed the following resolution ' /‘Agreed. Central Government. Rules would apply to the Board’s - employees for all tents and purposes.” Under paragraph 43 of the scheme the Board 1s authorized to make: rules to carry out the/purposes BF the. scheme framed under sec. tori 16-A(i) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and. Rehabbing* ton) Act 1958) and under section 14(2) of the. Displaced ’Persons (Land Settlement) : Act.1958.; Paragraph. 16 of the Scheme provides that no employee of the : Board shall be dismissed or otherwise *V punished except in accordance. with the rules framed by the Board and approved by the Central Government. In. our opinion. the ' aforesaid resolution amounted to making of the rules by the Board. It was not disputed before the learned Chief Justice that till such - time the Board framed its own rules, the employees were governed. by the Efficiency and Discipline Rules 1960, framed by the Central Government. Admittedly these rules were not followed in the cases of the two respondents and, therefore, no fault can be found with the impugned. orders of the learned Chief Justice. Both the petitions are accordingly dismissed.” 5. Learned counsel has not been able to distinguish the present case from the precedent above-mentioned. Even otherwise it is well settled that where statutory rules govern the service conditions of an employee, then the pleasure of the master stands surrendered to the extent the matter is covered by the relevant rules. See Syed Akbar Ali Bokhara v. State Bank of Pakistan and 7 others 6. The result is that the impugned order BMG quite in conformity with the law on the subject the same calls for no interference by this Court. The petition has no merit and is dismissed. WW. M. z. M.

Question: What is case 1983 SCMR 1240 about?
Answer: Case 1983 SCMR 1240 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1983-04-13. The case involved DEPUTYADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY ;. BOARDI LAHORE PETITIONER. :' VERSUS '':: A. R. CHAUDHRYAND OTHERS% (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL)ACT (XUII OF 1975) -S. 8. The case was heard by NASIM HASAN SHAH AND SHAFIUR RAHMAN, J.J R.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 SCMR 1240?
Answer: In case 1983 SCMR 1240, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL)ACT (XUII OF 1975) -S. 8. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1983-04-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 SCMR 1240?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 SCMR 1240 were: CH. FAZALI HUSSAIN, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER. SHAHZAD JAHANGIR, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: NASIM HASAN SHAH AND SHAFIUR RAHMAN, J.J R.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 SCMR 1240?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 SCMR 1240 were: DEPUTYADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY ;. BOARDI LAHORE PETITIONER. :' VERSUS '':: A. R. CHAUDHRYAND OTHERS% (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 SCMR 1240.
Answer: Judgment Shafter Rahman, J.-The petitioner, Deputy Administrator Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore, seeks leave to appeal against the judgment of the Lahore High Court, dated 17-4-1979 whereby a constitutional petition filed by him was dismissed in liming. A small piece of land measuring 376 square feet situate in Morally Mare, Rabbi Bazaar, Lahore, was treated as an evacuee property auctioned and purchased by respondent No. who obtained its permanent transfer deed also on 28-1-1974. The petitioner considered the property to be an evacuee trust property and made a reference under section 8"of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Control) Act, 1975 on which the Chairman Trust Property Board declared it to be so. However, a revision petition was filed by the affected respondents against that order, and the Federal Government reversed that order and maintained the transfer. The petitioner invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court for challenging the decision on numerous grounds. By the impugned order the High Court declined to interfere, inter alia, on the ground that the petitioner had no locus standi, that the Federal Government in whom the property vested had itself sustained the earlier transfer in favor of the respondents and that'it was not shown to be evacuee trust property. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the findings on all these points have affected the functioning of the petitioner and concerned questions of public importance for such questions have arisen and are likely to arise in a number of similar petitions. The learned counsel does not deny to the Federal Government the authority to revise the orders as was done in this case but contends that material evidence on the record has been ignored, and erroneous conclusions have been drawn and findings recorded cannot be sustained. We have heard the learned counsel at length. We find that it was essentially a finding of fact which has been recorded by the Chairman and in revision by the Federal Government. Without there BMG compelling reasons for interference and there appear to be none on the surface to us, it is immune from interference in the constitutional jurisdiction. The property involved \was a small piece of land. In the revenue record except for a J-j tree, a well and a Their no other use or dedication is shown to exist. In’this background we do not consider it proper to review a finding of fact nor do we consider that the High Court’s refusal to interfere was such as may require further consideration in this case. As regards the other questions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, they, can be attended to Ina more appropriate case raising a substantial controversy. We do not, therefore, consider it to be a fit case for grant of leave to appeal which is hereby refused. WWW

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 SCMR 1240?
Answer: From case 1983 SCMR 1240 (SUPREME COURT, 1983-04-13): Judgment Shafter Rahman, J.-The petitioner, Deputy Administrator Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore, seeks leave to appeal against the judgment of the Lahore High Court, dated 17-4-1979 whereby a constitutional petition filed by him was dismissed in liming. A small piece of land measuring 376 square feet situate in Morally Mare, Rabbi Bazaar, Lahore, was treated as an evacuee property auctioned and purchased by respondent No. who obtained its permanent transfer deed also on 28-1-1974. The petitioner considered the property to be an evacuee trust property and made a reference under section 8"of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Control) Act, 1975 on which the Chairman Trust Property Board declared it to be so. However, a revision petition was filed by the affected respondents against that order, and the Federal Government reversed that order and maintained the transfer. The petitioner invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court for challenging the decision on numerous grounds. By the impugned order the High Court declined to interfere, inter alia, on the ground that the petitioner had no locus standi, that the Federal Government in whom the property vested had itself sustained the earlier transfer in favor of the respondents and that'it was not shown to be evacuee trust property. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the findings on all these points have affected the functioning of the petitioner and concerned questions of public importance for such questions have arisen and are likely to arise in a number of similar petitions. The learned counsel does not deny to the Federal Government the authority to revise the orders as was done in this case but contends that material evidence on the record has been ignored, and erroneous conclusions have been drawn and findings recorded cannot be sustained. We have heard the learned counsel at length. We find that it was essentially a finding of fact which has been recorded by the Chairman and in revision by the Federal Government. Without there BMG compelling reasons for interference and there appear to be none on the surface to us, it is immune from interference in the constitutional jurisdiction. The property involved \was a small piece of land. In the revenue record except for a J-j tree, a well and a Their no other use or dedication is shown to exist. In’this background we do not consider it proper to review a finding of fact nor do we consider that the High Court’s refusal to interfere was such as may require further consideration in this case. As regards the other questions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, they, can be attended to Ina more appropriate case raising a substantial controversy. We do not, therefore, consider it to be a fit case for grant of leave to appeal which is hereby refused. WWW

Question: What is case 1983 PLD 374 about?
Answer: Case 1983 PLD 374 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1983-02-21. The case involved MST. HAFEEZ BEGUM (PETITIONER) VERSUS ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTYAND 11 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XII OF 1975) - SS. AND 10 EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10(1)(B) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by NASIR ASLAM ZAHID AND ALI NAWAZ BUDHANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: In case 1983 PLD 374, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XII OF 1975) - SS. AND 10 EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10(1)(B) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1983-02-21.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 PLD 374 were: ZAHEERUDDIN KHAN FOR PETITIONER. MANZURUL HAQ AND ABDUL HAMID SIDDIQUI FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: NASIR ASLAM ZAHID AND ALI NAWAZ BUDHANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 PLD 374 were: MST. HAFEEZ BEGUM (PETITIONER) VERSUS ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTYAND 11 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 PLD 374.
Answer: Judgment Nasir Islam Zahid, J.-By this constitutional petition, the petitioner prays that order dated 15-12-1976 by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board (respondent No. harm) and order dated 29-6-1978 passed in revision by the Government of Pakistan (respondent No. harm) be quashed and the property in dispute, namely, immovable Property No. E/2673 situated in That CFAO, Hyderabad, be declared to be non-trust evacuee property lawfully transferred permanently to the petitioner by the Settlement Department. 2. The facts as stated in the memo, of petition are that in 1960 the said property was transferred by the Settlement Department Hyderabad in favor of one Mascot-ul- Hassan but due to non-payment of the transfer price by him, the appendix acid P. T. O. issued to him were cancelled. Thereafter, the said property was included MN auction lists published by the Settlement Department on several occasions, and ultimately it was purchased in auction by one Chaos son of Buddies on 19-7-1958 from the Settlement Department as the highest bidder. The said Chaos surrendered his rights in favor of the present petitioner and finally the Settlement Department Hyderabad issued permanent Transfer Deed of the said property in favor of the petitioner on 19-6-1974 and then the name of the petitioner was also mutated in the City Survey Records. It is alleged that after issuance of P. T. D. in her favor, the petitioner served notices under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, on the occupants of the said property and some occupants came to a settlement with the petitioner whereas against others, the petitioner instituted ejectment proceedings, and it is alleged that in some cases ejectment orders have been passed by the concerned Rent Controller and other ejectment cases are pending. Some of occupants, however, moved an application in the office of the Evacuee Trust Department alleging that the said property was attached to a temple. The Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property (Southern Zone), Karachi. (respondent No. herein) issued a notification dated 12-11-1974 taking over and assuming the administrative control, management and maintenance of the said property describing it as “Property No. C. S. 2673, Ward ‘E' measuring 785-3 sq. yards attached to Baja Gurneys Temple, That Chow, Hyderabad”’. Petitioner filed a miscellaneous application dated 12-11-1974 but by his order dated 2-4-1975, the Administrator observed that he was not competent in the matter and the petitioner was advised to approach the competent authority. Petitioner then filed an appeal on 16-4-1975 before the Chairman Evacuee Trust Property Board (respondent No. 3). Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Hyderabad Region, Hyderabad (respondent No. 1) also filed an application dated 16-5-1976 before the Chairman under section 8 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, for determination of the status of the said property. Deputy Settlement Commissioner Hyderabad and the petitioner were made opponents in the said application. Petitioner filed her detailed written statement against the application of the respondent No. 1. After several dates of harem when the case was adjourned, arguments were finally heard by the Chairman (respondent No. 3) on 15-12-1976 at Karachi and the judgment was reserved. It is the case of the petitioner that judgment was not announced by respondent No. but the petitioner received a notice dated 18-1-1977 from the office of respondent No. to appear before him in Hyderabad on 25-1-1977. Notice also required the Deputy Settlement Commissioner Hyderabad and City Surveyor Hyderabad to appear on that date with the record. However, it is averred that on 25-1-1977 when the petitioner’s Advocate and others appeared at Hyderabad the case was not listed for hearing before respondent No, 3 and he neither granted hearing nor announced judgment and the parties were told that they would be called later. However, on 26-1-1977 the petitioner Advocate came to know from the subordinate officers of respondent No. that the said property had been declared as evacuee trust property by respondent No. 3. After great efforts' petitioner was able to get copy of the judgment dated 15-12-1976 of respondent No, 3 on 25-2-1977. By his judgment dated 15-12-1976, respondent No. declared the said property as evacuee trust property and cancelled the transfer documents of the petitioner and ordered taking over the said property by the Evacuee Transfer Property Board. Petitioner, BMG aggrieved, filed a revision before the Government of Pakistan but the same was dismissed by order dated 29-6-1978. Hence, this petition. 3. We have heard at length Mr. Zaheeruddm Khan, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Madurai Had for respondents Nos. 1, 3, and 5, and Mr. Abdul Hamid Siddiqui, who appeared for private respondents Nos. to 12. No one appeared for respondent No. 2, Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Hyderabad. It was first contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that the order dated 15-12-1976 of the Chairman (respondent No. 3) is liable to be set aside as there has been a violation of principles of natural justice. It was submitted that respondent No. granted hearing to the concerned parties on 15-12-1976 and reserved judgment, but apparently he was not satisfied with the hearing as notice was received by the petitioner for hearing of the case at Hyderabad on 25-1-1977, but no hearing took place on 25-1-1977 or at any time thereafter and later on the petitioner came to know that the judgment had been passed by respondent No. on 15-12-1976. In the objections filed on behalf of the official respondents stand has been taken that judgment had been announced on 15-12-1976 by respondent No. just after conclusion of the proceedings their the parties had been heard at length by respondent No. and that notice for hearing on 25-1-1977 at Hyderabad was issued on account of clerical mistake on the part of the office of respondent No. 1. It is not necessary to make any observation in regard to this controversy as in our view the petitioner is not entitled to succeed on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice for the following reasons: The petitioner had filed a revision application before the Government against the order dated 15-12-1976 of respondent No. and a full hearing was granted to the petitioner m the revision proceedings. No grievance has been made about the hearing before the Government being inadequate or improper; (it) No ground has been taken in the memo, of the present constitutional petition about hearing not being granted by respondent No. 3; (Hi) No ground has been taken in the memo, of the present constitutional petition that the order dated 15-12-1976 of respondent No. is bad for violation of principles of natural justice; and (iv) Apparently a full hearing was granted on 15-12-1976 by respondent No. to the petitioner. 4. It was then contended by Mr. Zaheeruddm Khan, learned counsel for the petitioner that the Permanent Transfer Deed of the property in question was issued to the petitioner on 19-6-1974, the same could not be cancelled under the Evacuee ‘Trust Property (Management and Disposal) Act of 1975 which came into effect on 1-7-1974 (section I subsection (3) of the Act), 1. e. after the date of P. T. D. Apparently the argument was that whether the property was evacuee trust property or not was a question which could not be determined by the Evacuee Trust Authorities in the instant case as the property had been transferred and P. T. D. issued in favor of the petitioner before 1-7-1974, the date on which the Act of 1975 1s deemed to have come into effect. A reference to section 8 and 10 of the 1975 Act shows that the proposition advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner is not correct. Section 8 provides that if a question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or institution or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final. Section 10 is as follows:- ‘TO. Validation of certain transfers.-(1) An immovable trust property,-~ to June, 1964, for allotment against the satisfaction of verified claims; and (b) if situated in an urban area and utilized bona fide under any Act for transfer against the satisfaction of verified claims in respect of which Present Transfer Deeds were issued prior to June, 1968, shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and the sale proceeds thereof shall be reimbursed to the Board and shall form part of the Trust pool. (2) If a question arises whether a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is bona fide or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (3) If it is decided that a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is not bona fide, the Chairman may pass an order cancelling the allotment or transfer of such property; provided that no decision under subsection (2) or order under subsection (3) shall be taken or passed in respect of any property without giving the persons affected a reasonable opportunity of being heard.” The question whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable or other specified trust or institution or not is to be decided by the Chairman. IFA P. T. D. in respect of an evacuee trust property situated in an urban area has been issued bona fide to a transferee against satisfaction of a verified claim it is deemed to be validly transferred by the Chief Settlement Commission sooner provided the P. T. D. was issued prior to June, 1968. For validation under section 10(1)(£>) of the Act, 1975, therefore, two conditions must be satisfied. Firstly the P. T. D. must have been issued prior to June, 1968, and secondly the transfer by the Settlement Authorities must be bona fide and whether such transfer is bona fide or not is to be decided by the Chairman. In the instant case P. T. D. was issued to the petitioner on B 19-6-1974, which is a date much after June, 1968, and as such if the property was evacuee trust property the transfer could not be validated by the Chairman even if the transfer in favor of the petitioner is presumed to be bona fide. 5. Another argument by the learned counsel for the petitioner was that the petitioner was a bona fide transferee from the Settlement Department and as such, even if the said property is evacuee trust property, the P. T. D. issued in favor of the petitioner is not liable to be set aside and what the C Evacuee Trust Property Board ought to have done was to claim the amount for which the property has been transferred to the petitioner. In support of this contention learned counsel relied upon certain reported judgments which are discussed here:- (a) A. R. Nazi. Pakistan PLD 1968S C 119. (b) Evacuee Trust Board v. Lahore Improvement Trust P LD 1969 LAH. 243. © Secretary Evacuee Trust Board v. Allah Radha P LD 1975 Keir. 854. In P LD 1968 S C 119 the appellants, who were tenants of Dayak Singh Trust Society since before petition had challenged the sale of the property in dispute to State Bank of Pakistan by the Chief Settlement Commissioner and the Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Board. It had been contended on behalf of the appellant that the sale in favor of the State Bank of Pakistan was not sanctioned by law. Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the following observations of the Supreme Court at page 128 and 129 of the report:- “The next contention advanced in the High Court and here, on behalf of the appellants, was that the sale of the property in dispute to the State Bank was repugnant to the provisions of section 16- A of the Act, as the Bank was not a “suitable institution” with the meaning of that section. There is no definition of this term in the Act, which must, therefore, receive its primary dictionary connotation. The State Bank is a public institution which performs a very essential function for the State in this country, and it is difficult to say why, if the departmental authorities and the Central Government were agreed that it is a “suitable institution” to which the evacuee trust property should be transferred, such a transfer should be open to exception. Even if it conceded for the sake of argument that the “institution” referred to in the section had to be charitable or educational institution to qualify for transfer under the section, the position seems to have been placed beyond the possibility of the challenge by a change in the law. Section 16-A of the Act, as retrospectively amended in 1964, empowered the relevant authority, under a Scheme to be prepared to sell the property in question, where disposal by sale appears to be the best course under the circumstances. Sub-clause (j) of clause 19 of the Scheme framed thereunder, enabled the Evacuee Trust Board to sell, with the previous approval of the Central Government, uneconomic immovable or any other property in respect of which disposal by sale appears to be the best course under the circumstances. The property sold is said to have been yielding very little come to the Trust in its present condition and the Trust Was not in a position, for lack of the necessary finances, to exploit its building possibilities to OCTAM higher income. In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the powers conferred by section 16-A and the Scheme framed thereunder, have been in any manner, exceeded. It also appears that subsequently, the property after acquisition by the Central Government by notification under section 3 of the Act, had vested in it for all purposes and all evacuee interests in it had been extinguished, by operation of law, with effect from the date of the notification. Henceforth, the property was available to be disposed of according to the legislative provisions made by the Central Government in that behalf, and it does seem that the Central Government is aware of the nature of the property in so far as it had only sold what was considered to be uneconomic property of the Trust for carrying out its original purposes. There is thus no diversion of the purposes of the original Trust involved in the sale.” The aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court do not support’ the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner in the mutant case. In the Supreme Court case the property had been sold by a competent authority under a scheme prepared pursuant to section 16-A of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. The said scheme had been framed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner and was known as “Scheme for Management of Trust Properties”. The Supreme Court accepted the contention of the Central Government that what was sold was considered by the Central Government to be uneconomic property of the Trust. In the instant case the provisions of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act of 1975 are under consideration, which Act had not even been enacted when the aforesaid case was decided by the Supreme Court, P L D 1969 LAH, 243 also cannot come to the assistance of the learned counsel for the petitioner. In the Lahore case the property ceased to be evacuee property long before the enactment of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act of 1958 and the Lahore High Court came to the conclusion, on the facts of that case, that the property in question was never acquired by the Government and, therefore, did never form part of the Trust pool Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon para. 15 of the said Lahore judgment, which is to the following effect:- “Even if it is assumed that the property was Trust property, a perusal of section 4-A of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, by which the Trust pool was created, would show that not only was the trust property to form part of the rust pool but even ‘sale proceeds of any such property lying with the Custodian was to be a part of it’. Sections and 4-A, therefore, did envisage cases in which Trust property was sold and stead of annulling such sales, provided for the vesting of the sale proceeds in the Trust pool. The sale of the property in dispute can, therefore, not be questioned. ’ It was contended, relying upon para, 15 of the judgment of the Lahore High Court case referred to above, that as in the mutant P, T. D, had already been issued, the transfer in favor of the petitioner should not have been set aside, but the sale proceeds lying with the Settlement Department should have vested in the Trust pool. In the Lahore case, as observed earlier, the property in question had already been transferred to the Lahore Improvement Trust in 1951 and the property had ceased to be evacuee property much before 1958 and never formed part of the Trust pool, which is not the position in the case of the petitioner, In the case of the petitioner, the transfer documents were issued much after the enactment OL the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Further, if the said property is evacuee trust property, to validate the transfer by the Settlement Department in favor of the petitioner what has to be shown is that the Settlement Department was competent to do so and that the transfer was made under some legal provision or scheme. In the circumstances we are of the view that the Lahore case is clearly distinguishable. In the Karachi case reported in P LD 1976 Keir. 854 reliance was placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on the last paragraph of that judgment which reads as follows: “TN the result, for the foregoing reasons I would set aside the order made by the Settlement Department and grant the declaration that “Piano”’ is a registered Trust. However, by granting the declaration the transfers in favor of the respondents Nos. to 7 will not be affected so far as the present appeal is concerned, though under the Act, the power is given to the Evacuee Trust Board to go into bona fides of such transfers.” In the 1975 Karachi case the transfer orders had been issued in 1963 and 1966 e. before June, 1968, the date provided in section 10(1) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, As already observed, if transfer documents had been issued prior to June, 1968, statutory protection is granted to such transfers subject to the bona fides of the transactions having been established. As the transfers in the 1975 Karachi case had been made by the Settlement Department prior to June, 1968, it was decided that the transfers in favor of the concerned respondents would not be affected, but it was made clear that the Evacuee Trust Board could go into the bona fides of such transfers. In the circumstances, we are of the. view that PL D 1975 Keir. 854 does not help the contention on behalf of the petitioner, as in the instant case the transfer had been made alter June, 1968, whereas in P LD 1975, Keir. 854 the transfers had been made prior to June, 1968. In our view, under the 1970 Act, Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Board is competent to determine whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or not and it a r. has been issued in respect of an evacuee trust property, Sufi transfer document can be cancelled by the Chairman provided that a P. T. D, issued by the Settlement Department prior to June, 1968, shall not be cancelled and shall be deemed to have been validly issued if the Chairman finds that its transfer was bona fide. _# 7 The only other question that requires to be determined in this petition is whether the finding of respondents Nos. and 5 that the property m question is evacuee trust property cannot be sustained and is la e quashed under the constitutional jurisdiction of this Court. Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a letter dated 22-6-1966 supposed to ha e been written by the Secretary District Evacuee Trust Property Committee Hyderabad to one Nasiruddin son of Ameeruddm. in this LE.TER it is stated as follows:-, “This is to inform you that properly bearing C. S. E/2691, Hyderabad is neither included in the list o1 Evacuee Trust Property supplied by the City Survey Officer, Hyderabad, nor it has been taken under the management of this organization. It was further submitted that the property had remained under the management and control of the Custodian Evacuee Property till 1974 when for the first time the Evacuee Trust Department came on the scene and canned the property as evacuee trust property. It was also pointed out that Settlement Department had placed the said property in the earmarking list and then put the same to auction on several occasions but no objection was taken by the Trust Department. It was contended that in the face of these P‘s'yes evidence respondents Nos. and 5 came to the wrong conclusion that the property in question was evacuee trust property. The Chairman (respondent No. 3) decided that the property was truss, property on the basis of City Survey Record, entries wherein bad. Shown that the property had devolved from Guru to Cheka/and/that the property COU neither be sold, gifted, mortgaged nor otherwise alienated. Respondent No. 5, m revision confirmed the decision of the Chairman, he doubted the genuineness of the aforesaid letter dated 22-6-1966 of the Department produced by the petitioner observing that “no reliance can be placed on 11 J*ca« the number of the property (E-2673) appears to have been typed MTO the letter as an afterthought”. It was further stated that “even if the plea and proof of the petitioner are accepted to be valid and true, the same would not be of any avail to petitioner. It is evident that the property in question is admitted between the parties to be a private trust A"! 1975 which has b?en created by a Guru in favor of his Cheka. In P LD Keir. 854, His Lordship has clearly laid down that ‘ BAU “«« religious head of place of worship and Piano means a temple property, held dedicated to deity. Further, P LD 1978 Keir. 252 gives added strength to the matter”., Before respondent No. 5, on behalf of the tenants' reliance was placed on a letter dated 23-1-1960 of the Settlement Department Hyderabad whereby C, H. Form filed by one Noor Muhammad, a recorded tenant, for transfer P*° party,in,?question> was rejected on the ground that the property being trust property, it could not be transferred. Respondent No 5 in his impugned order observed that this letter dated 23-1-1960 of the Settlement Department was worth consideration and that in its presence the Settlement authorities were not subsequently empowered to transfer the property in dispute by treating the same as an evacuee property simpliciter. 8. A perusal of the two impugned orders shows that the finding that the said property is evacuee trust property is neither arbitrary nor capricious is based on evidence discussed hereinafter. An examination of the pieces of evidence on which reliance was placed by respondents Nos. and 5 indicates,at 18 lie!"her a case of no evidence nor of misreading or misappreciation of evidence. We see no illegality in rejection of the letter dated 22-6- 1966 of the evacuee Trust Property Committee, Hyderabad by respondent No 5 From the City Survey Record, and the will dated 5-3-1939 of Guru Dharmas in which the property was described as “Piano” the respondents, Nos. and 5 correctly decided that TNE property was religious Trust Property. 9. In any case, the impugned order dated 29- 6-78 of respondent No. shows that the admitted position of the petitioner was that the said property was a private trust property, and m the face of this admission coupled with the fact that this property was described as a “‘Piano” the property has to be evacuee trust property. It may be observed here that the view of this Court is that the words “‘religious trust” in section 4(2) of Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, embrace both private as public religious trust Evacuee Trust Committee v. Muhammad Ismail (1) In section 2(d) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, evacuee trust property” has been defined to mean the evacuee trust properties attached to charitable, religious or educational trust or institutions or any other properties which form part of the Trust pool constituted under that Act. Section 7 of that Act provides for constitution of a Trust Pool consisting inter alia of all evacuee trust property which immediately before the commencement of that Act formed part of the Trust Pools constituted under the Acts and any evacuee property declared under section 8 to be evacuee trust property. Even if the property in question is private religious trust property, it will fall within the definition of evacuee trust property. i. State the view that the impugned orders do not suffer from any illegality. This Constitutional Petition is accordingly dismissed but theref7 will be 1S’ Orel GS GH big-co™

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): Judgment Nasir Islam Zahid, J.-By this constitutional petition, the petitioner prays that order dated 15-12-1976 by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board (respondent No. harm) and order dated 29-6-1978 passed in revision by the Government of Pakistan (respondent No. harm) be quashed and the property in dispute, namely, immovable Property No. E/2673 situated in That CFAO, Hyderabad, be declared to be non-trust evacuee property lawfully transferred permanently to the petitioner by the Settlement Department. 2. The facts as stated in the memo, of petition are that in 1960 the said property was transferred by the Settlement Department Hyderabad in favor of one Mascot-ul- Hassan but due to non-payment of the transfer price by him, the appendix acid P. T. O. issued to him were cancelled. Thereafter, the said property was included MN auction lists published by the Settlement Department on several occasions, and ultimately it was purchased in auction by one Chaos son of Buddies on 19-7-1958 from the Settlement Department as the highest bidder. The said Chaos surrendered his rights in favor of the present petitioner and finally the Settlement Department Hyderabad issued permanent Transfer Deed of the said property in favor of the petitioner on 19-6-1974 and then the name of the petitioner was also mutated in the City Survey Records. It is alleged that after issuance of P. T. D. in her favor, the petitioner served notices under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, on the occupants of the said property and some occupants came to a settlement with the petitioner whereas against others, the petitioner instituted ejectment proceedings, and it is alleged that in some cases ejectment orders have been passed by the concerned Rent Controller and other ejectment cases are pending. Some of occupants, however, moved an application in the office of the Evacuee Trust Department alleging that the said property was attached to a temple. The Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property (Southern Zone), Karachi. (respondent No. herein) issued a notification dated 12-11-1974 taking over and assuming the administrative control, management and maintenance of the said property describing it as “Property No. C. S. 2673, Ward ‘E' measuring 785-3 sq. yards attached to Baja Gurneys Temple, That Chow, Hyderabad”’. Petitioner filed a miscellaneous application dated 12-11-1974 but by his order dated 2-4-1975, the Administrator observed that he was not competent in the matter and the petitioner was advised to approach the competent authority. Petitioner then filed an appeal on 16-4-1975 before the Chairman Evacuee Trust Property Board (respondent No. 3). Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Hyderabad Region, Hyderabad (respondent No. 1) also filed an application dated 16-5-1976 before the Chairman under section 8 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, for determination of the status of the said property. Deputy Settlement Commissioner Hyderabad and the petitioner were made opponents in the said application. Petitioner filed her detailed written statement against the application of the respondent No. 1. After several dates of harem when the case was adjourned, arguments

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): Act, 1975, for determination of the status of the said property. Deputy Settlement Commissioner Hyderabad and the petitioner were made opponents in the said application. Petitioner filed her detailed written statement against the application of the respondent No. 1. After several dates of harem when the case was adjourned, arguments were finally heard by the Chairman (respondent No. 3) on 15-12-1976 at Karachi and the judgment was reserved. It is the case of the petitioner that judgment was not announced by respondent No. but the petitioner received a notice dated 18-1-1977 from the office of respondent No. to appear before him in Hyderabad on 25-1-1977. Notice also required the Deputy Settlement Commissioner Hyderabad and City Surveyor Hyderabad to appear on that date with the record. However, it is averred that on 25-1-1977 when the petitioner’s Advocate and others appeared at Hyderabad the case was not listed for hearing before respondent No, 3 and he neither granted hearing nor announced judgment and the parties were told that they would be called later. However, on 26-1-1977 the petitioner Advocate came to know from the subordinate officers of respondent No. that the said property had been declared as evacuee trust property by respondent No. 3. After great efforts' petitioner was able to get copy of the judgment dated 15-12-1976 of respondent No, 3 on 25-2-1977. By his judgment dated 15-12-1976, respondent No. declared the said property as evacuee trust property and cancelled the transfer documents of the petitioner and ordered taking over the said property by the Evacuee Transfer Property Board. Petitioner, BMG aggrieved, filed a revision before the Government of Pakistan but the same was dismissed by order dated 29-6-1978. Hence, this petition. 3. We have heard at length Mr. Zaheeruddm Khan, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Madurai Had for respondents Nos. 1, 3, and 5, and Mr. Abdul Hamid Siddiqui, who appeared for private respondents Nos. to 12. No one appeared for respondent No. 2, Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Hyderabad. It was first contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that the order dated 15-12-1976 of the Chairman (respondent No. 3) is liable to be set aside as there has been a violation of principles of natural justice. It was submitted that respondent No. granted hearing to the concerned parties on 15-12-1976 and reserved judgment, but apparently he was not satisfied with the hearing as notice was received by the petitioner for hearing of the case at Hyderabad on 25-1-1977, but no hearing took place on 25-1-1977 or at any time thereafter and later on the petitioner came to know that the judgment had been passed by respondent No. on 15-12-1976. In the objections filed on behalf of the official respondents stand has been taken that judgment had been announced on 15-12-1976 by respondent No. just after conclusion of the proceedings their the parties had been heard at length by respondent No. and that notice for hearing on 25-1-1977 at Hyderabad was issued on account of clerical mistake on the part

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): stand has been taken that judgment had been announced on 15-12-1976 by respondent No. just after conclusion of the proceedings their the parties had been heard at length by respondent No. and that notice for hearing on 25-1-1977 at Hyderabad was issued on account of clerical mistake on the part of the office of respondent No. 1. It is not necessary to make any observation in regard to this controversy as in our view the petitioner is not entitled to succeed on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice for the following reasons: The petitioner had filed a revision application before the Government against the order dated 15-12-1976 of respondent No. and a full hearing was granted to the petitioner m the revision proceedings. No grievance has been made about the hearing before the Government being inadequate or improper; (it) No ground has been taken in the memo, of the present constitutional petition about hearing not being granted by respondent No. 3; (Hi) No ground has been taken in the memo, of the present constitutional petition that the order dated 15-12-1976 of respondent No. is bad for violation of principles of natural justice; and (iv) Apparently a full hearing was granted on 15-12-1976 by respondent No. to the petitioner. 4. It was then contended by Mr. Zaheeruddm Khan, learned counsel for the petitioner that the Permanent Transfer Deed of the property in question was issued to the petitioner on 19-6-1974, the same could not be cancelled under the Evacuee ‘Trust Property (Management and Disposal) Act of 1975 which came into effect on 1-7-1974 (section I subsection (3) of the Act), 1. e. after the date of P. T. D. Apparently the argument was that whether the property was evacuee trust property or not was a question which could not be determined by the Evacuee Trust Authorities in the instant case as the property had been transferred and P. T. D. issued in favor of the petitioner before 1-7-1974, the date on which the Act of 1975 1s deemed to have come into effect. A reference to section 8 and 10 of the 1975 Act shows that the proposition advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner is not correct. Section 8 provides that if a question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or institution or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final. Section 10 is as follows:- ‘TO. Validation of certain transfers.-(1) An immovable trust property,-~ to June, 1964, for allotment against the satisfaction of verified claims; and (b) if situated in an urban area and utilized bona fide under any Act for transfer against the satisfaction of verified claims in respect of which Present Transfer Deeds were issued prior to June, 1968, shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and the sale proceeds thereof shall be reimbursed to the Board and shall form part of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): the satisfaction of verified claims in respect of which Present Transfer Deeds were issued prior to June, 1968, shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and the sale proceeds thereof shall be reimbursed to the Board and shall form part of the Trust pool. (2) If a question arises whether a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is bona fide or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (3) If it is decided that a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is not bona fide, the Chairman may pass an order cancelling the allotment or transfer of such property; provided that no decision under subsection (2) or order under subsection (3) shall be taken or passed in respect of any property without giving the persons affected a reasonable opportunity of being heard.” The question whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable or other specified trust or institution or not is to be decided by the Chairman. IFA P. T. D. in respect of an evacuee trust property situated in an urban area has been issued bona fide to a transferee against satisfaction of a verified claim it is deemed to be validly transferred by the Chief Settlement Commission sooner provided the P. T. D. was issued prior to June, 1968. For validation under section 10(1)(£>) of the Act, 1975, therefore, two conditions must be satisfied. Firstly the P. T. D. must have been issued prior to June, 1968, and secondly the transfer by the Settlement Authorities must be bona fide and whether such transfer is bona fide or not is to be decided by the Chairman. In the instant case P. T. D. was issued to the petitioner on B 19-6-1974, which is a date much after June, 1968, and as such if the property was evacuee trust property the transfer could not be validated by the Chairman even if the transfer in favor of the petitioner is presumed to be bona fide. 5. Another argument by the learned counsel for the petitioner was that the petitioner was a bona fide transferee from the Settlement Department and as such, even if the said property is evacuee trust property, the P. T. D. issued in favor of the petitioner is not liable to be set aside and what the C Evacuee Trust Property Board ought to have done was to claim the amount for which the property has been transferred to the petitioner. In support of this contention learned counsel relied upon certain reported judgments which are discussed here:- (a) A. R. Nazi. Pakistan PLD 1968S C 119. (b) Evacuee Trust Board v. Lahore Improvement Trust P LD 1969 LAH. 243. © Secretary Evacuee Trust Board v. Allah Radha P LD 1975 Keir. 854. In P LD 1968 S C 119 the appellants, who were tenants of Dayak Singh Trust Society since before petition had

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): 1968S C 119. (b) Evacuee Trust Board v. Lahore Improvement Trust P LD 1969 LAH. 243. © Secretary Evacuee Trust Board v. Allah Radha P LD 1975 Keir. 854. In P LD 1968 S C 119 the appellants, who were tenants of Dayak Singh Trust Society since before petition had challenged the sale of the property in dispute to State Bank of Pakistan by the Chief Settlement Commissioner and the Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Board. It had been contended on behalf of the appellant that the sale in favor of the State Bank of Pakistan was not sanctioned by law. Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the following observations of the Supreme Court at page 128 and 129 of the report:- “The next contention advanced in the High Court and here, on behalf of the appellants, was that the sale of the property in dispute to the State Bank was repugnant to the provisions of section 16- A of the Act, as the Bank was not a “suitable institution” with the meaning of that section. There is no definition of this term in the Act, which must, therefore, receive its primary dictionary connotation. The State Bank is a public institution which performs a very essential function for the State in this country, and it is difficult to say why, if the departmental authorities and the Central Government were agreed that it is a “suitable institution” to which the evacuee trust property should be transferred, such a transfer should be open to exception. Even if it conceded for the sake of argument that the “institution” referred to in the section had to be charitable or educational institution to qualify for transfer under the section, the position seems to have been placed beyond the possibility of the challenge by a change in the law. Section 16-A of the Act, as retrospectively amended in 1964, empowered the relevant authority, under a Scheme to be prepared to sell the property in question, where disposal by sale appears to be the best course under the circumstances. Sub-clause (j) of clause 19 of the Scheme framed thereunder, enabled the Evacuee Trust Board to sell, with the previous approval of the Central Government, uneconomic immovable or any other property in respect of which disposal by sale appears to be the best course under the circumstances. The property sold is said to have been yielding very little come to the Trust in its present condition and the Trust Was not in a position, for lack of the necessary finances, to exploit its building possibilities to OCTAM higher income. In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the powers conferred by section 16-A and the Scheme framed thereunder, have been in any manner, exceeded. It also appears that subsequently, the property after acquisition by the Central Government by notification under section 3 of the Act, had vested in it for all purposes and all evacuee interests in it had been extinguished, by operation of law, with effect

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): thereunder, have been in any manner, exceeded. It also appears that subsequently, the property after acquisition by the Central Government by notification under section 3 of the Act, had vested in it for all purposes and all evacuee interests in it had been extinguished, by operation of law, with effect from the date of the notification. Henceforth, the property was available to be disposed of according to the legislative provisions made by the Central Government in that behalf, and it does seem that the Central Government is aware of the nature of the property in so far as it had only sold what was considered to be uneconomic property of the Trust for carrying out its original purposes. There is thus no diversion of the purposes of the original Trust involved in the sale.” The aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court do not support’ the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner in the mutant case. In the Supreme Court case the property had been sold by a competent authority under a scheme prepared pursuant to section 16-A of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. The said scheme had been framed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner and was known as “Scheme for Management of Trust Properties”. The Supreme Court accepted the contention of the Central Government that what was sold was considered by the Central Government to be uneconomic property of the Trust. In the instant case the provisions of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act of 1975 are under consideration, which Act had not even been enacted when the aforesaid case was decided by the Supreme Court, P L D 1969 LAH, 243 also cannot come to the assistance of the learned counsel for the petitioner. In the Lahore case the property ceased to be evacuee property long before the enactment of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act of 1958 and the Lahore High Court came to the conclusion, on the facts of that case, that the property in question was never acquired by the Government and, therefore, did never form part of the Trust pool Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon para. 15 of the said Lahore judgment, which is to the following effect:- “Even if it is assumed that the property was Trust property, a perusal of section 4-A of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, by which the Trust pool was created, would show that not only was the trust property to form part of the rust pool but even ‘sale proceeds of any such property lying with the Custodian was to be a part of it’. Sections and 4-A, therefore, did envisage cases in which Trust property was sold and stead of annulling such sales, provided for the vesting of the sale proceeds in the Trust pool. The sale of the property in dispute can, therefore, not be questioned. ’ It was contended, relying upon para, 15 of the judgment of the Lahore High Court case

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): property was sold and stead of annulling such sales, provided for the vesting of the sale proceeds in the Trust pool. The sale of the property in dispute can, therefore, not be questioned. ’ It was contended, relying upon para, 15 of the judgment of the Lahore High Court case referred to above, that as in the mutant P, T. D, had already been issued, the transfer in favor of the petitioner should not have been set aside, but the sale proceeds lying with the Settlement Department should have vested in the Trust pool. In the Lahore case, as observed earlier, the property in question had already been transferred to the Lahore Improvement Trust in 1951 and the property had ceased to be evacuee property much before 1958 and never formed part of the Trust pool, which is not the position in the case of the petitioner, In the case of the petitioner, the transfer documents were issued much after the enactment OL the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Further, if the said property is evacuee trust property, to validate the transfer by the Settlement Department in favor of the petitioner what has to be shown is that the Settlement Department was competent to do so and that the transfer was made under some legal provision or scheme. In the circumstances we are of the view that the Lahore case is clearly distinguishable. In the Karachi case reported in P LD 1976 Keir. 854 reliance was placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on the last paragraph of that judgment which reads as follows: “TN the result, for the foregoing reasons I would set aside the order made by the Settlement Department and grant the declaration that “Piano”’ is a registered Trust. However, by granting the declaration the transfers in favor of the respondents Nos. to 7 will not be affected so far as the present appeal is concerned, though under the Act, the power is given to the Evacuee Trust Board to go into bona fides of such transfers.” In the 1975 Karachi case the transfer orders had been issued in 1963 and 1966 e. before June, 1968, the date provided in section 10(1) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, As already observed, if transfer documents had been issued prior to June, 1968, statutory protection is granted to such transfers subject to the bona fides of the transactions having been established. As the transfers in the 1975 Karachi case had been made by the Settlement Department prior to June, 1968, it was decided that the transfers in favor of the concerned respondents would not be affected, but it was made clear that the Evacuee Trust Board could go into the bona fides of such transfers. In the circumstances, we are of the. view that PL D 1975 Keir. 854 does not help the contention on behalf of the petitioner, as in the instant case the transfer had been made alter June, 1968,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): the Evacuee Trust Board could go into the bona fides of such transfers. In the circumstances, we are of the. view that PL D 1975 Keir. 854 does not help the contention on behalf of the petitioner, as in the instant case the transfer had been made alter June, 1968, whereas in P LD 1975, Keir. 854 the transfers had been made prior to June, 1968. In our view, under the 1970 Act, Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Board is competent to determine whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or not and it a r. has been issued in respect of an evacuee trust property, Sufi transfer document can be cancelled by the Chairman provided that a P. T. D, issued by the Settlement Department prior to June, 1968, shall not be cancelled and shall be deemed to have been validly issued if the Chairman finds that its transfer was bona fide. _# 7 The only other question that requires to be determined in this petition is whether the finding of respondents Nos. and 5 that the property m question is evacuee trust property cannot be sustained and is la e quashed under the constitutional jurisdiction of this Court. Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a letter dated 22-6-1966 supposed to ha e been written by the Secretary District Evacuee Trust Property Committee Hyderabad to one Nasiruddin son of Ameeruddm. in this LE.TER it is stated as follows:-, “This is to inform you that properly bearing C. S. E/2691, Hyderabad is neither included in the list o1 Evacuee Trust Property supplied by the City Survey Officer, Hyderabad, nor it has been taken under the management of this organization. It was further submitted that the property had remained under the management and control of the Custodian Evacuee Property till 1974 when for the first time the Evacuee Trust Department came on the scene and canned the property as evacuee trust property. It was also pointed out that Settlement Department had placed the said property in the earmarking list and then put the same to auction on several occasions but no objection was taken by the Trust Department. It was contended that in the face of these P‘s'yes evidence respondents Nos. and 5 came to the wrong conclusion that the property in question was evacuee trust property. The Chairman (respondent No. 3) decided that the property was truss, property on the basis of City Survey Record, entries wherein bad. Shown that the property had devolved from Guru to Cheka/and/that the property COU neither be sold, gifted, mortgaged nor otherwise alienated. Respondent No. 5, m revision confirmed the decision of the Chairman, he doubted the genuineness of the aforesaid letter dated 22-6-1966 of the Department produced by the petitioner observing that “no reliance can be placed on 11 J*ca« the number of the property (E-2673) appears to have been typed MTO the letter as an afterthought”. It was further stated that “even if the plea

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): genuineness of the aforesaid letter dated 22-6-1966 of the Department produced by the petitioner observing that “no reliance can be placed on 11 J*ca« the number of the property (E-2673) appears to have been typed MTO the letter as an afterthought”. It was further stated that “even if the plea and proof of the petitioner are accepted to be valid and true, the same would not be of any avail to petitioner. It is evident that the property in question is admitted between the parties to be a private trust A"! 1975 which has b?en created by a Guru in favor of his Cheka. In P LD Keir. 854, His Lordship has clearly laid down that ‘ BAU “«« religious head of place of worship and Piano means a temple property, held dedicated to deity. Further, P LD 1978 Keir. 252 gives added strength to the matter”., Before respondent No. 5, on behalf of the tenants' reliance was placed on a letter dated 23-1-1960 of the Settlement Department Hyderabad whereby C, H. Form filed by one Noor Muhammad, a recorded tenant, for transfer P*° party,in,?question> was rejected on the ground that the property being trust property, it could not be transferred. Respondent No 5 in his impugned order observed that this letter dated 23-1-1960 of the Settlement Department was worth consideration and that in its presence the Settlement authorities were not subsequently empowered to transfer the property in dispute by treating the same as an evacuee property simpliciter. 8. A perusal of the two impugned orders shows that the finding that the said property is evacuee trust property is neither arbitrary nor capricious is based on evidence discussed hereinafter. An examination of the pieces of evidence on which reliance was placed by respondents Nos. and 5 indicates,at 18 lie!"her a case of no evidence nor of misreading or misappreciation of evidence. We see no illegality in rejection of the letter dated 22-6- 1966 of the evacuee Trust Property Committee, Hyderabad by respondent No 5 From the City Survey Record, and the will dated 5-3-1939 of Guru Dharmas in which the property was described as “Piano” the respondents, Nos. and 5 correctly decided that TNE property was religious Trust Property. 9. In any case, the impugned order dated 29- 6-78 of respondent No. shows that the admitted position of the petitioner was that the said property was a private trust property, and m the face of this admission coupled with the fact that this property was described as a “‘Piano” the property has to be evacuee trust property. It may be observed here that the view of this Court is that the words “‘religious trust” in section 4(2) of Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, embrace both private as public religious trust Evacuee Trust Committee v. Muhammad Ismail (1) In section 2(d) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, evacuee trust property” has been defined to mean the evacuee trust properties attached to charitable, religious or educational

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 374?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 374 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1983-02-21): (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, embrace both private as public religious trust Evacuee Trust Committee v. Muhammad Ismail (1) In section 2(d) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, evacuee trust property” has been defined to mean the evacuee trust properties attached to charitable, religious or educational trust or institutions or any other properties which form part of the Trust pool constituted under that Act. Section 7 of that Act provides for constitution of a Trust Pool consisting inter alia of all evacuee trust property which immediately before the commencement of that Act formed part of the Trust Pools constituted under the Acts and any evacuee property declared under section 8 to be evacuee trust property. Even if the property in question is private religious trust property, it will fall within the definition of evacuee trust property. i. State the view that the impugned orders do not suffer from any illegality. This Constitutional Petition is accordingly dismissed but theref7 will be 1S’ Orel GS GH big-co™

Question: What is case 1983 PLD 30 about?
Answer: Case 1983 PLD 30 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1983-04-14. The case involved MST. RAM PIARI ALIAS IQBAL BEGUM (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 23 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44(2)(A)(/). The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD SHARIF KHAN, ACTG. C J.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 PLD 30?
Answer: In case 1983 PLD 30, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 23 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 44(2)(A)(/). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1983-04-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 PLD 30?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 PLD 30 were: PETITIONER IN PERSON. CH. SHAH WALI FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD SHARIF KHAN, ACTG. C J.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 PLD 30?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 PLD 30 were: MST. RAM PIARI ALIAS IQBAL BEGUM (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 PLD 30.
Answer: By this writ petition orders dated 5-2-1962 and 24-12-1978 respectively passed by the learned Custodian and the learned Additional Custodian stand challenged. The order of the Custodian is challenged - only to that extent wherein he had misdirected himself asking the petitioner* decree-holder of the lands in question to obtain a certificate under section 23 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 for restoration of the property in writ decree m her favor by the Deputy Custodian. The Custodian confirmed the decree dated 25-2-1961 passed by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment dated 5-2-1962, The decree of the Deputy Custodial is to the effect that the land in suit was not an evacuee property as its owners were unable to leave this part of the territory for the occupied part of Jammu Kashmir or India because they were killed in Mirror during the war of liberation started by the people of Azad Kashmir in 1947 and the petitioner was the only heir surviving the deceased persons who (petitioner) never left her native land for any place outside Azad Kashmir and as such she was not an evacuee* As soon as petitioner’s brother Ram Troop by name was killed and her brother’s widow Shell Devi committed suicide by jumping into a well to escape the miseries of life, with the territory of Azad Kashmir; the lands left behind by them devolved upon her as a sole-heir under the provisions of Hindu Law* Despite the decree of the Deputy Custodian in favor of the petitioner, her land was allotted to the refugees by the Rehabilitation Authorities who on acquisition of the pieces of lands allotted under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, for construction of Manila Dam, even received the compensation of the lands acquired under Government Order No. dated 23-10-1963- By this order the evacuee lands allotted to the refugees were to be transferred to them by sale by the Custodian in order to award compensation to the allottees. The allottees of the lands acquired were entitled to 2/3rd of the compensation money or Rs. 20,000 whichever less. In other words by this order 2/3rd of the compensation of the lands or. a sum of Rs. 20,030 whichever was less, was received by the allottees of the lands owned by the petitioner and the renaming /3rd of the compensation money was received by the Custodian. The question evolved in this case is very simple. The Character of the property in writ was determined by the competent authorities namely Deputy Custodian and the Custodian both. By their orders referred to above, the lands in question were declared as non- evacuee property. This being the case, by no stretch of lav, the Custodian could have legally asked the petitioner to obtain a certificate from the Government as required by section 23 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. This section relates to the evacuee property and not otherwise The proper direction in respect of the restitution of possession of the property to the petitioner after confirm mg the decree was to be made advising her to go to a civil Court and not to the Government as the property in question was not an evacuee property. This simple point escaped the notice of the learned Custodian as well as that of the learned Additional Custodian while determining the question of payment of compensation of the lands acquired. The allotments of the lands of the petitioner m view of the decree passed by the Deputy Custodian and confirmed by the Custodian thereat, could not legally be made in favor of the refugees by the Rehabilitation Authorities. By this writ she has not proceeded against the refugee-allottees and no clam, to the compensation paid to them was laid by her before me. As a matter of course, she has given-up her claim against them, and it was why that they were not even imp leaded harm as a party. The Custodian is the only party from whom that much amount of compensation of the lands acquired is claimed by the petitioner-owner which was awarded to him by the Collector as his share under Order No. dated 23-10-1963 after deducting the amount of compensation paid to the refugee allottees. The learned Custodian’s direction in question to the petitioner is to the following effect.: “Most. Iqbal Begum has in her plaint prayed for restoration of the suit land to her. The prayer, I am afraid, cannot be acceded to unless she gets a certificate from the Government under section 23 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957.” Obviously, this direction was given without jurisdiction as Custodian had no power to give such a direction under section 23 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 19S7 because such a direction is envisaged therein in respect of evacuee property. The character of the property involved'n the instant case is not that of evacuee property Le. it is non-evacuee property And this being so, the aforesaid direction composed, is of no legal effect so also the impugned judgment of the learned Additional Custodian who was misguided by the impugned direction of the Custodian which stands annulled and deleted as such. In the light of what has been stated above, this writ petition is accepted and the impugned part of the judgment dated 5-2-1962 of the learned Custodian TS declared to be without lawful authority and of no legal effect so also the impugned judgment of the learned Additional Custodian dated 24-12-1978 and consequently, the petitioner is held entitled to the compensation of the lands acquired for which she has a decree dated 25-2-1961 of the Deputy Custodian and confirmed by the Custodian, to the tune of what has been left with the Custodian, after having made the payment of the amounts of compensation money to the refugee-allottees of the portions of lands allotted. The amount of compensation awarded to the petitioner by this order shall be paid to her either by the Collector, Land Acquisition concerned or the Custodian, as the case may be. D

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 30?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 30 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1983-04-14): By this writ petition orders dated 5-2-1962 and 24-12-1978 respectively passed by the learned Custodian and the learned Additional Custodian stand challenged. The order of the Custodian is challenged - only to that extent wherein he had misdirected himself asking the petitioner* decree-holder of the lands in question to obtain a certificate under section 23 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 for restoration of the property in writ decree m her favor by the Deputy Custodian. The Custodian confirmed the decree dated 25-2-1961 passed by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment dated 5-2-1962, The decree of the Deputy Custodial is to the effect that the land in suit was not an evacuee property as its owners were unable to leave this part of the territory for the occupied part of Jammu Kashmir or India because they were killed in Mirror during the war of liberation started by the people of Azad Kashmir in 1947 and the petitioner was the only heir surviving the deceased persons who (petitioner) never left her native land for any place outside Azad Kashmir and as such she was not an evacuee* As soon as petitioner’s brother Ram Troop by name was killed and her brother’s widow Shell Devi committed suicide by jumping into a well to escape the miseries of life, with the territory of Azad Kashmir; the lands left behind by them devolved upon her as a sole-heir under the provisions of Hindu Law* Despite the decree of the Deputy Custodian in favor of the petitioner, her land was allotted to the refugees by the Rehabilitation Authorities who on acquisition of the pieces of lands allotted under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, for construction of Manila Dam, even received the compensation of the lands acquired under Government Order No. dated 23-10-1963- By this order the evacuee lands allotted to the refugees were to be transferred to them by sale by the Custodian in order to award compensation to the allottees. The allottees of the lands acquired were entitled to 2/3rd of the compensation money or Rs. 20,000 whichever less. In other words by this order 2/3rd of the compensation of the lands or. a sum of Rs. 20,030 whichever was less, was received by the allottees of the lands owned by the petitioner and the renaming /3rd of the compensation money was received by the Custodian. The question evolved in this case is very simple. The Character of the property in writ was determined by the competent authorities namely Deputy Custodian and the Custodian both. By their orders referred to above, the lands in question were declared as non- evacuee property. This being the case, by no stretch of lav, the Custodian could have legally asked the petitioner to obtain a certificate from the Government as required by section 23 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. This section relates to the evacuee property and not otherwise The proper direction in respect of the restitution of possession of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 30?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 30 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1983-04-14): lav, the Custodian could have legally asked the petitioner to obtain a certificate from the Government as required by section 23 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act. This section relates to the evacuee property and not otherwise The proper direction in respect of the restitution of possession of the property to the petitioner after confirm mg the decree was to be made advising her to go to a civil Court and not to the Government as the property in question was not an evacuee property. This simple point escaped the notice of the learned Custodian as well as that of the learned Additional Custodian while determining the question of payment of compensation of the lands acquired. The allotments of the lands of the petitioner m view of the decree passed by the Deputy Custodian and confirmed by the Custodian thereat, could not legally be made in favor of the refugees by the Rehabilitation Authorities. By this writ she has not proceeded against the refugee-allottees and no clam, to the compensation paid to them was laid by her before me. As a matter of course, she has given-up her claim against them, and it was why that they were not even imp leaded harm as a party. The Custodian is the only party from whom that much amount of compensation of the lands acquired is claimed by the petitioner-owner which was awarded to him by the Collector as his share under Order No. dated 23-10-1963 after deducting the amount of compensation paid to the refugee allottees. The learned Custodian’s direction in question to the petitioner is to the following effect.: “Most. Iqbal Begum has in her plaint prayed for restoration of the suit land to her. The prayer, I am afraid, cannot be acceded to unless she gets a certificate from the Government under section 23 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957.” Obviously, this direction was given without jurisdiction as Custodian had no power to give such a direction under section 23 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 19S7 because such a direction is envisaged therein in respect of evacuee property. The character of the property involved'n the instant case is not that of evacuee property Le. it is non-evacuee property And this being so, the aforesaid direction composed, is of no legal effect so also the impugned judgment of the learned Additional Custodian who was misguided by the impugned direction of the Custodian which stands annulled and deleted as such. In the light of what has been stated above, this writ petition is accepted and the impugned part of the judgment dated 5-2-1962 of the learned Custodian TS declared to be without lawful authority and of no legal effect so also the impugned judgment of the learned Additional Custodian dated 24-12-1978 and consequently, the petitioner is held entitled to the compensation of the lands acquired for which she has a decree dated 25-2-1961 of the Deputy Custodian and confirmed by the Custodian, to the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 30?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 30 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1983-04-14): and of no legal effect so also the impugned judgment of the learned Additional Custodian dated 24-12-1978 and consequently, the petitioner is held entitled to the compensation of the lands acquired for which she has a decree dated 25-2-1961 of the Deputy Custodian and confirmed by the Custodian, to the tune of what has been left with the Custodian, after having made the payment of the amounts of compensation money to the refugee-allottees of the portions of lands allotted. The amount of compensation awarded to the petitioner by this order shall be paid to her either by the Collector, Land Acquisition concerned or the Custodian, as the case may be. D

Question: What is case 1983 PLD 502 about?
Answer: Case 1983 PLD 502 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1983-02-08. The case involved MIR SALAH UD DIN PETITIONER VERSUS ADMINISTRATOR (RESIDUAL PROPERTY) AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include SCHEME FOR THE MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL OF AVAILABLE URBAN PROPERTIES - PARAGRAPH PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (1 OF 1981) - ARTICLE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 10 DISPLACED PERSONS (COM PENSATJOFRAND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 2, SECOND PROVISO. The case was heard by FAZAL-E-M AHM OOD.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: In case 1983 PLD 502, the court applied the following statutes: SCHEME FOR THE MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL OF AVAILABLE URBAN PROPERTIES - PARAGRAPH PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (1 OF 1981) - ARTICLE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 10 DISPLACED PERSONS (COM PENSATJOFRAND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 2, SECOND PROVISO. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1983-02-08.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1983 PLD 502 were: CH. HAMID-UD-DIN FOR PETITIONER.. The judges presiding were: FAZAL-E-M AHM OOD.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: The parties in case 1983 PLD 502 were: MIR SALAH UD DIN PETITIONER VERSUS ADMINISTRATOR (RESIDUAL PROPERTY) AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1983 PLD 502.
Answer: Judgment This writ petition has arisen out of litigation which has a conquered history in respect of a composite building’ situated on Branded Road, Lahore. 2. The petitioner in this case Mir Aladdin is the real brother of Aladdin against whom an ejectment petition by the respondent No, 3 succeeded before a learned Rent Controller on 12-11-1975 and the same was upheld up to the High Court in S. A. O. No. 372 of 1978 decided on 7-4-1979 when 15 days’ time was allowed to the said brother of the petitioner for vacating the premises. 3. The petitioner before the expiry of these 15 days entered the scene on 19-4-1979 by film a civil suit for a declaration that he should not be dispossessed except in due course of law, in the Court of learned Senior Civil Judge, Lahore and together with it, he filed an application under Order XXXIX, rules and 2 read with section 151, C. P. C, for maintenance of status quo and restrain the respondent from ejecting him from the suit property. 4. The suit came up for hearing before the learned Senior Civil Judge on 22-4-1979 who granted an interim my unction on the same day with notice to the respondent for 3-5-1979. On written statement being filed, the facts were brought to the notice of the learned Senior Civil Judge Le. eviction had been maintained up to the High Court level vide judgment dated 7-4-1979. The status quo order was therefore recalled and the plant was rejected on the same day under Order VII, rule 11, C. P. C. 5. The petitioner then filed an appeal before the learned Additional District Judge on 16-7- 1979 which was accepted on 3-11- 1979. The view of the learned Additional District Judge was that Order VII, rule 11, C. P. C. was not applicable. The learned Additional District Judge therefore remanded the case. 6. The matter was then challenged before the High Court through Civil Revision No. 1443 of 1979 which was accepted by Mr. Justice Aftab Hussain on 3-5-1980 on the view that objection to a decree by the third party can be taken only under Order XXI and rules thereunder of the C.P.C. and not otherwise. The petitioner has now gone up to the learned Supreme Court by way of Civil Petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 1115 of 1980 which is stated to be pending grant of leave. The learned counsel at the hearing had produced the paper book on my asking and these facts have been gathered from a perusal thereof. 7. The petitioner in the aforementioned set of circumstances and background opened up new front on the Settlement side by moving an application on 5-8-1979 before the Administrator (Residual Property) for transfer of a portion on the first floor by describing it a godown of the property in question on the plea that the same had not been transferred to the predecessor in interest of the respondents and was available for transfer to him on the ground that be been in occupation thereof 22 may be rejected and the request for the condonation of delay and for the transfer of the property may be turned down. 9. The Administrator Residual Property accordingly informed the petitioner Mir Aladdin that his application dated 5-6-1979 for condonation of delay had been rejected for the reason that the property in question was not available for transfer as it already stood disposed of This was vide order dated 16-8-1979. 10. The petitioner then filed a review petition dated 10-9-1979 before the Administrator Residual Property. Again a report was made by the Deputy Administrator dated 24-10- 1979 and this time the Administrator Residual Property vide his memo, dated 25- 11-1979 purported to condone the delay. 11. On the happening of the aforesaid event, respondent No, 3 Nazi Career-ud-Din filed Writ Petition No. 56/R of 1980 on the grievance that the order passed by the Administrator Residual Property on 25-11-1979 in reversal of his previous order dated 16- 8-1979 was behind the back of Nazi Career-ud-Din who was likely to be affected thereby. Both the learned counsel appearing for parties in this case gave a consent that the second order of the Administrator dated 25-11-1979 be quashed, and the matter be remitted to him for fresh decision after notice to both parties and affording them an opportunity of being heard. This is vide order of the Lahore High Court dated 26-2-1981. 12. The matter was then taken up in remand by the then Administrator Residual Property and disposed of vide his order dated 8- 12-1981. This learned officer took note of the fact that the property in dispute had been transferred by the order of the D. S. C, dated 28-3- 1960 in its entirety to one Abdul Hamid, There was an appeal against this order which was accepted by Additional Settlement Commissioner, Mr. Muhammad Akram Khan on 20-6- 1960 and the property was transferred to Amin-up-Din father of Career-ud-Dm. There was a further revision before Syed Jazz Hussain Shah, Settlement Commissioner, which was dismissed on 22-5-1960. It was also noted by him that some rooms on the first floor of this property were in possession of Aladdin brother of Aladdin petitioner. He also took note of the eviction proceedings against Aladdin which culm mated in the order of High Court dated 7-4-1979 passed in S. A. O. No. 372 of 1978 and the institution of civil suit leading to civil petition for special leave to appeal before the Supreme Court of Pakistan and the proceedings under Scheme No. at the stance of the present petitioner Mir Aladdin. After elaborately noting the contentions raised from both the sides, the learned Administrator Residual Property, Lahore by his impugned order dated 8-12- 1981 recorded the following findings : - that the silence of Aladdin during the eviction application filed against Aladdin showed that the stand of the two brothers was alike. Aladdin petitioner had filed application under Settlement Scheme No. (Residual Property Scheme) and prior to that he had never given an application under any other Scheme, From this fact, he inferred that the idea cropped up in his mind to have the godown treated separate from the rest of the property after 7-4-1979 when the S. A. O. of his brother Aladdin was dismissed by the High Court against his eviction on 7-4-1979. (Hi) It was further held that Sister Road (Branded Road) in the year 1947 could not be declared to be commercial area and even if that be assumed that it was a commercial area even them either Aladdin or Aladdin should have given an application before the Settlement and Rehabilitation Authorities, but they never did so. The reason for this was that when the property was transferred in favor of the father of Career-ud-Din, so all the occupants including these two brothers knew that the property stood so transferred. (iv) The learned Administrator Residual Property found himself unable to agree with the argument of Aladdin petitioner that since Career-ud-Din knew that he had not been transferred the godown, therefore, he did not pay the entire transfer price. The reasoning of the Administrator Residual Property was that firstly Career-ud-Dmn had obtained the transfer order in the year 1974. Secondly, the balance of transfer price amounting to Rs. 3,200 was paid by him m pursuance to the Department’s notice of the year 1978. Thirdly, he was of the view that the petitioner could not capitalize on the weaknesses of-the opposite side because according to him the failure of Aladdin to apply for the transfer of the alleged godown up to 24-4- 1979 spoke volumes. (v) He repelled the contention of the counsel for Aladdin to the effect that the opposite side namely, respondent No. had admitted the possession of Aladdin. This learned officer was of the view that the stand of the two brothers was alike and their desire to perpetuate their possession of the property could not adversely affect the opposite side. (vi) He further repelled the contention of the petitioner Aladdin that mere condonation of delay and permission to file the form did not adversely affect the interest of Career-uu- Din respondent No. because the case was now going to be decided by the Deputy Administrator. The reasoning given by him was that this was similar to the story of ‘the Arab and the camel’. The camel had sought permission of the Arab to put his neck under the tent toward off cold but ultimately occupied the whole of the tent. (v«) After spot inspection, he came to the conclusion that the place in dispute was located in the center of the house and was clearly and visibly part and parcel of the said house. For all these reasons, the application of Aladdin petitioner was dismissed, and the property was held to have already been transferred to Career-ud-Dmn. 13. The petitioner has thus approached the High Court by way of the present writ petition. 14. When this petition came up for line hearing, in order to appreciate the full facts of the case and the submission of the learned counsel, I had summoned the record and also called for parawise comments. 15. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length on various dates. The departmental stand is to the effect that the property already stood transferred to the father of respondent No. and'thus was not available for disposal under the Residual Property Scheme. I propose to deal with the contentions of the petitioner raised at the hearing. 16. The foremost attack of the petitioner is directed against the entitlement of respondent No. Nazi Career-ud-Din on the reasoning that,on the demise of Nazi Amin-up-Din, the original transferee, respondent No. has got himself declared as successor-MN-interest through the exclusion of other heirs t,hur,°tUtldrllemS have. been raised. in order to lend strength to the main-amabihty of the writ petition, otherwise I fail to understand how is it the concern OT the petitioner. To my mind, he does not have the locus standi to agitate pro bono public the question of inheritance of Nazi Amin-up-Din It ! LmbLI0.DCeTi0 the* legal HEIFs,and the can out the matters amongst themselves. This is not a ground which can be captained by the petitioner in order to succeed in the present proceedings. 17. The next contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that no limiting date could be prescribed for Submission of applications under para. of Settlement Scheme No. (Residual Property Scheme). Reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court m re Ch AFPAH Hussein The Chief Settlement Commissioner, Pakistan, Lahore and 2 others I have considered the submission, but I find no merit inst. The enunciatel1?W made the learned Supreme Court was based on the wording of the relevant provision of Settlement Scheme No. framed under the Repealed Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act 1958 I,a™can?BV!e subscribe to the reasoning of the learned counsel that for all times it has been laid down that under no circumstances a limiting date can be legitimately prescribed by the Authorities acting under any statute The present proceedings arise out of Act XIV of 1975. The case in hand is more aptly governed by the principle laid down in this very judgment at page 82 OT the report as under 5 “The C H form submitted by the second and third appellants was apparently intended as a second string to their bow if the first appellant s second C. H. form was not considered valid. It was admitted only conditionally and was rejected, it seems high'TLV when it was found that the house had already been transferred. A Moreover, this argument cannot succeed for the reason that the position elucidated by the learned Supreme Court and followed by the High Court is that where TT is found that the property already stands transferred the application being belated can be rightly rejected on that ground. The case in hand is covered by the latter category and not by the former. Additionally, the Residual Property Scheme, as is quite evident from its plain provisions, is only applicable to such properties as did not already stand transferred. In the present case, the finding is to the effect that the property in dispute stood transferred in the year 1960 in favor of the predecessor Inter of respondent No. and even a final transfer order issued in 1974. Therefore, refusal to condone the delay or to enter tam the application of the petitioner appears to me to be unexceptionable. 18. The next argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is to! the effect that the Administrator had to condone or not to condone the delay but he beys wrongly assumed jurisdiction by entering upon the merits of the case. The argument seems to be not well based. It was incumbent upon D the Administrator Residual Property, while considering the request of the petitioner to condone the delay and to entertain his application under the Residual Property Scheme, to address himself to whether the property was an available property or not and if it was available whether the delay had to be condoned. I think the Administrator Residual Property has done well in firstly informing himself about the whole background of the case and then applying bis conscious mind for the purpose of the decision of whether the application was to be entertained or not on the ground that the property already stood disposed of and whether in such circumstances the delay could be condoned. This jurisdiction was inherent in the Administrator Residual Property, and it cannot reasonably be said that he assumed a jurisdiction which he did not possess. Moreover, the petitioner himself gave the application for condonation of delay and entertainment of his application for transfer and having done so, he cannot now turn around and be heard against his own conduct. The learned Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Ghulam Mahmoud- Din (1) has already held that a party invoking the jurisdiction of a tribunal by his conduct TS precluded from subsequently challenging the order passed on his own initiative. 19. The further ground urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that respondent No. had himself earlier ordered on 20- 11-1979 that it was not a fit case for the condonation of delay as the property stood transferred, and therefore it had the jurisdiction to take a contrary view and thus his review application was competently filed. I must observe in this respect that even if the order was admmmmnstrative in nature, the ratio of the case of Pakistan v. Muhammad Himayatullah Farrukh (2) would fully stand attracted to the facts of the present case. In the precedent case, the Supreme Court had laid down the principle of locus penitential even by virtue of the General Clauses Act. It was thus ruled that where an order had been passed and conveyed, it took Legal effect and on the basis of it nights accrued in favor of the party, then the functionary did not possess the locus penitential to vary or alter that order. The order dated 20-11-1979 was passed and conveyed and thus TT took legal effect and created a right in favor of respondent No. mas much as his entitlement could not be subjected to attack by virtue of the Residual Property Scheme. C Furthermore, there is no provision under Act XIV of 1975 or the Scheme framed thereunder providing for review of a previous order. The framers of{ the Scheme in their wisdom had only made a provision for a revision off the order of the Deputy Administrator Residual Property. The power of review therefore had to be specifically conferred and cannot be conceded as being inherent in Administrator Residual Property. Reference may advantageously be made to the ratio of the decision of the learned Supreme Court in re : Quaffer All v. Muhammad Shaft The argument therefore, instead of going in favor of the petitioner, is against him. 20. It was next contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that this Court ought to take notice of the fact that in the course of previous Writ Petition No. 56/R of 1980, the report submitted by the Department was in favor of the petitioner mas much as it had been stated their that the property was an available property. I may, however, observe that the stand taken by the Department in the present case is to the contrary as it has been categorically stated that the property stood transferred way back in 1960 and is not an available property. I can do no better than observe that the reports of the Settlement Department in the previous writ petition and the present petition only go to show the mind and the attitude of the functionaries holding certain posts. The opinions expressed in the report are in no (1) PLD 1964 SC 829 (2) PLD 1969 S C 407 manner binding and would not be advancing the case of the petitioner because the proceedings were being contested by private respondent No. 3. The impugned order of the Administrator Residua! Property is to be adjudged on its own merits. At any rate, whatever be the evidentiary value of the two reports, the letter cancels the former. The argument therefore fails. 21. The learned counsel for the petitioner further sought to argue that by virtue of second proviso to section 2 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act MN respect of composite property, unless a declaration was made, the commercial part of the property could not be treated as a part of the house, The learned counsel relied on the ratio of Abdul Maid’s case The argument of the learned counsel cannot be sustained for many reasons. Firstly, the ratio of Abdul Maid’s case would not apply to the facts of this case because the finding is that the room in question which is described by the petitioner to be a godown is located in the middle of the house and is a part of the house. Secondly, the petitioner is in no position to make a collateral attack on the orders of the Additional Settlement Commissioner or the Settlement Commissioner passed way back in the year 1960 which have attained finality MN law. The petitioner never assailed those orders as some of the other occupants did but failed. There can be no collateral attack on those orders in these proceedings more than two decades thereafter. The petitioner not having agitated against the orders of transfer reconciled to his fate and thus acquiesced in those orders. On no conceivable principle therefore, I can entertain this argument or sustain it. The argument is accordingly repelled. 22. Lastly, the learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the impugned order of the Administrator Residual Property stood vitiated for the reason which weighed with him that the writ petitioner had not applied under Scheme No. and therefore he could not claim transfer under Scheme No. 9. According to the learned counsel this was against the spirit of the Scheme. The argument in my view does not seem to proceed on correct appreciation of the reasons and the findings of the learned Administrator Residual Property. A perusal of his order would show that while taking stock of the entire background of the case and the various stages through which the litigation has passed, he observed that the petitioner for the first time had thought of having the godown in his possession declared as a separate unit after 7- 4-1979 when the S. A. O. against the eviction of his brother Aladdin had been dismissed by the Lahore High Court. The chain and sequence of events, as already noticed in the earlier part of my judgment, would itself show that the petitioner entered the arena after his brother Aladdin had lost the legal battle up to the High Court. The brother of the petitioner had been allowed 15 days’time for vacating the premises by the High Court on 7-4-1979. Thereafter, the petitioner died the suit for declaration and injunction on 19-4-1979. It was still later that he thought of approaching the Authorities under the Residual Property Scheme in his effort to - strike at the very entitlement of the landlord by filing the aforesaid civil suit in respect of which a civil petition for special leave to appeal is pending before the learned Supreme Court. This was a relevant circumstance for the Administrator Residual Property to consider for deciding whether the for was to be entertained or the delay was to be condoned or not and whether the proceedings before him were bona fide. The finding of respondent No. is not to the effect that the provisions of Residual Property Scheme are riot available to persons who did not apply under Settlement Scheme No. 1. am therefore unable to read into the impugned order something which is conspicuous by its absence. 23. In the last analysis, I am firmly of the view that in the patent background of this case and facts established, the inference is irresistible that the petitioner is making his last attempt to catch a straw like a drowning man MN his effort to revive water-logged disputes and matters which have become transactions past and closed. The provisions of Settlement Scheme No. are not meant to be abused so as to affect the finality of the orders under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 which stands repealed with effect from 1-7-1974. The very fact that on interpretation of various orders and documents it has been held by the Administrator Residual Property that the property in dispute of which the godown forms part already stands finally transferred in favor of respondent No. concludes the matter. It was not open for the Deputy Administrator or the Administrator to go behind the final orders passed under the law as it stood at the relevant time and therefore the refusal of the request of the b petitioner to condone the delay and to entertain his application for transfer under Scheme No. on the ground that the property already stood transferred is not open to any valid exception. It is not a case where a property had been transferred to a transferee under the provisions of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 by description of a room or two. which clearly showed that there was still available some part of the property for disposal under the Residual Property Scheme. The whole property having been rightly or wrongly transferred, the matter cannot be reopened after decades because there was a litigation between the petitioner’s brother and the respondent and the petitioner are also interested in putting his weight in favor of his brother and to safeguard his own interest at the cost of the transferee, 24. No other point was urged before me. 25, I do not think this is a fit case where I should come to the aid of the petitioner in exercise of my discretionary jurisdiction. The writ petitioning has no merit and the same is accordingly dismissed in liming.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): Judgment This writ petition has arisen out of litigation which has a conquered history in respect of a composite building’ situated on Branded Road, Lahore. 2. The petitioner in this case Mir Aladdin is the real brother of Aladdin against whom an ejectment petition by the respondent No, 3 succeeded before a learned Rent Controller on 12-11-1975 and the same was upheld up to the High Court in S. A. O. No. 372 of 1978 decided on 7-4-1979 when 15 days’ time was allowed to the said brother of the petitioner for vacating the premises. 3. The petitioner before the expiry of these 15 days entered the scene on 19-4-1979 by film a civil suit for a declaration that he should not be dispossessed except in due course of law, in the Court of learned Senior Civil Judge, Lahore and together with it, he filed an application under Order XXXIX, rules and 2 read with section 151, C. P. C, for maintenance of status quo and restrain the respondent from ejecting him from the suit property. 4. The suit came up for hearing before the learned Senior Civil Judge on 22-4-1979 who granted an interim my unction on the same day with notice to the respondent for 3-5-1979. On written statement being filed, the facts were brought to the notice of the learned Senior Civil Judge Le. eviction had been maintained up to the High Court level vide judgment dated 7-4-1979. The status quo order was therefore recalled and the plant was rejected on the same day under Order VII, rule 11, C. P. C. 5. The petitioner then filed an appeal before the learned Additional District Judge on 16-7- 1979 which was accepted on 3-11- 1979. The view of the learned Additional District Judge was that Order VII, rule 11, C. P. C. was not applicable. The learned Additional District Judge therefore remanded the case. 6. The matter was then challenged before the High Court through Civil Revision No. 1443 of 1979 which was accepted by Mr. Justice Aftab Hussain on 3-5-1980 on the view that objection to a decree by the third party can be taken only under Order XXI and rules thereunder of the C.P.C. and not otherwise. The petitioner has now gone up to the learned Supreme Court by way of Civil Petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 1115 of 1980 which is stated to be pending grant of leave. The learned counsel at the hearing had produced the paper book on my asking and these facts have been gathered from a perusal thereof. 7. The petitioner in the aforementioned set of circumstances and background opened up new front on the Settlement side by moving an application on 5-8-1979 before the Administrator (Residual Property) for transfer of a portion on the first floor by describing it a godown of the property in question on the plea that the same had not been transferred to the predecessor in interest of the respondents and was available for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): an application on 5-8-1979 before the Administrator (Residual Property) for transfer of a portion on the first floor by describing it a godown of the property in question on the plea that the same had not been transferred to the predecessor in interest of the respondents and was available for transfer to him on the ground that be been in occupation thereof 22 may be rejected and the request for the condonation of delay and for the transfer of the property may be turned down. 9. The Administrator Residual Property accordingly informed the petitioner Mir Aladdin that his application dated 5-6-1979 for condonation of delay had been rejected for the reason that the property in question was not available for transfer as it already stood disposed of This was vide order dated 16-8-1979. 10. The petitioner then filed a review petition dated 10-9-1979 before the Administrator Residual Property. Again a report was made by the Deputy Administrator dated 24-10- 1979 and this time the Administrator Residual Property vide his memo, dated 25- 11-1979 purported to condone the delay. 11. On the happening of the aforesaid event, respondent No, 3 Nazi Career-ud-Din filed Writ Petition No. 56/R of 1980 on the grievance that the order passed by the Administrator Residual Property on 25-11-1979 in reversal of his previous order dated 16- 8-1979 was behind the back of Nazi Career-ud-Din who was likely to be affected thereby. Both the learned counsel appearing for parties in this case gave a consent that the second order of the Administrator dated 25-11-1979 be quashed, and the matter be remitted to him for fresh decision after notice to both parties and affording them an opportunity of being heard. This is vide order of the Lahore High Court dated 26-2-1981. 12. The matter was then taken up in remand by the then Administrator Residual Property and disposed of vide his order dated 8- 12-1981. This learned officer took note of the fact that the property in dispute had been transferred by the order of the D. S. C, dated 28-3- 1960 in its entirety to one Abdul Hamid, There was an appeal against this order which was accepted by Additional Settlement Commissioner, Mr. Muhammad Akram Khan on 20-6- 1960 and the property was transferred to Amin-up-Din father of Career-ud-Dm. There was a further revision before Syed Jazz Hussain Shah, Settlement Commissioner, which was dismissed on 22-5-1960. It was also noted by him that some rooms on the first floor of this property were in possession of Aladdin brother of Aladdin petitioner. He also took note of the eviction proceedings against Aladdin which culm mated in the order of High Court dated 7-4-1979 passed in S. A. O. No. 372 of 1978 and the institution of civil suit leading to civil petition for special leave to appeal before the Supreme Court of Pakistan and the proceedings under Scheme No. at the stance of the present petitioner Mir Aladdin. After elaborately noting the contentions raised from both the sides,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): No. 372 of 1978 and the institution of civil suit leading to civil petition for special leave to appeal before the Supreme Court of Pakistan and the proceedings under Scheme No. at the stance of the present petitioner Mir Aladdin. After elaborately noting the contentions raised from both the sides, the learned Administrator Residual Property, Lahore by his impugned order dated 8-12- 1981 recorded the following findings : - that the silence of Aladdin during the eviction application filed against Aladdin showed that the stand of the two brothers was alike. Aladdin petitioner had filed application under Settlement Scheme No. (Residual Property Scheme) and prior to that he had never given an application under any other Scheme, From this fact, he inferred that the idea cropped up in his mind to have the godown treated separate from the rest of the property after 7-4-1979 when the S. A. O. of his brother Aladdin was dismissed by the High Court against his eviction on 7-4-1979. (Hi) It was further held that Sister Road (Branded Road) in the year 1947 could not be declared to be commercial area and even if that be assumed that it was a commercial area even them either Aladdin or Aladdin should have given an application before the Settlement and Rehabilitation Authorities, but they never did so. The reason for this was that when the property was transferred in favor of the father of Career-ud-Din, so all the occupants including these two brothers knew that the property stood so transferred. (iv) The learned Administrator Residual Property found himself unable to agree with the argument of Aladdin petitioner that since Career-ud-Din knew that he had not been transferred the godown, therefore, he did not pay the entire transfer price. The reasoning of the Administrator Residual Property was that firstly Career-ud-Dmn had obtained the transfer order in the year 1974. Secondly, the balance of transfer price amounting to Rs. 3,200 was paid by him m pursuance to the Department’s notice of the year 1978. Thirdly, he was of the view that the petitioner could not capitalize on the weaknesses of-the opposite side because according to him the failure of Aladdin to apply for the transfer of the alleged godown up to 24-4- 1979 spoke volumes. (v) He repelled the contention of the counsel for Aladdin to the effect that the opposite side namely, respondent No. had admitted the possession of Aladdin. This learned officer was of the view that the stand of the two brothers was alike and their desire to perpetuate their possession of the property could not adversely affect the opposite side. (vi) He further repelled the contention of the petitioner Aladdin that mere condonation of delay and permission to file the form did not adversely affect the interest of Career-uu- Din respondent No. because the case was now going to be decided by the Deputy Administrator. The reasoning given by him was that this was similar to the story of ‘the Arab and the camel’. The

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): and permission to file the form did not adversely affect the interest of Career-uu- Din respondent No. because the case was now going to be decided by the Deputy Administrator. The reasoning given by him was that this was similar to the story of ‘the Arab and the camel’. The camel had sought permission of the Arab to put his neck under the tent toward off cold but ultimately occupied the whole of the tent. (v«) After spot inspection, he came to the conclusion that the place in dispute was located in the center of the house and was clearly and visibly part and parcel of the said house. For all these reasons, the application of Aladdin petitioner was dismissed, and the property was held to have already been transferred to Career-ud-Dmn. 13. The petitioner has thus approached the High Court by way of the present writ petition. 14. When this petition came up for line hearing, in order to appreciate the full facts of the case and the submission of the learned counsel, I had summoned the record and also called for parawise comments. 15. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length on various dates. The departmental stand is to the effect that the property already stood transferred to the father of respondent No. and'thus was not available for disposal under the Residual Property Scheme. I propose to deal with the contentions of the petitioner raised at the hearing. 16. The foremost attack of the petitioner is directed against the entitlement of respondent No. Nazi Career-ud-Din on the reasoning that,on the demise of Nazi Amin-up-Din, the original transferee, respondent No. has got himself declared as successor-MN-interest through the exclusion of other heirs t,hur,°tUtldrllemS have. been raised. in order to lend strength to the main-amabihty of the writ petition, otherwise I fail to understand how is it the concern OT the petitioner. To my mind, he does not have the locus standi to agitate pro bono public the question of inheritance of Nazi Amin-up-Din It ! LmbLI0.DCeTi0 the* legal HEIFs,and the can out the matters amongst themselves. This is not a ground which can be captained by the petitioner in order to succeed in the present proceedings. 17. The next contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that no limiting date could be prescribed for Submission of applications under para. of Settlement Scheme No. (Residual Property Scheme). Reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court m re Ch AFPAH Hussein The Chief Settlement Commissioner, Pakistan, Lahore and 2 others I have considered the submission, but I find no merit inst. The enunciatel1?W made the learned Supreme Court was based on the wording of the relevant provision of Settlement Scheme No. framed under the Repealed Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act 1958 I,a™can?BV!e subscribe to the reasoning of the learned counsel that for all times it has been laid down that under no circumstances a limiting date can be legitimately prescribed by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): wording of the relevant provision of Settlement Scheme No. framed under the Repealed Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act 1958 I,a™can?BV!e subscribe to the reasoning of the learned counsel that for all times it has been laid down that under no circumstances a limiting date can be legitimately prescribed by the Authorities acting under any statute The present proceedings arise out of Act XIV of 1975. The case in hand is more aptly governed by the principle laid down in this very judgment at page 82 OT the report as under 5 “The C H form submitted by the second and third appellants was apparently intended as a second string to their bow if the first appellant s second C. H. form was not considered valid. It was admitted only conditionally and was rejected, it seems high'TLV when it was found that the house had already been transferred. A Moreover, this argument cannot succeed for the reason that the position elucidated by the learned Supreme Court and followed by the High Court is that where TT is found that the property already stands transferred the application being belated can be rightly rejected on that ground. The case in hand is covered by the latter category and not by the former. Additionally, the Residual Property Scheme, as is quite evident from its plain provisions, is only applicable to such properties as did not already stand transferred. In the present case, the finding is to the effect that the property in dispute stood transferred in the year 1960 in favor of the predecessor Inter of respondent No. and even a final transfer order issued in 1974. Therefore, refusal to condone the delay or to enter tam the application of the petitioner appears to me to be unexceptionable. 18. The next argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is to! the effect that the Administrator had to condone or not to condone the delay but he beys wrongly assumed jurisdiction by entering upon the merits of the case. The argument seems to be not well based. It was incumbent upon D the Administrator Residual Property, while considering the request of the petitioner to condone the delay and to entertain his application under the Residual Property Scheme, to address himself to whether the property was an available property or not and if it was available whether the delay had to be condoned. I think the Administrator Residual Property has done well in firstly informing himself about the whole background of the case and then applying bis conscious mind for the purpose of the decision of whether the application was to be entertained or not on the ground that the property already stood disposed of and whether in such circumstances the delay could be condoned. This jurisdiction was inherent in the Administrator Residual Property, and it cannot reasonably be said that he assumed a jurisdiction which he did not possess. Moreover, the petitioner himself gave the application for condonation of delay and entertainment of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): of and whether in such circumstances the delay could be condoned. This jurisdiction was inherent in the Administrator Residual Property, and it cannot reasonably be said that he assumed a jurisdiction which he did not possess. Moreover, the petitioner himself gave the application for condonation of delay and entertainment of his application for transfer and having done so, he cannot now turn around and be heard against his own conduct. The learned Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Ghulam Mahmoud- Din (1) has already held that a party invoking the jurisdiction of a tribunal by his conduct TS precluded from subsequently challenging the order passed on his own initiative. 19. The further ground urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that respondent No. had himself earlier ordered on 20- 11-1979 that it was not a fit case for the condonation of delay as the property stood transferred, and therefore it had the jurisdiction to take a contrary view and thus his review application was competently filed. I must observe in this respect that even if the order was admmmmnstrative in nature, the ratio of the case of Pakistan v. Muhammad Himayatullah Farrukh (2) would fully stand attracted to the facts of the present case. In the precedent case, the Supreme Court had laid down the principle of locus penitential even by virtue of the General Clauses Act. It was thus ruled that where an order had been passed and conveyed, it took Legal effect and on the basis of it nights accrued in favor of the party, then the functionary did not possess the locus penitential to vary or alter that order. The order dated 20-11-1979 was passed and conveyed and thus TT took legal effect and created a right in favor of respondent No. mas much as his entitlement could not be subjected to attack by virtue of the Residual Property Scheme. C Furthermore, there is no provision under Act XIV of 1975 or the Scheme framed thereunder providing for review of a previous order. The framers of{ the Scheme in their wisdom had only made a provision for a revision off the order of the Deputy Administrator Residual Property. The power of review therefore had to be specifically conferred and cannot be conceded as being inherent in Administrator Residual Property. Reference may advantageously be made to the ratio of the decision of the learned Supreme Court in re : Quaffer All v. Muhammad Shaft The argument therefore, instead of going in favor of the petitioner, is against him. 20. It was next contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that this Court ought to take notice of the fact that in the course of previous Writ Petition No. 56/R of 1980, the report submitted by the Department was in favor of the petitioner mas much as it had been stated their that the property was an available property. I may, however, observe that the stand taken by the Department in the present case

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): of previous Writ Petition No. 56/R of 1980, the report submitted by the Department was in favor of the petitioner mas much as it had been stated their that the property was an available property. I may, however, observe that the stand taken by the Department in the present case is to the contrary as it has been categorically stated that the property stood transferred way back in 1960 and is not an available property. I can do no better than observe that the reports of the Settlement Department in the previous writ petition and the present petition only go to show the mind and the attitude of the functionaries holding certain posts. The opinions expressed in the report are in no (1) PLD 1964 SC 829 (2) PLD 1969 S C 407 manner binding and would not be advancing the case of the petitioner because the proceedings were being contested by private respondent No. 3. The impugned order of the Administrator Residua! Property is to be adjudged on its own merits. At any rate, whatever be the evidentiary value of the two reports, the letter cancels the former. The argument therefore fails. 21. The learned counsel for the petitioner further sought to argue that by virtue of second proviso to section 2 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act MN respect of composite property, unless a declaration was made, the commercial part of the property could not be treated as a part of the house, The learned counsel relied on the ratio of Abdul Maid’s case The argument of the learned counsel cannot be sustained for many reasons. Firstly, the ratio of Abdul Maid’s case would not apply to the facts of this case because the finding is that the room in question which is described by the petitioner to be a godown is located in the middle of the house and is a part of the house. Secondly, the petitioner is in no position to make a collateral attack on the orders of the Additional Settlement Commissioner or the Settlement Commissioner passed way back in the year 1960 which have attained finality MN law. The petitioner never assailed those orders as some of the other occupants did but failed. There can be no collateral attack on those orders in these proceedings more than two decades thereafter. The petitioner not having agitated against the orders of transfer reconciled to his fate and thus acquiesced in those orders. On no conceivable principle therefore, I can entertain this argument or sustain it. The argument is accordingly repelled. 22. Lastly, the learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the impugned order of the Administrator Residual Property stood vitiated for the reason which weighed with him that the writ petitioner had not applied under Scheme No. and therefore he could not claim transfer under Scheme No. 9. According to the learned counsel this was against the spirit of the Scheme. The argument in my view does not seem to proceed on correct

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): which weighed with him that the writ petitioner had not applied under Scheme No. and therefore he could not claim transfer under Scheme No. 9. According to the learned counsel this was against the spirit of the Scheme. The argument in my view does not seem to proceed on correct appreciation of the reasons and the findings of the learned Administrator Residual Property. A perusal of his order would show that while taking stock of the entire background of the case and the various stages through which the litigation has passed, he observed that the petitioner for the first time had thought of having the godown in his possession declared as a separate unit after 7- 4-1979 when the S. A. O. against the eviction of his brother Aladdin had been dismissed by the Lahore High Court. The chain and sequence of events, as already noticed in the earlier part of my judgment, would itself show that the petitioner entered the arena after his brother Aladdin had lost the legal battle up to the High Court. The brother of the petitioner had been allowed 15 days’time for vacating the premises by the High Court on 7-4-1979. Thereafter, the petitioner died the suit for declaration and injunction on 19-4-1979. It was still later that he thought of approaching the Authorities under the Residual Property Scheme in his effort to - strike at the very entitlement of the landlord by filing the aforesaid civil suit in respect of which a civil petition for special leave to appeal is pending before the learned Supreme Court. This was a relevant circumstance for the Administrator Residual Property to consider for deciding whether the for was to be entertained or the delay was to be condoned or not and whether the proceedings before him were bona fide. The finding of respondent No. is not to the effect that the provisions of Residual Property Scheme are riot available to persons who did not apply under Settlement Scheme No. 1. am therefore unable to read into the impugned order something which is conspicuous by its absence. 23. In the last analysis, I am firmly of the view that in the patent background of this case and facts established, the inference is irresistible that the petitioner is making his last attempt to catch a straw like a drowning man MN his effort to revive water-logged disputes and matters which have become transactions past and closed. The provisions of Settlement Scheme No. are not meant to be abused so as to affect the finality of the orders under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 which stands repealed with effect from 1-7-1974. The very fact that on interpretation of various orders and documents it has been held by the Administrator Residual Property that the property in dispute of which the godown forms part already stands finally transferred in favor of respondent No. concludes the matter. It was not open for the Deputy Administrator or the Administrator to go behind

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1983 PLD 502?
Answer: From case 1983 PLD 502 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1983-02-08): various orders and documents it has been held by the Administrator Residual Property that the property in dispute of which the godown forms part already stands finally transferred in favor of respondent No. concludes the matter. It was not open for the Deputy Administrator or the Administrator to go behind the final orders passed under the law as it stood at the relevant time and therefore the refusal of the request of the b petitioner to condone the delay and to entertain his application for transfer under Scheme No. on the ground that the property already stood transferred is not open to any valid exception. It is not a case where a property had been transferred to a transferee under the provisions of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 by description of a room or two. which clearly showed that there was still available some part of the property for disposal under the Residual Property Scheme. The whole property having been rightly or wrongly transferred, the matter cannot be reopened after decades because there was a litigation between the petitioner’s brother and the respondent and the petitioner are also interested in putting his weight in favor of his brother and to safeguard his own interest at the cost of the transferee, 24. No other point was urged before me. 25, I do not think this is a fit case where I should come to the aid of the petitioner in exercise of my discretionary jurisdiction. The writ petitioning has no merit and the same is accordingly dismissed in liming.

Question: What is case 1977 PLD 377 about?
Answer: Case 1977 PLD 377 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1977-01-11. The case involved CUSTODIAN OF ENEMY PROPERTY, ISLAMABAD—APPELLANTVERSUS HOSHANG M. DASTUR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - FIRST SCHED. ARTICLE 113 CONTRACT EVIDENCE ACT (1 OF 1872) - S. 115 CHLL PROCEDURE CODE IV OF 1908) - S. 11 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XXI, R. 32(1), 3G) ENEMY PROPRETY (CUSTODY AND REGISTRATION) ORDERS, 1965 - CL. 5. The case was heard by I. MAHMUD AND Z. A. CHANNA.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: In case 1977 PLD 377, the court applied the following statutes: LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - FIRST SCHED. ARTICLE 113 CONTRACT EVIDENCE ACT (1 OF 1872) - S. 115 CHLL PROCEDURE CODE IV OF 1908) - S. 11 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XXI, R. 32(1), 3G) ENEMY PROPRETY (CUSTODY AND REGISTRATION) ORDERS, 1965 - CL. 5. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1977-01-11.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1977 PLD 377 were: A. FAZEEL FOR APPELLANT. SYED AKHLAQUE HUSSAIN FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. I TO 5.RESPONDENTS NOS. AND (CALLED ABSENT).. The judges presiding were: I. MAHMUD AND Z. A. CHANNA.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: The parties in case 1977 PLD 377 were: CUSTODIAN OF ENEMY PROPERTY, ISLAMABAD—APPELLANTVERSUS HOSHANG M. DASTUR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1977 PLD 377.
Answer: . Mahmud, J.—This Is a Letters Patent Appeal from the Judgment and Decree dated 11-1- 1967 passed by a learned Single Judge (Nadir Nawab S. A. Away, in Suit No. 191 of 1963 on the original side of the High Court, decreeing the suit of the respondents Nos. to 5 for specific performance of a contract for lease and damages. 2. The property in dispute is a vacant plot of land bear mg survey No. 29 Sheet SB-S, measuring 2724 sq. yes, in Radar Bazaar Quarter, Karachi, situated at the corner of Focus Road and Strachey Road, Karachi. It was owned by Dr. Eddie P. Whatcha, the respondent No. who was a resident of India. His properties in Karachi, including the suit property, were being managed by the partners of the firm of Messes Adult Dins haw, which included Julian Houshang Dins haw. They will hereinafter be collectively-referred to as “the Owner’. As Dr. Eddie P. Baruch became an enemy alien on the outbreak of war between India and Pakistan in 19t>5, the suit' property became vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property, and he was imp leaded as defendant No. in the suit. 3. The suit property was held on lease by one Chakras G. Ad want’ since before Partition on which he was running the business of an open-air’ cinema, known as “Mayfair Cinema”. On 16-8-1948, Khan Ghulam Modding Khan and his wife Begum Noor Baht (hereinafter referred to as “the Khans”), purchased the said cinema business from Adana and with the consent of the owner, the Khans were accepted as lessees for a period of 10 years commencing from 16-8-1948 on a monthly rent of Rs. 4. Sometime in May 1956, the Khans were interested in disposing of the “Afar Cinema”. But as their lease was to expire shortly after two years on 16-8-1958, they obtained a promise from Pinochet Dins haw, UNC’.e of the said Julian Houshang Dim haw. to extend their lease for a further period of 25 years to enable the Khans to obtain a better price from buyers of the Cinema. Manectric Master and his son, Houshang Manectric Master, hereinafter referred to as “the Masters") were interested in purchasing the cinema from the Khans with the object of putting up a closed air-conditioned cinema and a hotel thereon. The case of the Deistic, who were plaintiffs in the Suit No. 191 of 1963 out of which the present Appeal arises, was* that Manectric Master, who was an intimate friend of Pinochet Dins haw, uncle of Julian Houshang Dins haw, approached him for the purchase of the suit property on statement basis, but this was not acceptable to Pinochet Dins haw. Instead, an oral agreement was reached to the effect that if the Masters purchased the CMEA business from the Khans, they would be granted a lease of the suit property for a period of 25 years with an option to purchase the same at an agreed price of Rs. 4,76.700. That, relying on the assurance contained in this oral agreement, the Masters. Entered into an agreement with the Khans on 10th May, 1956 to purchase the cinemas business including their leasehold rights in the land for a high price. Their further case was that the terms and conditions of the agreements between the owner, the Khans and the Masters were confirmed and contamed in’ a letter dated 30th August, 1956 (Ex. 8) addressed to the Khans by Julian Houshang Dins haw, which is the alleged contract for lease with the options ‘Educate Dins haw, 30th August, 1956.260 R. A. Lines, Karachi: (Ex. 8) Khan O. M. Khan, ESR. Karachi: Dear Str. Re:—Plot No. 19 Sheet S. B. measuring 2724 sq. yes. Saddam Bazaar, Karachi, called Mayfair Cinema: With reference to the above plot, which you hold on lease up to 16th August 1958, I agree to lease the same to you from 16th August 1958 for a further period of 25 years on the following main terms and conditions as arranged personally— (1) The period of the lease will be 25 years commencing from 6th August 1958. The rent payable by you will be at the rate of 5% on the value of the Plot at Rs. 175 per square yard amounting to Rs. 1985. (One thousand me hundred and eighty-five only), per month. All taxes and assessments now payable or which may be imposed hereafter, including all Municipal taxes and Government taxes, present or future in respect of the plot or buildings that may be constructed thereon will be payable by you. The rent payable will be Rs. 1,985 per month, free of all deductions. You will have permission to erect buildings on the aforesaid plot, in accordance with plans to be previously approved by me in writing’ and to be approved by all Authorities before the commencement of the work. All such buildings to be surrendered and handed over at the termination of the lease period. t(4) In the event of your failure to pay rent at any time for a period of two months, the lease will be label to be terminated by us and all buildings erected on the same plot would be surrendered to the owner. You will have the option to purchase the above-mentioned plot within a period of 15 (fifteen) years from the 16th August 1956 at the rate of Rs. 175 per square yard that is to say at a total price of Rs: 4,76,700. The said option if not exercised within the period of 15 (fifteen) years, will stand automatically cancelled. A regular Lease Deed will be executed by us on other terms and conditions as may be advised by our Legal Advisers, the costs of which will be payable by you. The lease would be in favor of yourself, your successors and assigns. You will not transfer, assign or sublet the lease or premises to anyone without our written permission. Further, six free passes for each show in the Cinema will be given to us. All disputes to be settled by arbitration under the Arbitration Act for the time being in force. Please confirm the above. Yours faithfully. (SD.) J. H. Dins haw.” "The Masters further pleaded that the Khans delivered possession of the “Mayfair Cinema" and the suit property to the Masters on 2-9-1956 with ‘the consent and knowledge of the Owner and 26-3-1957, the Khans executed a deed of conveyance transferring the cinema to them. 5. In October 1957, the Karachi Municipal Corporation made demand of Rs. 39,524- 14-0 on account of arrears of Municipal taxes in - respect of the suit property which had remained unpaid since the year 1945. The Masters also fell in arrears in payment of the rent of the plot despite demands by the Owner. In September 1958, the open-air cinema was demolished under the Orders of the then Martial Law Authorities and the Masters even asked the Owner to forego the rent until they were able to re-erect a new CMEA and get the business going, but it was not acceded to. In the result, the Owner addressed a legal notice dated 28-7-1959 to the Masters calling -upon them to quit and deliver vacant possession of the plot and also pay up the arrears of the rents which then amounted to Rs. 37,282-8-0. As the Masters failed to comply, a final legal notice dated 7-12-1959 was addressed lo them (as also to the Khans) demanding payment of the rent as well as the outstanding Municipal taxes and calling upon the Masters to quit and band over vacant possession of the plot by 30-1-1960, failing which legal proceedings would be taken for their ejectment. As the Masters failed to comply with the said requisitions, the Owner filed a Suit No. 47 of 1960 on the Original side of the High Court on 29-2-1960 against both the Khans and the Masters for recovery of the arrears of rent, mesne profits and for their ejectment. By the Judgment dated 30-9-1961 passed in that suit, the Masters were held to be monthly tenants and the prayer for their ejectment was dismissed. It was also held that in the circumstances of the case, the Masters had justification for withholding payment of rent. The prayer for payment of arrears of rent to the extent of Rs. 14,931 at the old rate of Rs. 538-4-0 per month was however decreed. A Letters Patent Appeal No. 15 of 1962 was filed by the Owner, but it was dismissed. While that Letters Patent Appeal was pending, the Owner filed another Suit No. 122 of 1962 In the High Court for ejectment of the Masters and for the recovery of further arrears of rent and mesne profits, but the suit was withdrawn and a separate Ejectment Application No. 2976 of 1963 was filed before the Rent Controller. A few weeks later, on 22-11-1963, the Masters filed the Suit No. 191 of 1963 against the Owner and the Khans, and others for Specific Performance of the Contract of Lease with the option to purchase dated 30th August, 1956 (Ex. 8), and for damages in the sum of Rs. 6,20,000 and further damages at the rate of Rs. 20,000 per month from the date of the suit till payment. The plant was later amended to include as the principal prayer, a prayer for specific performance of the option to purchase the suit property for the price of Rs. 4,76,000 as per paragraph contamed I'm the letter dated 30-8-1956 (Ex. 8) above quoted. As stated earlier, the Custodian of Enemy Property was imp leaded as defendant No. in the said suit. 6. The suit was resisted by the Owner who filed a written statement in which it was pleaded mainly that there was no concluded or finalized contract of which specific performance could be claimed or granted and, in the alternative, that the Masters were guilty of breaches thereof and therefore could not enforce it. It was further pleaded that the suit was barred, not only BV res judicata having regard to the judgment ‘and decree in Suit No. 47 of 1960, but also by limitation their written statement was adopted by the Custodian of Enemy Property. 7. Several issues were framed m the suit including the issue whether the suit was incompetent and not main tamable. The suit was at first dismissed as not maintainable on the ground that the alleged contract in suit bad become frustrated upon the Owner becoming an enemy alien upon the commencement of the Into-Pakistan war in September, 196S. and that Its enforcement had become illegal. But, on appeal by the Masters, a Letters Patent Bench remanded the suit for hearing on merits. 8. After recording evidence of the parties the trial Court by the impugned judgment dated 11-1-1967, decreed specific performance of the contract for lease with option to purchase dated 30-8-56 (Ex. 8) against the Owner and the Custodian of Enemy Property, and awarded damages in the sum of Rs. 1,55,000 in addition to monthly damages at the rate of Rs. 5,000 per month from the date of the Suit till execution of the lease lead with costs. The suit against the other defendants was dismissed. The present Letters Patent Appeal has been filed by the Custodian of Enemy Property aga.NST the said judgment and decree dated 1-1-1967. 9. Mr. Ali Ahmed Feel, learned counsel for the appellant, has-challenged the judgment and decree of the trial Court on the following grounds — (1) That the suit for specific performance of the alleged contract was barred by time under Article 113 of the First Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908. (2) That there was no binding or concluded contract between the parties which had given rise to a claim for specific performance. (3) That the decision in Suit No. holding that the respondents were monthly tenants and that the alleged contract for lease (Ex. 8) bad not become operative, were res judicata and could not be re-agitated in Suit No. 191 of 1963. (4) That the respondents had committed breach of the alleged contract for lease (Ex. 8) by defaulting in payment of rent and taxes and were therefore disentitled to claim specific performance. (5) That as the decree for specific performance was incapable of execution in view of clause 5 of the Enemy Property (Custodian and Registration) Order, 1965, it should not have been granted by the Court in the exercise of its discretion. (6) That the award of damages was arbitrary. These submissions will now be considered. 10. Dealing with the first submission of Mr. A. A. Feel, regarding limitation, the contention is that the suit for specific performance of the contract for lease was filed beyond three years from the date when the Masters bad notice that performance of the contract had been refused and that it was barred under Article 113 of the First Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908. According to the counsel, both the notice to quit dated 7-12-1959 (Ex. ) as well as the filing of the Suit No. 47 of 1960 for ejectment of the Masters from the plot ‘summons of which were served on the Masters on 26-3-1960), was each, a notice to them that the performance of the contract for lease contained in the letter dated 30-8- 1956 (Ex. 8) had been refused. But, Article 113 of the Limitation Act presupposes the existence of concluded and finalized contract between the plaintiff and the defendant, the performance of which has been refused by the defendant and of which the plaintiff has noticed. Again, before a defendant can successfully invoke the bar of limitation under Article 113, he has to prove affirmatively that his refusal to perform the contract was clear, unequivocal and unconditional. As rightly submitted by Mr. S. Plaque Hussain, learned counsel for the Masters, the position adopted by the Owner throughout this litigation has been that the letter dated 30-8-1956 (Ex. 8) did not constitute a concluded or finalized contract for lease. In fact, it is the second numbered submission abovementioned of Mr. Feel (to be presently discussed) that no binding or finalized contract between the parties was ever concluded, which had given rise to a claim for specific performance, inter alia, on the ground that some terms and conditions of the lease had yet to be finalized, as may be Adi ed by the Legal Advisers of the Owner as stated in paragraph 5 of the said letter (Ex. 8). The Owner had neither accepted the Masters as having any contractual right to a lease, nor acknowledged the right of the Masters as assignee of the Khans to the benefit of the Contract contamed in the letter dated 20-8-1956 (Ex. 8). On the contrary, the case of the Owner in both the notice to quit and the plait in Suit No. was that as the Masters were put in possession of the plot by the Khans, the Owner was prepared, at most, to accept them as monthly tenants; but as the Masters had defaulted in the payment of the monthly rents demanded from them and the settlement of the arrears of the municipal taxes, their tenancy was being forfeited by the notice to quit (Ex. ) dated 7-12-1959 and their ejectment was sought by filing the Suit No. 47 of 1960 a few weeks later on that basis. The ejectment suit was not filed on the basis that there had existed either a contract for lease with the Masters or that the Masters were assignees of the contract with the Khans, which contract the Owner was refusing to perform because the Masters had committed breach by defaulting in payment of rents and taxes. Therefore, we accept the submission of Mr. Plaque Hussain that there can be no question of refusal to perform a contract, which the Owner himself had not accepted as concluded or finalized, and that neither the notice to quit (Ex. ) nor the filing of the Suit No. 47 of 1960 for ejectment contained any such refusal to perform the contract (Ex. 8), or that any such refusal was ever made or intended to be made. 11. It is also clear to us that Article 113 cannot properly be evoked by the owner who has taken consistent and contradictory pleas with regard to whether the contract was concluded or not. For, while the Masters were not accepted as assignees of the Khans in the absence of written permission by the Owner, the latter was yet agreeable to grant a lease of the plot to the Masters on the basis of Ex. 8, but made it conditional upon payment of the arrears of rents and the municipal taxes. This stand was main tamed even until 1962, for in paragraph of THS plaint in But No. 122 of 1962, the Owner admitted that he was ready and willing to execute the lease deed and would have done so, had the Masters paid the rent and the municipal taxes. The Owner also relied on Ex. in Suit No. 47 of 1960 to claim the higher rent of Rs. 1985 per month from the Masters, stipulated in paragraph 2 of that letter and yet were disowning the right of the Masters to a lease, on the plea that the Masters had forfeited their right by breach. In view of the contradictory and inconsistent position taken by the Owner, it can hardly be said that there was a clear and unequivocal refusal to perform the contract. If at all, there was a clear and unequivocal refusal, it was contained in the statement of Marek Wanna (P. W. 1) Manager of the Owner which he made on 25-9-1961 in answer to a question by the Court in Suit No. 47 of 1960 w'z: “In view of the breach committed by the defendants (Masters), we are not prepared now to execute the lease deed contemplated in Ex. (Ex. 8)”. Mr. Feel conceded that if this statement is accepted as a clear and unequivocal refusal to perform, then the suit would be within time. We are, therefore, in agreement with the finding by the learned Single Judge on this Issue that neither the notice to quit (Ex. ) nor the plaint in Suit No. 47 of 1960 contained any such unconditional or unequivocal refusal as is-contemplated under Article 113 of the Limitation Act, and hold that the TT is not barred by Imitation. It 1s, therefore, not necessary to discuss-the further contentions of Mr. S. Plaque Russian that even if the plaint In Suit No. 47 of 1960 is held to contain a refusal, the same had been revoked within three years before the present suit and the bar of limitation under Article 113 had been removed, and further that the bar of limitation of Article 113 cannot apply to the option to purchase the property which could be exercised at any time with IS years from 13-8-19S6. 12. The next submission of Mr. Feel is that letter dated 30-8-1956 (Ex. 8) addressed to the Khans containing the alleged contract for lease with option to purchase, was not a binding or concluded contract because* as stated in para. S thereof, the other terms and conditions which were to be incorporated in the regular Lease Deed on the advice of the Legal Advisers before its execution, were neither settled nor finalized. In support of the proposition of law that an agreement which provides that a later document is to be concluded on the advice of the Legal Adviser, is an inchoate and incomplete agreement, Mr. Feel referred to the decision of this High Court in Messes Ashraf (Pvt.) Ltd. and another v. Karachi Transport Syndicate Ltd. the note of which case is reported in which several decisions from the British and Indian Jurisdictions were discussed. In that case, the agreement for sale of land was made expressly subject to approval by the general body of shareholders of the respondent-Company, which was not accorded. He also referred to additional case-law from the said jurisdictions and, in particular, the decision in Von Hatfield Waldenburg v. Alexander Coney v. Leith (3), and another v. Troll (4), Rain gold Bromley (5), and Banach v. Kahetrahari Sugar In each of these cases, the agreement relied on as constituting the completed contract was held to be inchoate, which provided either that the agreement was subject to “solicitors approving the lease” or "the covenants to be contained in the lease” or was subject to "usual terms’. The proposition of law laid down in these cases is, no doubt, well settled. But, whether the parties had reached a concluded contract or not, is a question of fact to be, deduced from the correspondence, and other documentary and oral evidence. The true test for decided this question is to ascertain whether the parties were of one mind on all the material terms at the time it is said to have been finalized between them and whether they intended that the matter was closed and concluded between them. There is nothing on record to show as to what were the alleged "other terms and conditions’* to be contained mm this regular lease deed. Mane Chino (D. W. 2) m answer to a Court question, admitted that no efforts were made by the Owner to finalize the terms and conditions of the lease. Nor did Mr. Dingoma), the Legal Adviser, who drafted the letter (Ex. 8), ever submit any new terms or conditions for consideration of the Masters. On the other band, the documentary evidence supports the conclusion that all main and material terms and conditions to be contained (1) P LD 1973 Note 119 at p. (3) (1937) 156 LT 483 (5) (1931) 2 Ch. D 307 (2) (1912) Ch. D 284 (4) (1953) AU ER 966 (6) ATR 1955 Cat, 210 in the proposed lease deed were settled. Thus, the Khans and the Masters confirm in their jointly signed letter addressed to the Owner dated 14*9-1956 (Ex. 19) written shortly after Ex. 8, requesting that the lease deed be made oat directly in the name of the Masters that “the terms of lease offered in your above letter (Ex. 8) have now been completely agreed upon.” In' subsequent correspondence exchanged between the Owner and the Masters, the agreement for lease is also acknowledged without as much as even ® suggestion that it was subject to settlement of other terms and conditions of the proposed lease and a particular reference may be made to letter dated 3-12-1957 (Ex. 35) addressed by Mane Chino (D. W. 2) to the Masters wherein payment of outstanding rents and taxes only was demanded before the question of transfer of the lease to their names could be considered. Me. Mane Chino (D. W. 2) who had deposed that at no time all the terms and conditions were settled with the Masters and the Owner regarding the proposed lease, gave a false and prevaricated version and was rightly disbelieved by the learned trial Court on this post. On a proper construe ton of Ex. dated 30-8-1956, as well as the correspondence and other documentary and oral evidence on record, the learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that all the main and material terms and conditions to be contained in the proposed regular lease, were settled between the owner and the Khans, and were contamed in Ex. and that nothing was BSFT for further settlement. We agree with this conclusion. 13. Mr. Feel further submitted that although consent to assignment was requested by the Khans and the Masters in their jot letter addressed to the Owner, dated 14-9-1956 (Ex. 19), it was not accorded. He also referred to para. of the letter (Ex. 8) prohibiting assignment of the lease of the premises without the previous written permission of the Owner. On -the other hand, Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain referred to the oral and documentary evidence on record, showing that the Owner had in fact orally agreed to grant the lease to the Masters, which fact has been confirmed and acknowledged in several letters, and that the prohibition to assignment mentioned in para 6 of the latter referred to by Mr. Feel, was to be a term of the proposed lease and did not apply to transfer of the benefit of Ex. S, because the fact was that the Owner had admitted that the lease was to be executed in favor of the Masters. The case of the Masters and the version of their main witness, Houshang Meiji Master (P. W. 1), in his deposition was that Pinochet Dins haw who had earlier promised the Khans to renew their lease of the suit property for 25 years with effect® from date of its expiry on 16-8-1958, orally agreed and assured his father, Meiji Master, who was an intimate friend of Pinochet Dins haw, that if the Masters wanted to purchase the cinema business from the Khans, they would be granted the lease of the suit property for 25 years with option to purchase the same at an agreed price of Rs. 4,76,000 and that relying on the faith of this agreement and assurance, they entered into that agreement with -the Khans on 10-5-1956 to purchase the “Mayfair Cinema” and the leasehold rights in the plot of land and paid a large price to them, and that the ' said arrangement between the Owner, Khans and the Masters was embodied and contained in letter dated 30-8-1955 (Ex. 8). The arrangement was in the full knowledge of Julian Hashing Dins haw and Eddie Pinochet Dins haw, the nephew and son respectively of Pinochet Dins haw. The letter Ex. was in fact written by the former on the structions of his uncle. Pinochet died in 1960. Therefore, Julian Houshang Dins haw and Eddie Pinochet ' Dins haw were important witnesses. If the version of Houshang Manky - Master (P. W. 1) was false, as alleged, it was indeed the duty of Julian Houshang Dins haw and Eddie Pinochet Dingbat to have entered the witness box, they being important witnesses in this regard. Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain pointed out that the omission of Julian Hashing Dins haw or even of Eddie Pinochet Dins haw to enter the witness box must lead to the inference that the falsity of the plea now advanced would have been exposed in cross-examination and in this connection, he cited the following observations of the Privy Council in Sri Rajah Vatsavaya Renata Subhadrayyamma. Ganapati Balder Ga.ru v. Sri Poosapati Vankatapati Rate Gary and others (1) at. Page 166 “They were not examined as witnesses in the suit out of which this appeal has arisen. They were important witnesses if their allegations were true. It appears to the Lordships that there is only one rational explanation of their absence from the witness chair, namely, their well-grounded fear of cross-examination. If their statements be true, the evidence of Lakshmi must be a wicked and deliberate concoction. Their Lordships do not think TT 1s that.” On the other hand, the version of Houshang Meiji Master (P. W. 1) stands amply supported by several admission and acknowledgements to which Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain drew our attention. He referred to the statement of Mr. Diagonal, the Legal Adviser of the Owner and the author of letter Ex. 8, made by him under Order X, C. P. C. m Suit No. 47 of 1960 (Ex. 21), wherein he stated that the tripartite arrangement between the Owner, Khans and the Masters was set out in the said letter (Ex. 8) pursuant to which the Masters "were to be substituted as tenants” in place of the Khans. The evidence also shows that the Masters took possession. Of the premises from the Khans on 2- 9-19S6 as, Mane Wanna (P. W. 1) in Suit No. said in answer to a question by the Court, “with the Owner's consent and knowledge, paid rent to us, and we accepted it’. However, in the Suit No. 191 of 1963, Mane Wanna was withheld and, instead, Mane Chino was put forward by the Owner as the principal witness, who while denying this fact gave a prevaricated and false version. There is also a clear admission by Julian Houshang Dins haw in his letter addressed to the Architect (Control),K. D. A. dated 3-12-60 (Ex. ) wherein he stated “subsequently G, M. Khan with the permission of the landlord assigned his rights to Messes Meiji Masters and Houshang Meiji Master who became the lessees of the plot” There is also the admission of Mane Chino (D. W. 2) in Suit in which he stated "It is also correct that Mr. Pinochet Dins haw had orally agreed to transfer the lease to the Masters’”. This witness also admitted the endorsement (Ex. ) made by him at the foot of letter 4 of the plaint in Suit No. 122 of 1962 and in paragraph 3 of Rent Application No. 2976 of I9t>3. In the face of these admissions and the documentary and oral evidence on record, we agree with the learned Single Judge that there is no truth in the plea that the owner had not consented to the assignment or that the owner had not agreed to grant the lease to the Masters. 14. The next submission of Mr. Feel was that neither Moocher Dins haw was authorized to consent to the assignment of the lease, nor Julian Houshang Dins haw had any authority to give the option to purchase, because the former was not an Attorney of Dr. Eddie. Baruch, while the latter, as attorney, had no power except to manage his properties. This plea was also raised before the learned Single Judge and, for reasons with which we agree and which have been further elaborated by Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain before us, it was rightly rejected. The evidence on record shows that it was Pinochet, uncle of Julian Houshang Dins haw, who was personally dealing with the property in dispute Julian Houshang Dins haw who admittedly had signed the letter Ex. 8, did not indicate beneath his signature that he signed it as an Attorney. TNC evidence of Houshang Manky Master (P. W. 1) was that Pinochet Dins haw alone managed and dealt with the property MN suit until he fell ill at the end of 1958, thereafter Julian Houshang Dins haw assumed the management of the property. This is further supported by the evidence of Mane Wanna (P. W. 1) MN Suit No. 47 of 19t>0, and is not contradicted by Mane China (D. W. 3), the principal witness of the Owner in Suit. The evidence farther shows that the property was being treated as if it belonged to the firm the “Eduardo Dins haw" and rent bills were being issued in the firm’s name even after the power of attorney dated 3-6-1956 vide Exes., and some checks were also drawn in favor of the firm "Educate Dins haw’’. In the municipal records, the Dins haws were recorded as owner of the said property vide Municipal Extract Ex. dated 29-6-1959 and notices were BMG addressed to them with regard to taxes and assessments, vide Ex. 9, dated 30-10-1957, and were being attended to by the firm “Educate Dins haw’’. The name of Dr. Eddie P. Baruch as owner of the said property did not transpire until later in. However, the plea of want of authority was not raised in tho litigation ; nor was any issue framed thereon, and therefore, it was rightly held by the learned Single Judge that the owner was stopped from agitating this question at the time of arguments J In this regard, Mr. S. Plaque Hussain referred to the observations of the Privy Council in Sri Rajah Affray Lakshmi Venkayjrama Rao Border and another v. Sri Rajah Renata Natasha APA Rao Broader and others (1) to the effect that if parties have acted with knowledge and upon the footing of a proposal made, they are stopped by their conduct from raising plea that the contract is inchoate and incomplete. In Sri Mira Raja Sri v. Secretary of State for India the Lordships for the Privy Council observed — “A litigant who has all along maintained a position in support of one, and in this case the more important branch of his suit, cannot be permitted, when he fails upon this branch to withdraw from the position and assert the contrary, more especially when he thereby places For these reasons, we must reject the submission of Mr. Feel that the assignments of the benefit of the contract or the option to purchase were unauthorized. 15. The next submission of Mr. Feel is that the decision on issue No. MN Suit No. 47 of 1960 that Ex. did not create a valid and binding lease was res judicata. Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain submitted that the decision on this issue which was based on the concession of Mr. Diagonal, rightly held that in the absence of registered lease deed, no binding lease can come into legal effect and therefore Mr. Diagonal rightly conceded that the Masters held the premises as monthly tenants. But there was no contest in the suit between the parties whether Ex. was a concluded and binding contract for lease or not. It was neither alleged nor denied by either party m that suit. The Khans with whom Ex. was entered into were dropped from the suit AAD the Masters were sued as monthly tenants on the basis that they held the premises on the terms and conditions of Ex. 8, as to rents and taxes and were liable to ejectment for default of payment. On the contrary, he submitted that the decisions in Suit No. 47 of 1960 were recorded on the basis and the admission by the Owner that Ex. was a binding and concluded contract The only matters involved in Suit No. 47 of 1960 which were res judicata were that Ex. did not constitute a valid lease deed due to non-registration ; that the Owner could not charge rent at the higher rate of Rs. 1985 per month on the basis of Ex. ; and that the Masters were justified in withholding payment of the rent in the circumstances that while the owner was not recognizing them as tenants nor executing the lease deed in their favor, was yet demanding the higher rent and the taxes on the basis of Ex. 8. His submission therefore is that although no issue as to the binding and concluded effect of Ex. was framed, it was yet a question evolved in the suit and indeed was the groundwork of the decision, as the findings on the above-mentioned matters raised in that suit could not be sustained except on the basis of the concluded nature of Ex. 8. Therefore on the principle of constructive res judicata, the implied admission as to concluded nature of Ex. was a matter directly and substantially in issue and was res judicata. In support of the submission that an implied finding based on an agreement or admission by a party in a former suit operates as res judicata in the subsequent soil in the same way as a finding based on an adjudication by the Court, learned Council cited S. ft and Singh v. Rahman Din (minor) and others In that case, in a mortgage Suit a distinct issue was raised whether the mortgagor was a member of a specified agricultural tribe and whether the mortgage of the suit land contravened the provisions of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act. By compromise, the defendants abandoned the plea that had given rise to this issue and agreed to a decree being passed on the assumption that the mortgage in suit was a perfectly valid mortgage, having been effected by a person who was not a member of the specified agricultural tribe and did not contravene any provisions of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act. When the decree-holder- mortgagee took out execution of the decree, the judgment-debtor resisted the execution on the ground that the mortgage g was a member of the specified agricultural tribe, the sale of his land was prohibited by section 16 of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act. It was held ! “The decree for sale of the suit land or any portion thereof could not have been passed except on a finding in the plaintiff's favor on the issue as to the validity of the mortgage and as to its BMG in contravention of the provisions of the Alienation of Land Act. A finding on this issue in the plaintiffs favor must, therefore, be regarded as implicit in the decree eventually passed. The mere circumstance that this implied finding was based not on an adjudication by the Court but on an agreement or admission by the defendant cannot make any difference in so far as the operation of the principle of res judicata is concerned. It was further pointed out that the ports to be considered in deciding a question of res judicata is whether the judgment in the previous case could be sustained without the determination of the question at issue in the subsequent suit, even though the subject-matters of the two suits are different. If the judgment in the previous suit could not be sustained. without the determination of the question in the subsequent suit the previous decision operates as res judicata and bars the subsequent suit. The consent decree TU the mortgage suit could not be sustained without the determination of the question of the tribe to which the mortgagor belonged. That decree must, therefore, operate as res judicata in any subsequent litigation between the same parties, or parties claiming through or under them. ” Counsel further referred to the principle of constructive res judicata in Tahini Handan Chaudhary and others v. Amanda Chaudhary and others (1) that even if a particular matter be not included in a formal issue, if it is directly and substantially in issue between the parties, and if there be a decision thereon, it will operate as res judicata. To the same effect is the decision in L. Vision Was v. L. Laxmi Na rain What was therefore, res judicata was the decision as to the binding and concluded nature of Ex. 8, which question was involved in that suit acid which was the groundwork of the decision and not the altogether different question whether Ex. created a valid and binding lease. We, therefore, find no force in the submission of Mr. Feel and concur with the finding of the learned Single Judge that the finding on issue No. m Suit No. 47 of 1960 is not res judicata. 16. The fourth submission of Mr. Feel is that as the Masters had committed breaches of the contract (Ex. 8) by defaulting in payment of the rents and taxes, they were, therefore, disentitled to claim the discretionary relief of specific performance of the said contract. In this regard, Mr. Feel referred to the correspondence and the circumstances which should the financial embarrassment of the Masters and inability to pay rents after the “Mayfair Cinema" was demolished on the orders of the Martial Law authorities, when they asked the Owner to relieve them from payment of the rents until the mama business was resumed. As observed earlier, and as rightly submitted by Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain, the decision in Suit No. 47 of 1960 was res judicata which held that the Masters were justified in withholding payment of the rent stipulated m Ex. in the circumstances, and that this question could not be agitated again. Learned counsel further submitted that even if the Masters are held to have defaulted in payment of the said rents which may lead to forfeiture of the lease, that could not affect the option to purchase the suit property. According to counsel, the letter (Ex. 8} comprises the contracts, one for grant of lease and the other for the option to purchase the suit property. He cited Green v. Low (1) for the proposition of law that when the contract comprises parts which are mutually exclusive of one another, and the plaintiff has a right to ask for performance of one part, the Court may treat this as independent of the other and default by the plaintiff 1a respect of the one part will not bar the specific performance of the other. In that case, the plaintiff had entered into an agreement with the defendant, to build a villa on the land of the defendant of the value of £1,000 and agreed to insure and keep it insured Io their joint names in the County Fire office for £90U and agreed to grant a lease of the house for 99 years to the plaintiff upon completion and that if the plaintiff should not perform his part, the agreement for lease should be void. The agreement also stipulated that the defendant would have the option of purchasing the land and the building within two years at the price of £500. The plaintiff erected the villa but sure in the wrong office and in his own name alone and within the stipulated period gave notice of his intention to exercise the option of purchase and tendered the purchase money and a conveyance, but the defendant refused to convey the property insisting that the plaintiff had committed breach of the agreement to sure in the manner stipulated. The defendant then commenced proceedings at law to recover possession, while the plaintiff brought the bill m inquiry for specific performance of the contract to sell. The Master of the Rolls (Sir John Reilly) upon the construction of the contract upheld the contention on behalf of the plaintiff that the might to purchase was independent of the right to lease and that even if the right to the latter had been forfeited on account of breach by the plaintiff still the might to purchase remained unaffected and, accordingly, he decreed specific performance and awarded perpetual injunction to restrain the defendant’s proceedings at law. That proposition of law is stated in Fry's, Specific Performance of Contracts (1921), 6th End.t Arts. 865, 938. We would, therefore, agree with the reasoning of the learned Single Judge and the conclusion reached by him on issue No. that the option to purchase was unconditional, independent and separate contract from that for the lease and that FYE exercise of the former option was not dependent on the execution of the lease deed. It is the submission of Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain that the Masters have exercised the option to purchase the suit property given in paragraph of the letter Ex. during the pendency of Suit No. 47 of 1960 in that they amended their plaint in that suit on 16-1-1964 and have prayed for a decree for specific performance of the option to purchase as a principal relief in THS suit. As that relief does not appear to have been granted by the learned Single Judge, Mr. Plaque Hussain during the course of arguments before us has filed an application under section 151, C. P. C. on 14-10-1976 praying for a clarification of the judgment and the decree. No orders, however, can be passed on this application without notice to the appellant. 17. In support of his fifth submission, Mr. Feel relied on clause 5 of the Enemy Property (Custody and Registration) Order, 1965 which exempts enemy property vesting 1a the Custodian from attachment, seizure or sale in execution of a decree of a civil Court. The contention is that as the attachment of the suit property in execution of THS decree for specific performance is barred, this Court should not have granted the decree. Attachment and sale of the attached property is only one mode of execution! of a decree for specific performance of contract under Order XX], rule 32(]j] »ND C. P. C. However it is open to the judgment-creditor to apply to) the Court under rule 5 of the said Order for a direction to appoint any! officer of the Court, such as usually the Nazi, to execute and register THC lease in lieu of attachment and sale. The submission of Mr. Feel, in our opinion, is therefore misconceived and cannot be accepted. 18. The final submission of Mr. Feel is that the award of normal damages against the appellant was arbitrary. But as rightly submitted by Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain, it is not in dispute that the Masters were prevented from constructing the new cinema and the hotel, the building plans of which had already been approved by the K, D. A. as the construction was suspended by the K. D. A. OG account of the objections lodged by Julian Dins haw. From the nature of things, it was not possible for any witness to state the precise amount of the loss suffered by the Masters.1 Therefore, the award of damages could only be given on the basis of ANF estimate. In the absence of evidence from the Owner’s side, we agree! that the award of normal damages was not improper in the circumstances} of the case. 19. For the foregoing reasons, we find no force in this appeal. It is accordingly dismissed with costs. - - — Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): . Mahmud, J.—This Is a Letters Patent Appeal from the Judgment and Decree dated 11-1- 1967 passed by a learned Single Judge (Nadir Nawab S. A. Away, in Suit No. 191 of 1963 on the original side of the High Court, decreeing the suit of the respondents Nos. to 5 for specific performance of a contract for lease and damages. 2. The property in dispute is a vacant plot of land bear mg survey No. 29 Sheet SB-S, measuring 2724 sq. yes, in Radar Bazaar Quarter, Karachi, situated at the corner of Focus Road and Strachey Road, Karachi. It was owned by Dr. Eddie P. Whatcha, the respondent No. who was a resident of India. His properties in Karachi, including the suit property, were being managed by the partners of the firm of Messes Adult Dins haw, which included Julian Houshang Dins haw. They will hereinafter be collectively-referred to as “the Owner’. As Dr. Eddie P. Baruch became an enemy alien on the outbreak of war between India and Pakistan in 19t>5, the suit' property became vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property, and he was imp leaded as defendant No. in the suit. 3. The suit property was held on lease by one Chakras G. Ad want’ since before Partition on which he was running the business of an open-air’ cinema, known as “Mayfair Cinema”. On 16-8-1948, Khan Ghulam Modding Khan and his wife Begum Noor Baht (hereinafter referred to as “the Khans”), purchased the said cinema business from Adana and with the consent of the owner, the Khans were accepted as lessees for a period of 10 years commencing from 16-8-1948 on a monthly rent of Rs. 4. Sometime in May 1956, the Khans were interested in disposing of the “Afar Cinema”. But as their lease was to expire shortly after two years on 16-8-1958, they obtained a promise from Pinochet Dins haw, UNC’.e of the said Julian Houshang Dim haw. to extend their lease for a further period of 25 years to enable the Khans to obtain a better price from buyers of the Cinema. Manectric Master and his son, Houshang Manectric Master, hereinafter referred to as “the Masters") were interested in purchasing the cinema from the Khans with the object of putting up a closed air-conditioned cinema and a hotel thereon. The case of the Deistic, who were plaintiffs in the Suit No. 191 of 1963 out of which the present Appeal arises, was* that Manectric Master, who was an intimate friend of Pinochet Dins haw, uncle of Julian Houshang Dins haw, approached him for the purchase of the suit property on statement basis, but this was not acceptable to Pinochet Dins haw. Instead, an oral agreement was reached to the effect that if the Masters purchased the CMEA business from the Khans, they would be granted a lease of the suit property for a period of 25 years with an option to purchase the same at an agreed price of Rs. 4,76.700. That, relying on

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): agreement was reached to the effect that if the Masters purchased the CMEA business from the Khans, they would be granted a lease of the suit property for a period of 25 years with an option to purchase the same at an agreed price of Rs. 4,76.700. That, relying on the assurance contained in this oral agreement, the Masters. Entered into an agreement with the Khans on 10th May, 1956 to purchase the cinemas business including their leasehold rights in the land for a high price. Their further case was that the terms and conditions of the agreements between the owner, the Khans and the Masters were confirmed and contamed in’ a letter dated 30th August, 1956 (Ex. 8) addressed to the Khans by Julian Houshang Dins haw, which is the alleged contract for lease with the options ‘Educate Dins haw, 30th August, 1956.260 R. A. Lines, Karachi: (Ex. 8) Khan O. M. Khan, ESR. Karachi: Dear Str. Re:—Plot No. 19 Sheet S. B. measuring 2724 sq. yes. Saddam Bazaar, Karachi, called Mayfair Cinema: With reference to the above plot, which you hold on lease up to 16th August 1958, I agree to lease the same to you from 16th August 1958 for a further period of 25 years on the following main terms and conditions as arranged personally— (1) The period of the lease will be 25 years commencing from 6th August 1958. The rent payable by you will be at the rate of 5% on the value of the Plot at Rs. 175 per square yard amounting to Rs. 1985. (One thousand me hundred and eighty-five only), per month. All taxes and assessments now payable or which may be imposed hereafter, including all Municipal taxes and Government taxes, present or future in respect of the plot or buildings that may be constructed thereon will be payable by you. The rent payable will be Rs. 1,985 per month, free of all deductions. You will have permission to erect buildings on the aforesaid plot, in accordance with plans to be previously approved by me in writing’ and to be approved by all Authorities before the commencement of the work. All such buildings to be surrendered and handed over at the termination of the lease period. t(4) In the event of your failure to pay rent at any time for a period of two months, the lease will be label to be terminated by us and all buildings erected on the same plot would be surrendered to the owner. You will have the option to purchase the above-mentioned plot within a period of 15 (fifteen) years from the 16th August 1956 at the rate of Rs. 175 per square yard that is to say at a total price of Rs: 4,76,700. The said option if not exercised within the period of 15 (fifteen) years, will stand automatically cancelled. A regular Lease Deed will be executed by us on other terms and conditions as may be advised by our Legal Advisers, the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): is to say at a total price of Rs: 4,76,700. The said option if not exercised within the period of 15 (fifteen) years, will stand automatically cancelled. A regular Lease Deed will be executed by us on other terms and conditions as may be advised by our Legal Advisers, the costs of which will be payable by you. The lease would be in favor of yourself, your successors and assigns. You will not transfer, assign or sublet the lease or premises to anyone without our written permission. Further, six free passes for each show in the Cinema will be given to us. All disputes to be settled by arbitration under the Arbitration Act for the time being in force. Please confirm the above. Yours faithfully. (SD.) J. H. Dins haw.” "The Masters further pleaded that the Khans delivered possession of the “Mayfair Cinema" and the suit property to the Masters on 2-9-1956 with ‘the consent and knowledge of the Owner and 26-3-1957, the Khans executed a deed of conveyance transferring the cinema to them. 5. In October 1957, the Karachi Municipal Corporation made demand of Rs. 39,524- 14-0 on account of arrears of Municipal taxes in - respect of the suit property which had remained unpaid since the year 1945. The Masters also fell in arrears in payment of the rent of the plot despite demands by the Owner. In September 1958, the open-air cinema was demolished under the Orders of the then Martial Law Authorities and the Masters even asked the Owner to forego the rent until they were able to re-erect a new CMEA and get the business going, but it was not acceded to. In the result, the Owner addressed a legal notice dated 28-7-1959 to the Masters calling -upon them to quit and deliver vacant possession of the plot and also pay up the arrears of the rents which then amounted to Rs. 37,282-8-0. As the Masters failed to comply, a final legal notice dated 7-12-1959 was addressed lo them (as also to the Khans) demanding payment of the rent as well as the outstanding Municipal taxes and calling upon the Masters to quit and band over vacant possession of the plot by 30-1-1960, failing which legal proceedings would be taken for their ejectment. As the Masters failed to comply with the said requisitions, the Owner filed a Suit No. 47 of 1960 on the Original side of the High Court on 29-2-1960 against both the Khans and the Masters for recovery of the arrears of rent, mesne profits and for their ejectment. By the Judgment dated 30-9-1961 passed in that suit, the Masters were held to be monthly tenants and the prayer for their ejectment was dismissed. It was also held that in the circumstances of the case, the Masters had justification for withholding payment of rent. The prayer for payment of arrears of rent to the extent of Rs. 14,931 at the old rate of Rs. 538-4-0 per month was however decreed. A Letters

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): was dismissed. It was also held that in the circumstances of the case, the Masters had justification for withholding payment of rent. The prayer for payment of arrears of rent to the extent of Rs. 14,931 at the old rate of Rs. 538-4-0 per month was however decreed. A Letters Patent Appeal No. 15 of 1962 was filed by the Owner, but it was dismissed. While that Letters Patent Appeal was pending, the Owner filed another Suit No. 122 of 1962 In the High Court for ejectment of the Masters and for the recovery of further arrears of rent and mesne profits, but the suit was withdrawn and a separate Ejectment Application No. 2976 of 1963 was filed before the Rent Controller. A few weeks later, on 22-11-1963, the Masters filed the Suit No. 191 of 1963 against the Owner and the Khans, and others for Specific Performance of the Contract of Lease with the option to purchase dated 30th August, 1956 (Ex. 8), and for damages in the sum of Rs. 6,20,000 and further damages at the rate of Rs. 20,000 per month from the date of the suit till payment. The plant was later amended to include as the principal prayer, a prayer for specific performance of the option to purchase the suit property for the price of Rs. 4,76,000 as per paragraph contamed I'm the letter dated 30-8-1956 (Ex. 8) above quoted. As stated earlier, the Custodian of Enemy Property was imp leaded as defendant No. in the said suit. 6. The suit was resisted by the Owner who filed a written statement in which it was pleaded mainly that there was no concluded or finalized contract of which specific performance could be claimed or granted and, in the alternative, that the Masters were guilty of breaches thereof and therefore could not enforce it. It was further pleaded that the suit was barred, not only BV res judicata having regard to the judgment ‘and decree in Suit No. 47 of 1960, but also by limitation their written statement was adopted by the Custodian of Enemy Property. 7. Several issues were framed m the suit including the issue whether the suit was incompetent and not main tamable. The suit was at first dismissed as not maintainable on the ground that the alleged contract in suit bad become frustrated upon the Owner becoming an enemy alien upon the commencement of the Into-Pakistan war in September, 196S. and that Its enforcement had become illegal. But, on appeal by the Masters, a Letters Patent Bench remanded the suit for hearing on merits. 8. After recording evidence of the parties the trial Court by the impugned judgment dated 11-1-1967, decreed specific performance of the contract for lease with option to purchase dated 30-8-56 (Ex. 8) against the Owner and the Custodian of Enemy Property, and awarded damages in the sum of Rs. 1,55,000 in addition to monthly damages at the rate of Rs. 5,000 per month from the date of the Suit

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): of the contract for lease with option to purchase dated 30-8-56 (Ex. 8) against the Owner and the Custodian of Enemy Property, and awarded damages in the sum of Rs. 1,55,000 in addition to monthly damages at the rate of Rs. 5,000 per month from the date of the Suit till execution of the lease lead with costs. The suit against the other defendants was dismissed. The present Letters Patent Appeal has been filed by the Custodian of Enemy Property aga.NST the said judgment and decree dated 1-1-1967. 9. Mr. Ali Ahmed Feel, learned counsel for the appellant, has-challenged the judgment and decree of the trial Court on the following grounds — (1) That the suit for specific performance of the alleged contract was barred by time under Article 113 of the First Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908. (2) That there was no binding or concluded contract between the parties which had given rise to a claim for specific performance. (3) That the decision in Suit No. holding that the respondents were monthly tenants and that the alleged contract for lease (Ex. 8) bad not become operative, were res judicata and could not be re-agitated in Suit No. 191 of 1963. (4) That the respondents had committed breach of the alleged contract for lease (Ex. 8) by defaulting in payment of rent and taxes and were therefore disentitled to claim specific performance. (5) That as the decree for specific performance was incapable of execution in view of clause 5 of the Enemy Property (Custodian and Registration) Order, 1965, it should not have been granted by the Court in the exercise of its discretion. (6) That the award of damages was arbitrary. These submissions will now be considered. 10. Dealing with the first submission of Mr. A. A. Feel, regarding limitation, the contention is that the suit for specific performance of the contract for lease was filed beyond three years from the date when the Masters bad notice that performance of the contract had been refused and that it was barred under Article 113 of the First Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908. According to the counsel, both the notice to quit dated 7-12-1959 (Ex. ) as well as the filing of the Suit No. 47 of 1960 for ejectment of the Masters from the plot ‘summons of which were served on the Masters on 26-3-1960), was each, a notice to them that the performance of the contract for lease contained in the letter dated 30-8- 1956 (Ex. 8) had been refused. But, Article 113 of the Limitation Act presupposes the existence of concluded and finalized contract between the plaintiff and the defendant, the performance of which has been refused by the defendant and of which the plaintiff has noticed. Again, before a defendant can successfully invoke the bar of limitation under Article 113, he has to prove affirmatively that his refusal to perform the contract was clear, unequivocal and unconditional. As rightly submitted by Mr. S. Plaque Hussain, learned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): by the defendant and of which the plaintiff has noticed. Again, before a defendant can successfully invoke the bar of limitation under Article 113, he has to prove affirmatively that his refusal to perform the contract was clear, unequivocal and unconditional. As rightly submitted by Mr. S. Plaque Hussain, learned counsel for the Masters, the position adopted by the Owner throughout this litigation has been that the letter dated 30-8-1956 (Ex. 8) did not constitute a concluded or finalized contract for lease. In fact, it is the second numbered submission abovementioned of Mr. Feel (to be presently discussed) that no binding or finalized contract between the parties was ever concluded, which had given rise to a claim for specific performance, inter alia, on the ground that some terms and conditions of the lease had yet to be finalized, as may be Adi ed by the Legal Advisers of the Owner as stated in paragraph 5 of the said letter (Ex. 8). The Owner had neither accepted the Masters as having any contractual right to a lease, nor acknowledged the right of the Masters as assignee of the Khans to the benefit of the Contract contamed in the letter dated 20-8-1956 (Ex. 8). On the contrary, the case of the Owner in both the notice to quit and the plait in Suit No. was that as the Masters were put in possession of the plot by the Khans, the Owner was prepared, at most, to accept them as monthly tenants; but as the Masters had defaulted in the payment of the monthly rents demanded from them and the settlement of the arrears of the municipal taxes, their tenancy was being forfeited by the notice to quit (Ex. ) dated 7-12-1959 and their ejectment was sought by filing the Suit No. 47 of 1960 a few weeks later on that basis. The ejectment suit was not filed on the basis that there had existed either a contract for lease with the Masters or that the Masters were assignees of the contract with the Khans, which contract the Owner was refusing to perform because the Masters had committed breach by defaulting in payment of rents and taxes. Therefore, we accept the submission of Mr. Plaque Hussain that there can be no question of refusal to perform a contract, which the Owner himself had not accepted as concluded or finalized, and that neither the notice to quit (Ex. ) nor the filing of the Suit No. 47 of 1960 for ejectment contained any such refusal to perform the contract (Ex. 8), or that any such refusal was ever made or intended to be made. 11. It is also clear to us that Article 113 cannot properly be evoked by the owner who has taken consistent and contradictory pleas with regard to whether the contract was concluded or not. For, while the Masters were not accepted as assignees of the Khans in the absence of written permission by the Owner, the latter was yet agreeable

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): cannot properly be evoked by the owner who has taken consistent and contradictory pleas with regard to whether the contract was concluded or not. For, while the Masters were not accepted as assignees of the Khans in the absence of written permission by the Owner, the latter was yet agreeable to grant a lease of the plot to the Masters on the basis of Ex. 8, but made it conditional upon payment of the arrears of rents and the municipal taxes. This stand was main tamed even until 1962, for in paragraph of THS plaint in But No. 122 of 1962, the Owner admitted that he was ready and willing to execute the lease deed and would have done so, had the Masters paid the rent and the municipal taxes. The Owner also relied on Ex. in Suit No. 47 of 1960 to claim the higher rent of Rs. 1985 per month from the Masters, stipulated in paragraph 2 of that letter and yet were disowning the right of the Masters to a lease, on the plea that the Masters had forfeited their right by breach. In view of the contradictory and inconsistent position taken by the Owner, it can hardly be said that there was a clear and unequivocal refusal to perform the contract. If at all, there was a clear and unequivocal refusal, it was contained in the statement of Marek Wanna (P. W. 1) Manager of the Owner which he made on 25-9-1961 in answer to a question by the Court in Suit No. 47 of 1960 w'z: “In view of the breach committed by the defendants (Masters), we are not prepared now to execute the lease deed contemplated in Ex. (Ex. 8)”. Mr. Feel conceded that if this statement is accepted as a clear and unequivocal refusal to perform, then the suit would be within time. We are, therefore, in agreement with the finding by the learned Single Judge on this Issue that neither the notice to quit (Ex. ) nor the plaint in Suit No. 47 of 1960 contained any such unconditional or unequivocal refusal as is-contemplated under Article 113 of the Limitation Act, and hold that the TT is not barred by Imitation. It 1s, therefore, not necessary to discuss-the further contentions of Mr. S. Plaque Russian that even if the plaint In Suit No. 47 of 1960 is held to contain a refusal, the same had been revoked within three years before the present suit and the bar of limitation under Article 113 had been removed, and further that the bar of limitation of Article 113 cannot apply to the option to purchase the property which could be exercised at any time with IS years from 13-8-19S6. 12. The next submission of Mr. Feel is that letter dated 30-8-1956 (Ex. 8) addressed to the Khans containing the alleged contract for lease with option to purchase, was not a binding or concluded contract because* as stated in para. S thereof, the other terms and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): IS years from 13-8-19S6. 12. The next submission of Mr. Feel is that letter dated 30-8-1956 (Ex. 8) addressed to the Khans containing the alleged contract for lease with option to purchase, was not a binding or concluded contract because* as stated in para. S thereof, the other terms and conditions which were to be incorporated in the regular Lease Deed on the advice of the Legal Advisers before its execution, were neither settled nor finalized. In support of the proposition of law that an agreement which provides that a later document is to be concluded on the advice of the Legal Adviser, is an inchoate and incomplete agreement, Mr. Feel referred to the decision of this High Court in Messes Ashraf (Pvt.) Ltd. and another v. Karachi Transport Syndicate Ltd. the note of which case is reported in which several decisions from the British and Indian Jurisdictions were discussed. In that case, the agreement for sale of land was made expressly subject to approval by the general body of shareholders of the respondent-Company, which was not accorded. He also referred to additional case-law from the said jurisdictions and, in particular, the decision in Von Hatfield Waldenburg v. Alexander Coney v. Leith (3), and another v. Troll (4), Rain gold Bromley (5), and Banach v. Kahetrahari Sugar In each of these cases, the agreement relied on as constituting the completed contract was held to be inchoate, which provided either that the agreement was subject to “solicitors approving the lease” or "the covenants to be contained in the lease” or was subject to "usual terms’. The proposition of law laid down in these cases is, no doubt, well settled. But, whether the parties had reached a concluded contract or not, is a question of fact to be, deduced from the correspondence, and other documentary and oral evidence. The true test for decided this question is to ascertain whether the parties were of one mind on all the material terms at the time it is said to have been finalized between them and whether they intended that the matter was closed and concluded between them. There is nothing on record to show as to what were the alleged "other terms and conditions’* to be contained mm this regular lease deed. Mane Chino (D. W. 2) m answer to a Court question, admitted that no efforts were made by the Owner to finalize the terms and conditions of the lease. Nor did Mr. Dingoma), the Legal Adviser, who drafted the letter (Ex. 8), ever submit any new terms or conditions for consideration of the Masters. On the other band, the documentary evidence supports the conclusion that all main and material terms and conditions to be contained (1) P LD 1973 Note 119 at p. (3) (1937) 156 LT 483 (5) (1931) 2 Ch. D 307 (2) (1912) Ch. D 284 (4) (1953) AU ER 966 (6) ATR 1955 Cat, 210 in the proposed lease deed were settled. Thus, the Khans and the Masters

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): to be contained (1) P LD 1973 Note 119 at p. (3) (1937) 156 LT 483 (5) (1931) 2 Ch. D 307 (2) (1912) Ch. D 284 (4) (1953) AU ER 966 (6) ATR 1955 Cat, 210 in the proposed lease deed were settled. Thus, the Khans and the Masters confirm in their jointly signed letter addressed to the Owner dated 14*9-1956 (Ex. 19) written shortly after Ex. 8, requesting that the lease deed be made oat directly in the name of the Masters that “the terms of lease offered in your above letter (Ex. 8) have now been completely agreed upon.” In' subsequent correspondence exchanged between the Owner and the Masters, the agreement for lease is also acknowledged without as much as even ® suggestion that it was subject to settlement of other terms and conditions of the proposed lease and a particular reference may be made to letter dated 3-12-1957 (Ex. 35) addressed by Mane Chino (D. W. 2) to the Masters wherein payment of outstanding rents and taxes only was demanded before the question of transfer of the lease to their names could be considered. Me. Mane Chino (D. W. 2) who had deposed that at no time all the terms and conditions were settled with the Masters and the Owner regarding the proposed lease, gave a false and prevaricated version and was rightly disbelieved by the learned trial Court on this post. On a proper construe ton of Ex. dated 30-8-1956, as well as the correspondence and other documentary and oral evidence on record, the learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that all the main and material terms and conditions to be contained in the proposed regular lease, were settled between the owner and the Khans, and were contamed in Ex. and that nothing was BSFT for further settlement. We agree with this conclusion. 13. Mr. Feel further submitted that although consent to assignment was requested by the Khans and the Masters in their jot letter addressed to the Owner, dated 14-9-1956 (Ex. 19), it was not accorded. He also referred to para. of the letter (Ex. 8) prohibiting assignment of the lease of the premises without the previous written permission of the Owner. On -the other hand, Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain referred to the oral and documentary evidence on record, showing that the Owner had in fact orally agreed to grant the lease to the Masters, which fact has been confirmed and acknowledged in several letters, and that the prohibition to assignment mentioned in para 6 of the latter referred to by Mr. Feel, was to be a term of the proposed lease and did not apply to transfer of the benefit of Ex. S, because the fact was that the Owner had admitted that the lease was to be executed in favor of the Masters. The case of the Masters and the version of their main witness, Houshang Meiji Master (P. W. 1), in his deposition was that Pinochet Dins haw who had

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): S, because the fact was that the Owner had admitted that the lease was to be executed in favor of the Masters. The case of the Masters and the version of their main witness, Houshang Meiji Master (P. W. 1), in his deposition was that Pinochet Dins haw who had earlier promised the Khans to renew their lease of the suit property for 25 years with effect® from date of its expiry on 16-8-1958, orally agreed and assured his father, Meiji Master, who was an intimate friend of Pinochet Dins haw, that if the Masters wanted to purchase the cinema business from the Khans, they would be granted the lease of the suit property for 25 years with option to purchase the same at an agreed price of Rs. 4,76,000 and that relying on the faith of this agreement and assurance, they entered into that agreement with -the Khans on 10-5-1956 to purchase the “Mayfair Cinema” and the leasehold rights in the plot of land and paid a large price to them, and that the ' said arrangement between the Owner, Khans and the Masters was embodied and contained in letter dated 30-8-1955 (Ex. 8). The arrangement was in the full knowledge of Julian Hashing Dins haw and Eddie Pinochet Dins haw, the nephew and son respectively of Pinochet Dins haw. The letter Ex. was in fact written by the former on the structions of his uncle. Pinochet died in 1960. Therefore, Julian Houshang Dins haw and Eddie Pinochet ' Dins haw were important witnesses. If the version of Houshang Manky - Master (P. W. 1) was false, as alleged, it was indeed the duty of Julian Houshang Dins haw and Eddie Pinochet Dingbat to have entered the witness box, they being important witnesses in this regard. Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain pointed out that the omission of Julian Hashing Dins haw or even of Eddie Pinochet Dins haw to enter the witness box must lead to the inference that the falsity of the plea now advanced would have been exposed in cross-examination and in this connection, he cited the following observations of the Privy Council in Sri Rajah Vatsavaya Renata Subhadrayyamma. Ganapati Balder Ga.ru v. Sri Poosapati Vankatapati Rate Gary and others (1) at. Page 166 “They were not examined as witnesses in the suit out of which this appeal has arisen. They were important witnesses if their allegations were true. It appears to the Lordships that there is only one rational explanation of their absence from the witness chair, namely, their well-grounded fear of cross-examination. If their statements be true, the evidence of Lakshmi must be a wicked and deliberate concoction. Their Lordships do not think TT 1s that.” On the other hand, the version of Houshang Meiji Master (P. W. 1) stands amply supported by several admission and acknowledgements to which Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain drew our attention. He referred to the statement of Mr. Diagonal, the Legal Adviser of the Owner and the author of letter Ex.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): On the other hand, the version of Houshang Meiji Master (P. W. 1) stands amply supported by several admission and acknowledgements to which Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain drew our attention. He referred to the statement of Mr. Diagonal, the Legal Adviser of the Owner and the author of letter Ex. 8, made by him under Order X, C. P. C. m Suit No. 47 of 1960 (Ex. 21), wherein he stated that the tripartite arrangement between the Owner, Khans and the Masters was set out in the said letter (Ex. 8) pursuant to which the Masters "were to be substituted as tenants” in place of the Khans. The evidence also shows that the Masters took possession. Of the premises from the Khans on 2- 9-19S6 as, Mane Wanna (P. W. 1) in Suit No. said in answer to a question by the Court, “with the Owner's consent and knowledge, paid rent to us, and we accepted it’. However, in the Suit No. 191 of 1963, Mane Wanna was withheld and, instead, Mane Chino was put forward by the Owner as the principal witness, who while denying this fact gave a prevaricated and false version. There is also a clear admission by Julian Houshang Dins haw in his letter addressed to the Architect (Control),K. D. A. dated 3-12-60 (Ex. ) wherein he stated “subsequently G, M. Khan with the permission of the landlord assigned his rights to Messes Meiji Masters and Houshang Meiji Master who became the lessees of the plot” There is also the admission of Mane Chino (D. W. 2) in Suit in which he stated "It is also correct that Mr. Pinochet Dins haw had orally agreed to transfer the lease to the Masters’”. This witness also admitted the endorsement (Ex. ) made by him at the foot of letter 4 of the plaint in Suit No. 122 of 1962 and in paragraph 3 of Rent Application No. 2976 of I9t>3. In the face of these admissions and the documentary and oral evidence on record, we agree with the learned Single Judge that there is no truth in the plea that the owner had not consented to the assignment or that the owner had not agreed to grant the lease to the Masters. 14. The next submission of Mr. Feel was that neither Moocher Dins haw was authorized to consent to the assignment of the lease, nor Julian Houshang Dins haw had any authority to give the option to purchase, because the former was not an Attorney of Dr. Eddie. Baruch, while the latter, as attorney, had no power except to manage his properties. This plea was also raised before the learned Single Judge and, for reasons with which we agree and which have been further elaborated by Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain before us, it was rightly rejected. The evidence on record shows that it was Pinochet, uncle of Julian Houshang Dins haw, who was personally dealing with the property in dispute Julian Houshang Dins haw who admittedly

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): which we agree and which have been further elaborated by Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain before us, it was rightly rejected. The evidence on record shows that it was Pinochet, uncle of Julian Houshang Dins haw, who was personally dealing with the property in dispute Julian Houshang Dins haw who admittedly had signed the letter Ex. 8, did not indicate beneath his signature that he signed it as an Attorney. TNC evidence of Houshang Manky Master (P. W. 1) was that Pinochet Dins haw alone managed and dealt with the property MN suit until he fell ill at the end of 1958, thereafter Julian Houshang Dins haw assumed the management of the property. This is further supported by the evidence of Mane Wanna (P. W. 1) MN Suit No. 47 of 19t>0, and is not contradicted by Mane China (D. W. 3), the principal witness of the Owner in Suit. The evidence farther shows that the property was being treated as if it belonged to the firm the “Eduardo Dins haw" and rent bills were being issued in the firm’s name even after the power of attorney dated 3-6-1956 vide Exes., and some checks were also drawn in favor of the firm "Educate Dins haw’’. In the municipal records, the Dins haws were recorded as owner of the said property vide Municipal Extract Ex. dated 29-6-1959 and notices were BMG addressed to them with regard to taxes and assessments, vide Ex. 9, dated 30-10-1957, and were being attended to by the firm “Educate Dins haw’’. The name of Dr. Eddie P. Baruch as owner of the said property did not transpire until later in. However, the plea of want of authority was not raised in tho litigation ; nor was any issue framed thereon, and therefore, it was rightly held by the learned Single Judge that the owner was stopped from agitating this question at the time of arguments J In this regard, Mr. S. Plaque Hussain referred to the observations of the Privy Council in Sri Rajah Affray Lakshmi Venkayjrama Rao Border and another v. Sri Rajah Renata Natasha APA Rao Broader and others (1) to the effect that if parties have acted with knowledge and upon the footing of a proposal made, they are stopped by their conduct from raising plea that the contract is inchoate and incomplete. In Sri Mira Raja Sri v. Secretary of State for India the Lordships for the Privy Council observed — “A litigant who has all along maintained a position in support of one, and in this case the more important branch of his suit, cannot be permitted, when he fails upon this branch to withdraw from the position and assert the contrary, more especially when he thereby places For these reasons, we must reject the submission of Mr. Feel that the assignments of the benefit of the contract or the option to purchase were unauthorized. 15. The next submission of Mr. Feel is that the decision on issue No. MN Suit No.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): more especially when he thereby places For these reasons, we must reject the submission of Mr. Feel that the assignments of the benefit of the contract or the option to purchase were unauthorized. 15. The next submission of Mr. Feel is that the decision on issue No. MN Suit No. 47 of 1960 that Ex. did not create a valid and binding lease was res judicata. Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain submitted that the decision on this issue which was based on the concession of Mr. Diagonal, rightly held that in the absence of registered lease deed, no binding lease can come into legal effect and therefore Mr. Diagonal rightly conceded that the Masters held the premises as monthly tenants. But there was no contest in the suit between the parties whether Ex. was a concluded and binding contract for lease or not. It was neither alleged nor denied by either party m that suit. The Khans with whom Ex. was entered into were dropped from the suit AAD the Masters were sued as monthly tenants on the basis that they held the premises on the terms and conditions of Ex. 8, as to rents and taxes and were liable to ejectment for default of payment. On the contrary, he submitted that the decisions in Suit No. 47 of 1960 were recorded on the basis and the admission by the Owner that Ex. was a binding and concluded contract The only matters involved in Suit No. 47 of 1960 which were res judicata were that Ex. did not constitute a valid lease deed due to non-registration ; that the Owner could not charge rent at the higher rate of Rs. 1985 per month on the basis of Ex. ; and that the Masters were justified in withholding payment of the rent in the circumstances that while the owner was not recognizing them as tenants nor executing the lease deed in their favor, was yet demanding the higher rent and the taxes on the basis of Ex. 8. His submission therefore is that although no issue as to the binding and concluded effect of Ex. was framed, it was yet a question evolved in the suit and indeed was the groundwork of the decision, as the findings on the above-mentioned matters raised in that suit could not be sustained except on the basis of the concluded nature of Ex. 8. Therefore on the principle of constructive res judicata, the implied admission as to concluded nature of Ex. was a matter directly and substantially in issue and was res judicata. In support of the submission that an implied finding based on an agreement or admission by a party in a former suit operates as res judicata in the subsequent soil in the same way as a finding based on an adjudication by the Court, learned Council cited S. ft and Singh v. Rahman Din (minor) and others In that case, in a mortgage Suit a distinct issue was raised whether the mortgagor was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): as res judicata in the subsequent soil in the same way as a finding based on an adjudication by the Court, learned Council cited S. ft and Singh v. Rahman Din (minor) and others In that case, in a mortgage Suit a distinct issue was raised whether the mortgagor was a member of a specified agricultural tribe and whether the mortgage of the suit land contravened the provisions of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act. By compromise, the defendants abandoned the plea that had given rise to this issue and agreed to a decree being passed on the assumption that the mortgage in suit was a perfectly valid mortgage, having been effected by a person who was not a member of the specified agricultural tribe and did not contravene any provisions of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act. When the decree-holder- mortgagee took out execution of the decree, the judgment-debtor resisted the execution on the ground that the mortgage g was a member of the specified agricultural tribe, the sale of his land was prohibited by section 16 of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act. It was held ! “The decree for sale of the suit land or any portion thereof could not have been passed except on a finding in the plaintiff's favor on the issue as to the validity of the mortgage and as to its BMG in contravention of the provisions of the Alienation of Land Act. A finding on this issue in the plaintiffs favor must, therefore, be regarded as implicit in the decree eventually passed. The mere circumstance that this implied finding was based not on an adjudication by the Court but on an agreement or admission by the defendant cannot make any difference in so far as the operation of the principle of res judicata is concerned. It was further pointed out that the ports to be considered in deciding a question of res judicata is whether the judgment in the previous case could be sustained without the determination of the question at issue in the subsequent suit, even though the subject-matters of the two suits are different. If the judgment in the previous suit could not be sustained. without the determination of the question in the subsequent suit the previous decision operates as res judicata and bars the subsequent suit. The consent decree TU the mortgage suit could not be sustained without the determination of the question of the tribe to which the mortgagor belonged. That decree must, therefore, operate as res judicata in any subsequent litigation between the same parties, or parties claiming through or under them. ” Counsel further referred to the principle of constructive res judicata in Tahini Handan Chaudhary and others v. Amanda Chaudhary and others (1) that even if a particular matter be not included in a formal issue, if it is directly and substantially in issue between the parties, and if there be a decision thereon, it will operate as res judicata. To the same effect is

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): and others v. Amanda Chaudhary and others (1) that even if a particular matter be not included in a formal issue, if it is directly and substantially in issue between the parties, and if there be a decision thereon, it will operate as res judicata. To the same effect is the decision in L. Vision Was v. L. Laxmi Na rain What was therefore, res judicata was the decision as to the binding and concluded nature of Ex. 8, which question was involved in that suit acid which was the groundwork of the decision and not the altogether different question whether Ex. created a valid and binding lease. We, therefore, find no force in the submission of Mr. Feel and concur with the finding of the learned Single Judge that the finding on issue No. m Suit No. 47 of 1960 is not res judicata. 16. The fourth submission of Mr. Feel is that as the Masters had committed breaches of the contract (Ex. 8) by defaulting in payment of the rents and taxes, they were, therefore, disentitled to claim the discretionary relief of specific performance of the said contract. In this regard, Mr. Feel referred to the correspondence and the circumstances which should the financial embarrassment of the Masters and inability to pay rents after the “Mayfair Cinema" was demolished on the orders of the Martial Law authorities, when they asked the Owner to relieve them from payment of the rents until the mama business was resumed. As observed earlier, and as rightly submitted by Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain, the decision in Suit No. 47 of 1960 was res judicata which held that the Masters were justified in withholding payment of the rent stipulated m Ex. in the circumstances, and that this question could not be agitated again. Learned counsel further submitted that even if the Masters are held to have defaulted in payment of the said rents which may lead to forfeiture of the lease, that could not affect the option to purchase the suit property. According to counsel, the letter (Ex. 8} comprises the contracts, one for grant of lease and the other for the option to purchase the suit property. He cited Green v. Low (1) for the proposition of law that when the contract comprises parts which are mutually exclusive of one another, and the plaintiff has a right to ask for performance of one part, the Court may treat this as independent of the other and default by the plaintiff 1a respect of the one part will not bar the specific performance of the other. In that case, the plaintiff had entered into an agreement with the defendant, to build a villa on the land of the defendant of the value of £1,000 and agreed to insure and keep it insured Io their joint names in the County Fire office for £90U and agreed to grant a lease of the house for 99 years to the plaintiff upon completion and that if the plaintiff

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): land of the defendant of the value of £1,000 and agreed to insure and keep it insured Io their joint names in the County Fire office for £90U and agreed to grant a lease of the house for 99 years to the plaintiff upon completion and that if the plaintiff should not perform his part, the agreement for lease should be void. The agreement also stipulated that the defendant would have the option of purchasing the land and the building within two years at the price of £500. The plaintiff erected the villa but sure in the wrong office and in his own name alone and within the stipulated period gave notice of his intention to exercise the option of purchase and tendered the purchase money and a conveyance, but the defendant refused to convey the property insisting that the plaintiff had committed breach of the agreement to sure in the manner stipulated. The defendant then commenced proceedings at law to recover possession, while the plaintiff brought the bill m inquiry for specific performance of the contract to sell. The Master of the Rolls (Sir John Reilly) upon the construction of the contract upheld the contention on behalf of the plaintiff that the might to purchase was independent of the right to lease and that even if the right to the latter had been forfeited on account of breach by the plaintiff still the might to purchase remained unaffected and, accordingly, he decreed specific performance and awarded perpetual injunction to restrain the defendant’s proceedings at law. That proposition of law is stated in Fry's, Specific Performance of Contracts (1921), 6th End.t Arts. 865, 938. We would, therefore, agree with the reasoning of the learned Single Judge and the conclusion reached by him on issue No. that the option to purchase was unconditional, independent and separate contract from that for the lease and that FYE exercise of the former option was not dependent on the execution of the lease deed. It is the submission of Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain that the Masters have exercised the option to purchase the suit property given in paragraph of the letter Ex. during the pendency of Suit No. 47 of 1960 in that they amended their plaint in that suit on 16-1-1964 and have prayed for a decree for specific performance of the option to purchase as a principal relief in THS suit. As that relief does not appear to have been granted by the learned Single Judge, Mr. Plaque Hussain during the course of arguments before us has filed an application under section 151, C. P. C. on 14-10-1976 praying for a clarification of the judgment and the decree. No orders, however, can be passed on this application without notice to the appellant. 17. In support of his fifth submission, Mr. Feel relied on clause 5 of the Enemy Property (Custody and Registration) Order, 1965 which exempts enemy property vesting 1a the Custodian from attachment, seizure or sale in execution of a decree of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 377?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 377 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1977-01-11): passed on this application without notice to the appellant. 17. In support of his fifth submission, Mr. Feel relied on clause 5 of the Enemy Property (Custody and Registration) Order, 1965 which exempts enemy property vesting 1a the Custodian from attachment, seizure or sale in execution of a decree of a civil Court. The contention is that as the attachment of the suit property in execution of THS decree for specific performance is barred, this Court should not have granted the decree. Attachment and sale of the attached property is only one mode of execution! of a decree for specific performance of contract under Order XX], rule 32(]j] »ND C. P. C. However it is open to the judgment-creditor to apply to) the Court under rule 5 of the said Order for a direction to appoint any! officer of the Court, such as usually the Nazi, to execute and register THC lease in lieu of attachment and sale. The submission of Mr. Feel, in our opinion, is therefore misconceived and cannot be accepted. 18. The final submission of Mr. Feel is that the award of normal damages against the appellant was arbitrary. But as rightly submitted by Mr. Syed Plaque Hussain, it is not in dispute that the Masters were prevented from constructing the new cinema and the hotel, the building plans of which had already been approved by the K, D. A. as the construction was suspended by the K. D. A. OG account of the objections lodged by Julian Dins haw. From the nature of things, it was not possible for any witness to state the precise amount of the loss suffered by the Masters.1 Therefore, the award of damages could only be given on the basis of ANF estimate. In the absence of evidence from the Owner’s side, we agree! that the award of normal damages was not improper in the circumstances} of the case. 19. For the foregoing reasons, we find no force in this appeal. It is accordingly dismissed with costs. - - — Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 1977 PLD 19 about?
Answer: Case 1977 PLD 19 was decided by PESHAWAR HIGH COURT on 1976-11-08. The case involved GHULAM MURTAZA AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(4) READ WITH S. 3(1), (2). The case was heard by ABDUL GHANI KHAN KHATTAK.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: In case 1977 PLD 19, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(4) READ WITH S. 3(1), (2). This case was heard in PESHAWAR HIGH COURT and decided on 1976-11-08.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1977 PLD 19 were: M.SARDAR KHAN FOR PETITIONER. KH. NAZIR AHMAD FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: ABDUL GHANI KHAN KHATTAK.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: The parties in case 1977 PLD 19 were: GHULAM MURTAZA AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in PESHAWAR HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1977 PLD 19.
Answer: Judgment This Writ Petition by Ghulam Mustafa and Natural Hassan sons of Ghulam Sarawak of Harper, Hazard, challenging the order of 15-2-71 passed by the Custodian of Evacuee property, West Pakistan, relating to a house detailed in the writ petition situate in Morally Masala, Harper- Hazard, arises out of the following facts. 2. On 10-4-63, the Director of Enforcement, Evacuee Property and Claims, I. B. West Pakistan, Lahore addressed a communication (Annexure G) to the Custodian Evacuee Property, W. P. Lahore which runs:- "Secret information was received that one Ghulam Sarawak of Harper City was MN illegal possession of an Evacuee House there. On this, inquiry was instituted by the Enforcement Staff, and it has been revealed that Ghulam Salwar owned a Kacha house, which was got auctioned in satisfaction of a debt by one Behar Lai, a non-Muslim of Harper. Behar Lai served a notice on Ghulam Salwar for ejectment of the house m question, and he compromised with Behar Lai and repurchased the same house from him in the names of his two sons Ghulam Mustafa and Oahu-ul Hassan for Rs. 200. After independence Ghulam Salwar with his sons shifted to another magnificent Pukka house left by Fate Hand Evacuee in another Mo hallah of Harper City. The inquiry bad revealed that Ghulam Salwar was not only in illegal possession of evacuee house abandoned by Fate Hand, but he had also obtained a declaration from the Assistant Custodian, Abbottabad, by showing that the house in question was the one that was purchased from Behar Lai. TT follows that decision of the Assistant Custodian has been obtained through fraud and misrepresentation of facts.” Notices were accordingly issued on 27-4-63 to the respondents under section 43 subsection (4) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 19S7 (Act XII of 1957) to show cause as to why the orders of the Assistant Custodian dated 31-3-59 should not be set aside. In this context, it is pertinent to reproduce the order of the Assistant Custodian dated 31-7- 59 (Annexure C) which TS as follows:- ‘IN THE COURT OF MR. MEXWELL MACGEE, ASSISTANT CUSTODIAN OF E. P. JUDICIAL), HAZARA AND CAMPBELLPUR ATABBOITABAD Case No. 602 1. Ghulam Mustafa, 2. Yahoo-ul Hassan sons of Ghulam Salwar, caste Rajput, Harper Hazard- Applicant versus Bharat Bihari Lai son of Mari NAND, Caste Şahin of Harper Hazard now Evacuee through D. R. C. Hazard-Respondent Suit for declaration to the effect that the house bounded by the shop of Ghulam Salwar on the North, by a public street and House No. 87/C on the South, by the house of Abdul Karim on the East and by house No. 85/C on the West situated MN Mo hallah same is not Evacuee property. The case of plaintiffs is that they have purchased the house in question from respondent by means of two sale deeds. They claim that the house contains no evacuee interest. The c«see was advertised in Iron dated 17-4-55. The D. R. C. was intimated on whose behalf written statement denying the plaintiff's title has been filed. The plaintiff has exam med Malik Aziz-Ur-Rehman Pleader the marginal witness and Ghulam Bahia the scribe of the sale-deeds dated 28- 1-45 in good faith and for valid consideration. The value of the property sold in each sale deed in Rs. 99 and as such they are not compulsorily registerable. Moreover the transaction dates back to 28-1-45. This being the case this Department cannot declare the property in suit to be Evacuee property. In view of the above discussion allow the petition and hold that the house in question is not an evacuee property. Announced. (SD.) Maxwell McGee. 31-7-59. Assistant Custodian, E. P. (Judicial), Hazard and Campbell. No. /A. C. H. dated 31-8-59. Copy to Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Hazard for information. (SD.) Maxwell McGee Assistant Custodian E. P. (Judicial) Hazard and Campbell.” The impugned order dated 15-2-71 (Annexure I) reads:- application was filed before the Assistant Custodian in 1954 for a declaration to the effect that the house bounded by the shop of Ghulam Salwar on the North of Street No. 83 with the house of Abdul Karim MN the East and House No. 85/C on the West Mo hallah Motional, Harper was the property of the plaintiff, Ghulam Mustafa and Natural Hasan, and was not evacuee property. The Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner filed a Written Statement denying the title of the appellants. However, on the basis of alleged unregistered two sale-deeds of 28-1-45 for Rs. 99 each, the learned Assistant Custodian held on 31-7-59 that the house in question was not evacuee property. The case of the Enforcement Directorate, on the other hand, was that Ghulam Salwar, the father of the respondents, owned a Kacha House, which was got auctioned by evacuee Behar Lai for the satisfaction of debt. Ghulam Salwar compromised and repurchased the house in the name of his two sons for Rs. 200. 2. However, after the Partition, Ghulam Salwar shifted to another big Dacca house left by Fate Hand, Evacuee, Harper and got a question-.able declaration from the Assistant Custodian that this house of the Evacuee, Fate Hand, was non-evacuee and had been purchased from. Behar Lai. On 7- 2-64, the Assistant Accounts Officer (Legal) filed a written argument on behalf of the State in which it was said that the disputed house No. 1133-New/8e-01d, Harper was an evacuee property as it was recorded to be the ownership of Dali Singh in the Municipal Record of 1903-04 after whom his wife, Teen Kaur was entered as its owner. Then their daughter, Ram Kaur inherited it and sold it to Fate Hand by a Registered Sale Deed. Fate Hand continued to live in it till his departure for India. After the Partition, one Yousuf Being, Sub-Post Master, occupied it, but it continued to be in the name of Fate Hand as owner in the property Tax Record. 3. In 1950, the house was occupied by Ghulam Salwar, the father of the respondents, who were then served with ejectment notice. The Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner finally heard the appeal of Ghulam Salwar for house No. 86/Con 20-5-51 and decided that the appellant, Ghulam Salwar has been living in the house on payment of rent. The house had also been ordered in 1948 to be allotted to the appellant and, as long as he paid the rent, he should not be ejected. Ghulam Salwar, subsequently, filed a declaration under M. L. R. 49 to the effect that he was in the occupation of this evacuee house, proving thereby that the Storey of its having been burnt or razed to the ground in 1953 was untrue. The house in question, was transferred to MST. Kane Fatima in the Earmarking Scheme, who was also issued a P. T. O. on 23-6-61. Possession could, however, not be handed over to the transferee MST. Kane Fatima as the declaration of the Assistant Custodian, dated 31-7-59, came in its way. The order of the Assistant Custodian was assailed on the grounds that the Sale deeds did not mention the boundaries of the property and the father of the respondents, Ghulam Salwar, had wrongly sought for declaration about a properly which, in fact, belonged to Fate Hand and could not be the subject-matter of the Sale Deeds. The reference is made in the Sale Deeds about another evacuee property which was the subject-matter of a litigation between Behar Lai and Ghulam Salwar and was ultimately purchased BP Ghulam Salwar. He, however, sold that house to Abdul Aziz a local Muslim. 4. Yet another series of litigations between the transferee, Keynes Fatima and the respondents, Ghulam Mustafa and Natural Hasan etc. started before the Rent Controller, when MST. Kane Fatima filed a suit for the ejectment of the respondents from and for recovery of rent for house No. 1133/C. The Rent Controller and subsequently in appeal the learned District Judge rejected the request of the transferee on the ground that she could not establish the relationship between her and the respondents in respect of the suit house to be that of landlord and tenant. All the above developments only lead to one conclusion, namely that it has to be decided whether house No. 1133/C/86/C was the same house which had been purchased by the respondent, Ghulam Salwar from Behar Lai or Is this the house which belonged to the evacuee, Fate Hand, and on which the respondents Ghulam Salwar or his sons, could have no claim of ownership ? 5. It has never been the claim of Ghulam Salwar or his two sons that they had any proprietary interest whatsoever in the house owned by Fate Hand, evacuee. This house was given to Ghulam Salwar on rent by Fate Hand as will be seen from Ex. R/3, a Rent Deed executed by Fate Hand. There can also be no hesitation in concluding that this house was numbered 1133-New/86-C-0ld, as Ghulam Salwar had himself filed a declaration form No. 9400 on 30-12-58.under M. L. R, admitting that he was in occupation of the above numbered evacuee property. Which and where is this house No. 1133-New/86-C-01d which belonged to Fate Hand, evacuee? From Share Abaci of 1903–04 it is seen that this house which was then numbered 796-797, belonged to one Dip Singh. Then m 1917-18, the records show that the house was renumbered to 2081 and was the ownership of Teen Kaur, widow of Dali Singh. It was merited by their daughter. Ram Kaur. who sold it to Fate Hand in 1939 vide Ex. C/7. Thereafter the house continued to BS the ownership of Fate Hand and, in 1944-45 and 1948-49 it was shown, to be the ownership of Fate Hand. Even when an ejectment Notice was given to Ghulam Salwar in 1950, he admitted in the appeal filed by him before the Settlement Authorities on 14-12-50 that he was in the occupation of 86-C for several years as a tenant. 6. With the above identification of the house No. 1133-New/86-C-01d belonging to Fate Hand, evacuee having been unquestionably established, the issue to be decided is whether the boundary of the property for which a declaration was claimed by Ghulam Salwar in 1959 was this very property of Fate Hand or was the property which, at one time, belonged to Ghulam Salwar, was purchased by Behar Lai in decree and repurchased by Ghulam Salwar for his sons under two Sale Deeds of Rs. 99 each. Tie sale deeds do not, unfortunately, mention the exact details of the properties sold through them and left their identity unclarified. Ghulam Salwar then went to the Assistant Custodian in 1959 to seek declaration for a property whose boundaries were mentioned in his application, Ex. D. B. Without gong into the exact identity of this property, the land Assistant Custodian granted the declaration. The boundaries as mentioned in the application were:- North.-Property of Ghulam Salwar, applicant. West.-85/C. South.- 97/C and Road. East.-House of Bamboo Abdul Arm. 7. When, however, MST. Franz Fatima, the transferee of House No. 113-New/86-C-Old of Evacuee, Fate Hand went to the Rent Controller for the recovery of rent from Ghulam Salwar, the occupant, AAD his ejectment, she mentioned the boundaries of her property to be:- North.-Road Main Bag Al. West. - Occupied by Fair Adam Misti 85/C. South.-Kacha AAM and house No. 87/C. East.-Occupied by Anwar Ahmad. 8. The suit was dismissed by the learned Rent Controller and then by the learned District Judge in appeal on the ground that the relationship of landlord and tenant as not established between MST. Kane Fatima and Ghulam Salwar. The learned Rent Controller and the District Judge purported to conclude that the property for which a declaration had already been granted by the learned Custodian to Ghulam Salwar was _ the same as the house claimed by MST. Kane Fatima the transferee and this could bo the house No. 86/C. 9. This controversy would obviously have been avoided had the learned Assistant Custodian applied himself to find out as to which property belonged to Fate Hand, evacuee, and which property had been repurchased by Ghulam Salwar from Behar Lai, instead of accepting, without any enquiry, the claim of Ghulam Salwar from Behar La, instead of accepting, without any enquiry, the claim of Ghulam Salwar to the declaration of the property, whose boundaries were indicated by him in the application for declaration. 10. It appears to have been rightly concluded by the learned Rent Controller as well as the learned District Judge, that the property which was bounded on the North by Road, on West by &5/C and on the South by 87/C was most likely to be No. 86/C. It was, in fact, property No. 86/Cold, new 1133, and this is indisputably, the property which belonged to-the evacuee, Fate Hand. Both from his own declaration under M. L. R. m 1958 and his appeal against the ejectment orders filed in 1950, Ghulam Salwar admitted this property to be an evacuee property and that he Wei» only living as a tenant therein. If a declaration of ownership by him was obtained by Ghulam Salwar and given by Assistant Custodian about this property, such a declaration and order were void and had no legal effect whatsoever. I am convinced that the house and property bounded in the North by a Road, in the West by 1132- New/85-C-01d, in the South by house No. 87/C-Old and Kacha, and in the East by a house occupied by Abdul Karim/Abdul Aziz and which belonged to Permanent and Avichai, evacuees, was the same house which belonged to the evacuee, Fate Hand and which carried number 1133-New/86-C-Old. Ghulam Salwar had and could have no proprietary interest MN this property, which was definitely an evacuee property. 11. Consequently, I hereby set aside the orders of the Assistant Custodian, dated 31-7- 1959 and declare the property No. 1133-New/86-C- 01d with the boundaries as mentioned above to be evacuee, and rightly transferred under the Settlement Laws as a part of the Compensation Pool. It is not for the Custodian or Settlement Authorities to identify the property said to have been repurchased by Ghulam Salwar or his sons from Behar Lai in 1945 Udder unregistered sale deeds of Rs. 99 each. That property was definitely not the one for which a declaration was sought for and obtained from the Assistant Custodian.” Mr. M. Vardar Khan, Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the house in question was not treated as evacuee property on or before the IST of January, 1957, therefore, TT could not have been declared as evacuee property, therefore the impugned order is ultra vires and without jurisdiction. Subsection (4) of section 43 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 (Act No. XII of 1957) reads ‘(4) The Custodian may, at any time, either of his own motion or on application made to him within the prescribed period 1a this behalf call for the record of any proceeding for the administration of evacuee property, which is pending before or has been disposed of by, an officer subordinate to him, including an Additional Custodian, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed in the said proceeding, and may pass such order in relation thereto as be books fit : any order affecting any person without giving such person and the Rehabilitation Authority an opportunity of being heard.” The above revisional power of the Custodian is subject to the following Subsection (1) of section 3 of the Act reads s- “(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January, 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or, as the case may, be, as evacuee property, on or after the said date. Subsection (2) reads “Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply- (a) to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before the date mentioned therein for treating such person as evacuee or such property as evacuee property ; or (b) to any property which is occupied, supervised, or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February, 1947, has not Bea accepted or approved by the Custodian.” Emphasizing the word ‘treatment’, the learned counsel was emphatic on the post that the property in question having not been treated as evacuee property before the first of January, 1957, TNE jurisdiction of the Custodian is therefore barred. In support, the learned counsel cited the case of Seed Ali Guitar Shah Dara and others The Custodian, Evacuee Property Following in TAE precedent case are important to note "In the first place, the vesting of property MN the Custodian or holding of property on behalf of the Custodian TS only by fiction of law. In that application these provisions are of a general nature because they do not deal with any specific or identified property. In the second place, the most formidable hurdle in the way of the Department pertains to the words “not treated’’ used in the subsection under consideration. The significance of these words cannot be overlooked. In my opinion their meaning is that the mere vesting of the property in the Custodian is not sufficient. The competent authorities must have done some overt act in respect of some specific property, namely that any particular person or any particular property must have been treated by a competent authority as evacuee or evacuee property.” The distinction becomes clearer from the recapitulation of the following facts posting in the direction of the property having been treated all along as evacuee property. On 25-6-1954 a declaratory plaint (on file No. 602 ACM) was instituted by the petitioners before the Assistant Custodian, Hazard wherein paragraph of the plait reads CJLIFR *S~ GRJ JJ} LXX* £ ACLJ try I(- (J* If In the written statement# submitted by the Rehabilitation Department, the averments MN the plaint were controverted alleging that the petitioners (plaintiffs) were in unauthorized occupation of the house in question and that Ghulam Salwar father of the petitioners (plaintiffs) was entered in the record of the department as a tenant. In the written statement mentioned above, it has been mentioned that the occupant of the house in question was served with a notice of ejectment. In this context, sub-para, (a) of paragraph No. of the objection application by Ghulam Salwar in appeal No. 300/ Misc. decided on 30-5-1952 (Copy Ex. C. 9), is reproduced Bel ___ JJ Ina S' C J L* GF» 15-16 500 c5* ISJ* YP <2- GUI(SY* *USC>«* 7\ 1,153 k_ On the above objection petition which was filed on 14-12-1950, in the Court of K. S. Ghulam Dad Khan, AssistanteJomt Deputy Commissioner and D. S. C, Hazard at Abbottabad, on 30-5-1951, the following order was passed t- “Ghulam Vardar son of Sadat Khan of Harper Appellant. Versus Crown.... Respondent. Appeal against the order of ejectment from house No. 86/C situated at Mo hallah Company Bag, Risalawala, Harper.” 30-5-1951.-Appellant present. I have perused the police file sent for on appellant’s request and have found that the appellant has been living in the house on payment of rent since the time of Hindu Proprietor. Previously the number of the house was and. The HONY. Custodian M. Aladdin on the report of the S. A. C. Harper, dated 10-12-1948 ordered to allot the house to the present appellant. In view of this order the appellant is an authorized allottee with old possession and as long as he would pay rent he would not be ejected. Arrears to be cleared at once. Appeal is accepted and notice is cancelled. Announced (SD.) Khan Ghulam Dad Khan, D. R. C. Hazard.” Ellis thus clear from the record of the case that the property in question has undoubtedly been treated evacuee property. Therefore, the bar of jurisdiction canvassed by the learned counsel in the impugned order has no force. The case of Rawalpindi Central Co-Operative Bank Ltd. Rawalpindi v. Custodian, Evacuee Property, W. P. Lahore and 3 others (1) was also quoted in support, wherein it was held ‘ Neither Custodian nor Rehabilitation Authorities treating a Banking company or its property as evacuee or evacuee property at any time before 1-1-1957. Such Property, held, cannot be treated as evacuee property by authorities concerned for first time after 1- 1-57.” The distinction becomes further clear by reproducing the following in the precedent case (page 238) “14-A. It may be seen that subsection (1) of section 3 is mandatory in its character and has an overriding effect. As already stated neither the Custodian nor the Rehabilitation Authorities treated the Punjab and Kashmir Bank Ltd. or its property as evacuee or evacuee property at any time before IST of January 1957. It, therefore, follows that they had no jurisdiction to treat the property in dispute as evacuee property for the first time after the IST of January, 1957.” Follow mg in the case of Khhanchand Johanan and others v. Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi, South Zone and others (1) fairly indicates that the case of the petitioner cannot have support from the precedent case t- The very fact that revisional and review powers of the Custodian under section 43 of the Act are not specifically saved clearly indicates that it is also subject to the provisions of section 3. The Legislature has saved CERTAM actions and pending proceedings in subsection (2) of section 3 (from the effect of subsection (1) of the same section. But they are only those cases where either an action has commenced, that is some steps have been taken, or proceedings are pending before the Custodian immediately before the 1st of January, 1957. But if no steps have been taken for filing the appeal or revision, such cases are not excepted from the effect of subsection (1) of section 3 of the Act. The words “in respect of which any action has commenced” occurring in section 3 of Act refer only to those cases where the Department has taken some steps to treat any person or property as evacuee but which has not taken any final shape or has not resulted in any effective action.” The misconception of seeking support from the above-quoted precedent case is evident from the fact that the entitlement or they house in question not only vested in the Custodian, but it was treated as evacuee Property years before the bar of jurisdiction, and to repeat it long before the 1st of January, 1957. The above narration of facts sufficiently, brings home the fact that the impugned order, under the circumstances of the case is unexceptionable, and the Writ Petition is, therefore, dismissed with costs. s. a. u. Petition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): Judgment This Writ Petition by Ghulam Mustafa and Natural Hassan sons of Ghulam Sarawak of Harper, Hazard, challenging the order of 15-2-71 passed by the Custodian of Evacuee property, West Pakistan, relating to a house detailed in the writ petition situate in Morally Masala, Harper- Hazard, arises out of the following facts. 2. On 10-4-63, the Director of Enforcement, Evacuee Property and Claims, I. B. West Pakistan, Lahore addressed a communication (Annexure G) to the Custodian Evacuee Property, W. P. Lahore which runs:- "Secret information was received that one Ghulam Sarawak of Harper City was MN illegal possession of an Evacuee House there. On this, inquiry was instituted by the Enforcement Staff, and it has been revealed that Ghulam Salwar owned a Kacha house, which was got auctioned in satisfaction of a debt by one Behar Lai, a non-Muslim of Harper. Behar Lai served a notice on Ghulam Salwar for ejectment of the house m question, and he compromised with Behar Lai and repurchased the same house from him in the names of his two sons Ghulam Mustafa and Oahu-ul Hassan for Rs. 200. After independence Ghulam Salwar with his sons shifted to another magnificent Pukka house left by Fate Hand Evacuee in another Mo hallah of Harper City. The inquiry bad revealed that Ghulam Salwar was not only in illegal possession of evacuee house abandoned by Fate Hand, but he had also obtained a declaration from the Assistant Custodian, Abbottabad, by showing that the house in question was the one that was purchased from Behar Lai. TT follows that decision of the Assistant Custodian has been obtained through fraud and misrepresentation of facts.” Notices were accordingly issued on 27-4-63 to the respondents under section 43 subsection (4) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 19S7 (Act XII of 1957) to show cause as to why the orders of the Assistant Custodian dated 31-3-59 should not be set aside. In this context, it is pertinent to reproduce the order of the Assistant Custodian dated 31-7- 59 (Annexure C) which TS as follows:- ‘IN THE COURT OF MR. MEXWELL MACGEE, ASSISTANT CUSTODIAN OF E. P. JUDICIAL), HAZARA AND CAMPBELLPUR ATABBOITABAD Case No. 602 1. Ghulam Mustafa, 2. Yahoo-ul Hassan sons of Ghulam Salwar, caste Rajput, Harper Hazard- Applicant versus Bharat Bihari Lai son of Mari NAND, Caste Şahin of Harper Hazard now Evacuee through D. R. C. Hazard-Respondent Suit for declaration to the effect that the house bounded by the shop of Ghulam Salwar on the North, by a public street and House No. 87/C on the South, by the house of Abdul Karim on the East and by house No. 85/C on the West situated MN Mo hallah same is not Evacuee property. The case of plaintiffs is that they have purchased the house in question from respondent by means of two sale deeds. They claim that the house contains no evacuee interest. The c«see was advertised in Iron dated 17-4-55. The D. R. C. was intimated on whose

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): is not Evacuee property. The case of plaintiffs is that they have purchased the house in question from respondent by means of two sale deeds. They claim that the house contains no evacuee interest. The c«see was advertised in Iron dated 17-4-55. The D. R. C. was intimated on whose behalf written statement denying the plaintiff's title has been filed. The plaintiff has exam med Malik Aziz-Ur-Rehman Pleader the marginal witness and Ghulam Bahia the scribe of the sale-deeds dated 28- 1-45 in good faith and for valid consideration. The value of the property sold in each sale deed in Rs. 99 and as such they are not compulsorily registerable. Moreover the transaction dates back to 28-1-45. This being the case this Department cannot declare the property in suit to be Evacuee property. In view of the above discussion allow the petition and hold that the house in question is not an evacuee property. Announced. (SD.) Maxwell McGee. 31-7-59. Assistant Custodian, E. P. (Judicial), Hazard and Campbell. No. /A. C. H. dated 31-8-59. Copy to Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Hazard for information. (SD.) Maxwell McGee Assistant Custodian E. P. (Judicial) Hazard and Campbell.” The impugned order dated 15-2-71 (Annexure I) reads:- application was filed before the Assistant Custodian in 1954 for a declaration to the effect that the house bounded by the shop of Ghulam Salwar on the North of Street No. 83 with the house of Abdul Karim MN the East and House No. 85/C on the West Mo hallah Motional, Harper was the property of the plaintiff, Ghulam Mustafa and Natural Hasan, and was not evacuee property. The Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner filed a Written Statement denying the title of the appellants. However, on the basis of alleged unregistered two sale-deeds of 28-1-45 for Rs. 99 each, the learned Assistant Custodian held on 31-7-59 that the house in question was not evacuee property. The case of the Enforcement Directorate, on the other hand, was that Ghulam Salwar, the father of the respondents, owned a Kacha House, which was got auctioned by evacuee Behar Lai for the satisfaction of debt. Ghulam Salwar compromised and repurchased the house in the name of his two sons for Rs. 200. 2. However, after the Partition, Ghulam Salwar shifted to another big Dacca house left by Fate Hand, Evacuee, Harper and got a question-.able declaration from the Assistant Custodian that this house of the Evacuee, Fate Hand, was non-evacuee and had been purchased from. Behar Lai. On 7- 2-64, the Assistant Accounts Officer (Legal) filed a written argument on behalf of the State in which it was said that the disputed house No. 1133-New/8e-01d, Harper was an evacuee property as it was recorded to be the ownership of Dali Singh in the Municipal Record of 1903-04 after whom his wife, Teen Kaur was entered as its owner. Then their daughter, Ram Kaur inherited it and sold it to Fate Hand by a Registered Sale Deed. Fate Hand continued to live in it till his departure

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): the ownership of Dali Singh in the Municipal Record of 1903-04 after whom his wife, Teen Kaur was entered as its owner. Then their daughter, Ram Kaur inherited it and sold it to Fate Hand by a Registered Sale Deed. Fate Hand continued to live in it till his departure for India. After the Partition, one Yousuf Being, Sub-Post Master, occupied it, but it continued to be in the name of Fate Hand as owner in the property Tax Record. 3. In 1950, the house was occupied by Ghulam Salwar, the father of the respondents, who were then served with ejectment notice. The Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner finally heard the appeal of Ghulam Salwar for house No. 86/Con 20-5-51 and decided that the appellant, Ghulam Salwar has been living in the house on payment of rent. The house had also been ordered in 1948 to be allotted to the appellant and, as long as he paid the rent, he should not be ejected. Ghulam Salwar, subsequently, filed a declaration under M. L. R. 49 to the effect that he was in the occupation of this evacuee house, proving thereby that the Storey of its having been burnt or razed to the ground in 1953 was untrue. The house in question, was transferred to MST. Kane Fatima in the Earmarking Scheme, who was also issued a P. T. O. on 23-6-61. Possession could, however, not be handed over to the transferee MST. Kane Fatima as the declaration of the Assistant Custodian, dated 31-7-59, came in its way. The order of the Assistant Custodian was assailed on the grounds that the Sale deeds did not mention the boundaries of the property and the father of the respondents, Ghulam Salwar, had wrongly sought for declaration about a properly which, in fact, belonged to Fate Hand and could not be the subject-matter of the Sale Deeds. The reference is made in the Sale Deeds about another evacuee property which was the subject-matter of a litigation between Behar Lai and Ghulam Salwar and was ultimately purchased BP Ghulam Salwar. He, however, sold that house to Abdul Aziz a local Muslim. 4. Yet another series of litigations between the transferee, Keynes Fatima and the respondents, Ghulam Mustafa and Natural Hasan etc. started before the Rent Controller, when MST. Kane Fatima filed a suit for the ejectment of the respondents from and for recovery of rent for house No. 1133/C. The Rent Controller and subsequently in appeal the learned District Judge rejected the request of the transferee on the ground that she could not establish the relationship between her and the respondents in respect of the suit house to be that of landlord and tenant. All the above developments only lead to one conclusion, namely that it has to be decided whether house No. 1133/C/86/C was the same house which had been purchased by the respondent, Ghulam Salwar from Behar Lai or Is this the house which belonged to the evacuee, Fate Hand, and on which the respondents

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): developments only lead to one conclusion, namely that it has to be decided whether house No. 1133/C/86/C was the same house which had been purchased by the respondent, Ghulam Salwar from Behar Lai or Is this the house which belonged to the evacuee, Fate Hand, and on which the respondents Ghulam Salwar or his sons, could have no claim of ownership ? 5. It has never been the claim of Ghulam Salwar or his two sons that they had any proprietary interest whatsoever in the house owned by Fate Hand, evacuee. This house was given to Ghulam Salwar on rent by Fate Hand as will be seen from Ex. R/3, a Rent Deed executed by Fate Hand. There can also be no hesitation in concluding that this house was numbered 1133-New/86-C-0ld, as Ghulam Salwar had himself filed a declaration form No. 9400 on 30-12-58.under M. L. R, admitting that he was in occupation of the above numbered evacuee property. Which and where is this house No. 1133-New/86-C-01d which belonged to Fate Hand, evacuee? From Share Abaci of 1903–04 it is seen that this house which was then numbered 796-797, belonged to one Dip Singh. Then m 1917-18, the records show that the house was renumbered to 2081 and was the ownership of Teen Kaur, widow of Dali Singh. It was merited by their daughter. Ram Kaur. who sold it to Fate Hand in 1939 vide Ex. C/7. Thereafter the house continued to BS the ownership of Fate Hand and, in 1944-45 and 1948-49 it was shown, to be the ownership of Fate Hand. Even when an ejectment Notice was given to Ghulam Salwar in 1950, he admitted in the appeal filed by him before the Settlement Authorities on 14-12-50 that he was in the occupation of 86-C for several years as a tenant. 6. With the above identification of the house No. 1133-New/86-C-01d belonging to Fate Hand, evacuee having been unquestionably established, the issue to be decided is whether the boundary of the property for which a declaration was claimed by Ghulam Salwar in 1959 was this very property of Fate Hand or was the property which, at one time, belonged to Ghulam Salwar, was purchased by Behar Lai in decree and repurchased by Ghulam Salwar for his sons under two Sale Deeds of Rs. 99 each. Tie sale deeds do not, unfortunately, mention the exact details of the properties sold through them and left their identity unclarified. Ghulam Salwar then went to the Assistant Custodian in 1959 to seek declaration for a property whose boundaries were mentioned in his application, Ex. D. B. Without gong into the exact identity of this property, the land Assistant Custodian granted the declaration. The boundaries as mentioned in the application were:- North.-Property of Ghulam Salwar, applicant. West.-85/C. South.- 97/C and Road. East.-House of Bamboo Abdul Arm. 7. When, however, MST. Franz Fatima, the transferee of House No. 113-New/86-C-Old of Evacuee, Fate Hand went to the Rent Controller for the recovery of rent from

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): The boundaries as mentioned in the application were:- North.-Property of Ghulam Salwar, applicant. West.-85/C. South.- 97/C and Road. East.-House of Bamboo Abdul Arm. 7. When, however, MST. Franz Fatima, the transferee of House No. 113-New/86-C-Old of Evacuee, Fate Hand went to the Rent Controller for the recovery of rent from Ghulam Salwar, the occupant, AAD his ejectment, she mentioned the boundaries of her property to be:- North.-Road Main Bag Al. West. - Occupied by Fair Adam Misti 85/C. South.-Kacha AAM and house No. 87/C. East.-Occupied by Anwar Ahmad. 8. The suit was dismissed by the learned Rent Controller and then by the learned District Judge in appeal on the ground that the relationship of landlord and tenant as not established between MST. Kane Fatima and Ghulam Salwar. The learned Rent Controller and the District Judge purported to conclude that the property for which a declaration had already been granted by the learned Custodian to Ghulam Salwar was _ the same as the house claimed by MST. Kane Fatima the transferee and this could bo the house No. 86/C. 9. This controversy would obviously have been avoided had the learned Assistant Custodian applied himself to find out as to which property belonged to Fate Hand, evacuee, and which property had been repurchased by Ghulam Salwar from Behar Lai, instead of accepting, without any enquiry, the claim of Ghulam Salwar from Behar La, instead of accepting, without any enquiry, the claim of Ghulam Salwar to the declaration of the property, whose boundaries were indicated by him in the application for declaration. 10. It appears to have been rightly concluded by the learned Rent Controller as well as the learned District Judge, that the property which was bounded on the North by Road, on West by &5/C and on the South by 87/C was most likely to be No. 86/C. It was, in fact, property No. 86/Cold, new 1133, and this is indisputably, the property which belonged to-the evacuee, Fate Hand. Both from his own declaration under M. L. R. m 1958 and his appeal against the ejectment orders filed in 1950, Ghulam Salwar admitted this property to be an evacuee property and that he Wei» only living as a tenant therein. If a declaration of ownership by him was obtained by Ghulam Salwar and given by Assistant Custodian about this property, such a declaration and order were void and had no legal effect whatsoever. I am convinced that the house and property bounded in the North by a Road, in the West by 1132- New/85-C-01d, in the South by house No. 87/C-Old and Kacha, and in the East by a house occupied by Abdul Karim/Abdul Aziz and which belonged to Permanent and Avichai, evacuees, was the same house which belonged to the evacuee, Fate Hand and which carried number 1133-New/86-C-Old. Ghulam Salwar had and could have no proprietary interest MN this property, which was definitely an evacuee property. 11. Consequently, I hereby set aside the orders of the Assistant Custodian, dated 31-7-

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): Avichai, evacuees, was the same house which belonged to the evacuee, Fate Hand and which carried number 1133-New/86-C-Old. Ghulam Salwar had and could have no proprietary interest MN this property, which was definitely an evacuee property. 11. Consequently, I hereby set aside the orders of the Assistant Custodian, dated 31-7- 1959 and declare the property No. 1133-New/86-C- 01d with the boundaries as mentioned above to be evacuee, and rightly transferred under the Settlement Laws as a part of the Compensation Pool. It is not for the Custodian or Settlement Authorities to identify the property said to have been repurchased by Ghulam Salwar or his sons from Behar Lai in 1945 Udder unregistered sale deeds of Rs. 99 each. That property was definitely not the one for which a declaration was sought for and obtained from the Assistant Custodian.” Mr. M. Vardar Khan, Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the house in question was not treated as evacuee property on or before the IST of January, 1957, therefore, TT could not have been declared as evacuee property, therefore the impugned order is ultra vires and without jurisdiction. Subsection (4) of section 43 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 (Act No. XII of 1957) reads ‘(4) The Custodian may, at any time, either of his own motion or on application made to him within the prescribed period 1a this behalf call for the record of any proceeding for the administration of evacuee property, which is pending before or has been disposed of by, an officer subordinate to him, including an Additional Custodian, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed in the said proceeding, and may pass such order in relation thereto as be books fit : any order affecting any person without giving such person and the Rehabilitation Authority an opportunity of being heard.” The above revisional power of the Custodian is subject to the following Subsection (1) of section 3 of the Act reads s- “(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the first day of January, 1957, shall be treated as evacuee or, as the case may, be, as evacuee property, on or after the said date. Subsection (2) reads “Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply- (a) to any person in respect of whom or to any property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before the date mentioned therein for treating such person as evacuee or such property as evacuee property ; or (b) to any property which is occupied, supervised, or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February, 1947, has not Bea accepted or approved by the Custodian.” Emphasizing the word ‘treatment’, the learned counsel was emphatic on the post that the property in question having not been treated as evacuee property before

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): a person whose authority or right so to do after the twenty-eighth day of February, 1947, has not Bea accepted or approved by the Custodian.” Emphasizing the word ‘treatment’, the learned counsel was emphatic on the post that the property in question having not been treated as evacuee property before the first of January, 1957, TNE jurisdiction of the Custodian is therefore barred. In support, the learned counsel cited the case of Seed Ali Guitar Shah Dara and others The Custodian, Evacuee Property Following in TAE precedent case are important to note "In the first place, the vesting of property MN the Custodian or holding of property on behalf of the Custodian TS only by fiction of law. In that application these provisions are of a general nature because they do not deal with any specific or identified property. In the second place, the most formidable hurdle in the way of the Department pertains to the words “not treated’’ used in the subsection under consideration. The significance of these words cannot be overlooked. In my opinion their meaning is that the mere vesting of the property in the Custodian is not sufficient. The competent authorities must have done some overt act in respect of some specific property, namely that any particular person or any particular property must have been treated by a competent authority as evacuee or evacuee property.” The distinction becomes clearer from the recapitulation of the following facts posting in the direction of the property having been treated all along as evacuee property. On 25-6-1954 a declaratory plaint (on file No. 602 ACM) was instituted by the petitioners before the Assistant Custodian, Hazard wherein paragraph of the plait reads CJLIFR *S~ GRJ JJ} LXX* £ ACLJ try I(- (J* If In the written statement# submitted by the Rehabilitation Department, the averments MN the plaint were controverted alleging that the petitioners (plaintiffs) were in unauthorized occupation of the house in question and that Ghulam Salwar father of the petitioners (plaintiffs) was entered in the record of the department as a tenant. In the written statement mentioned above, it has been mentioned that the occupant of the house in question was served with a notice of ejectment. In this context, sub-para, (a) of paragraph No. of the objection application by Ghulam Salwar in appeal No. 300/ Misc. decided on 30-5-1952 (Copy Ex. C. 9), is reproduced Bel ___ JJ Ina S' C J L* GF» 15-16 500 c5* ISJ* YP <2- GUI(SY* *USC>«* 7\ 1,153 k_ On the above objection petition which was filed on 14-12-1950, in the Court of K. S. Ghulam Dad Khan, AssistanteJomt Deputy Commissioner and D. S. C, Hazard at Abbottabad, on 30-5-1951, the following order was passed t- “Ghulam Vardar son of Sadat Khan of Harper Appellant. Versus Crown.... Respondent. Appeal against the order of ejectment from house No. 86/C situated at Mo hallah Company Bag, Risalawala, Harper.” 30-5-1951.-Appellant present. I have perused the police file sent for on appellant’s request and have found that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): was passed t- “Ghulam Vardar son of Sadat Khan of Harper Appellant. Versus Crown.... Respondent. Appeal against the order of ejectment from house No. 86/C situated at Mo hallah Company Bag, Risalawala, Harper.” 30-5-1951.-Appellant present. I have perused the police file sent for on appellant’s request and have found that the appellant has been living in the house on payment of rent since the time of Hindu Proprietor. Previously the number of the house was and. The HONY. Custodian M. Aladdin on the report of the S. A. C. Harper, dated 10-12-1948 ordered to allot the house to the present appellant. In view of this order the appellant is an authorized allottee with old possession and as long as he would pay rent he would not be ejected. Arrears to be cleared at once. Appeal is accepted and notice is cancelled. Announced (SD.) Khan Ghulam Dad Khan, D. R. C. Hazard.” Ellis thus clear from the record of the case that the property in question has undoubtedly been treated evacuee property. Therefore, the bar of jurisdiction canvassed by the learned counsel in the impugned order has no force. The case of Rawalpindi Central Co-Operative Bank Ltd. Rawalpindi v. Custodian, Evacuee Property, W. P. Lahore and 3 others (1) was also quoted in support, wherein it was held ‘ Neither Custodian nor Rehabilitation Authorities treating a Banking company or its property as evacuee or evacuee property at any time before 1-1-1957. Such Property, held, cannot be treated as evacuee property by authorities concerned for first time after 1- 1-57.” The distinction becomes further clear by reproducing the following in the precedent case (page 238) “14-A. It may be seen that subsection (1) of section 3 is mandatory in its character and has an overriding effect. As already stated neither the Custodian nor the Rehabilitation Authorities treated the Punjab and Kashmir Bank Ltd. or its property as evacuee or evacuee property at any time before IST of January 1957. It, therefore, follows that they had no jurisdiction to treat the property in dispute as evacuee property for the first time after the IST of January, 1957.” Follow mg in the case of Khhanchand Johanan and others v. Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi, South Zone and others (1) fairly indicates that the case of the petitioner cannot have support from the precedent case t- The very fact that revisional and review powers of the Custodian under section 43 of the Act are not specifically saved clearly indicates that it is also subject to the provisions of section 3. The Legislature has saved CERTAM actions and pending proceedings in subsection (2) of section 3 (from the effect of subsection (1) of the same section. But they are only those cases where either an action has commenced, that is some steps have been taken, or proceedings are pending before the Custodian immediately before the 1st of January, 1957. But if no steps have been taken for filing the appeal or revision, such cases are not excepted

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 19?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 19 (PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, 1976-11-08): they are only those cases where either an action has commenced, that is some steps have been taken, or proceedings are pending before the Custodian immediately before the 1st of January, 1957. But if no steps have been taken for filing the appeal or revision, such cases are not excepted from the effect of subsection (1) of section 3 of the Act. The words “in respect of which any action has commenced” occurring in section 3 of Act refer only to those cases where the Department has taken some steps to treat any person or property as evacuee but which has not taken any final shape or has not resulted in any effective action.” The misconception of seeking support from the above-quoted precedent case is evident from the fact that the entitlement or they house in question not only vested in the Custodian, but it was treated as evacuee Property years before the bar of jurisdiction, and to repeat it long before the 1st of January, 1957. The above narration of facts sufficiently, brings home the fact that the impugned order, under the circumstances of the case is unexceptionable, and the Writ Petition is, therefore, dismissed with costs. s. a. u. Petition dismissed

Question: What is case 1977 PLD 162 about?
Answer: Case 1977 PLD 162 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1976-10-22. The case involved QAMARDIN (THROUGH ITS LEGAL HEIRS)—PETITIONER VERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, HYDERABAD AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONTRACT ACT (IX OF 1872) - S. 202 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAA (1973) - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by JAMALUDDIN H. AHMED.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: In case 1977 PLD 162, the court applied the following statutes: CONTRACT ACT (IX OF 1872) - S. 202 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAA (1973) - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1976-10-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1977 PLD 162 were: K. A. GHANI FOR PETITIONER. ABDUL SATTAR FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.A. AZIZ FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2. ‘AKHTAR MAHMUD FOR RESPONDENT NO. 3.. The judges presiding were: JAMALUDDIN H. AHMED.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: The parties in case 1977 PLD 162 were: QAMARDIN (THROUGH ITS LEGAL HEIRS)—PETITIONER VERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, HYDERABAD AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1977 PLD 162.
Answer: Judgment The facts leading to this Petition, stated briefly are that a plot of land with some hutments, admeasuring about 1866 yes. (Plot No. Survey Sheet No. RY. 9) which originally belonged to two Hindus, was purchased by Woman Heywood Thai and his two sons Paul and Heywood. This transaction took place on 3-11-1947. Subsequently on 25-12-1947, Heywood son of Woman died in an air crash and the plot came to be the property of the renaming two purchasers* 2. On 11-5-1948, they had executed a power of attorney in favor of petitioner Tamarin who in now represented by his Legal Representatives. This power of attorney, a3 described in para. of the petition, was "to authorize him to take steps to put up a new building on the site and to do other acts and things for them, and on the behalf” Subsequent to this on 21-11-1948, they granted a ten-year lease of this plot to the petitioner, who in turn gave a lease for a like period to Messes Sun green Co. on 15-3- 1949. 3. As, under the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance, the sale executed by the Hindu in favor of the Muslim Purchasers, required to be confirmed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, the same was considered and was confirmed by the Deputy Custodian (Judicial) on 20-9- 1952, upon an application made to him mm this behalf This order was subsequently reversed by the Custodian by an order dated 19-11-1955, but that order was quashed in Constitutional Petition No. filed m the High Court. Messes Sun green Co. took the matter to the Supreme Court, whereupon it was ordered to be remitted to the Custodian, for making further inquiry into questions formulated, and thereafter to decide the case in accordance with law. Amongst the questions specified, one was, “whether at all material times the property was evacuee property by virtue of the allegations that the new owners are themselves resident in India, and the agent Tamarin is a person whose appointment has not been approved as required by law. In relation to this question the Custodian will necessarily have to consider whether after the execution of lease deed in his favor Tamarin can be said to be any longer a mere agent of the owners since he has developed an independent interest in the property. This question has another aspect also, namely whether a person who occupies two positions in respect of the property in question, one as agent and the other as a lessee from the owner in his own right TS a suitable person to be approved as an agent. 4. Before the Custodian, the petitioner made applications for confirmation of the lease, and also of the power of attorney, in view of the above-quoted observation of the Supreme Court; but after hearing the matter the Custodian by his order dated 11-11-1961 concluded that the power of attorney executed in favor of Tamarin had not been approved or accepted by the Custodian, hence it was not a valid power of attorney. He further held that since he had no valid power of attorney, his application for confirmation of sale made in favor of the Muslim Purchaser, was itself not competent. He thus finally held the property to be still evacuee. This order was challenged and the matter was once again remanded to the Custodian who on 6-5-74, finally rejected the application for confirmation on merits and this is the impugned order in this Petition. 5. An additional circumstance that need be noticed, is the death of petitioner Tamarin during the pendency of his applications before the Custodian. It it stated that an objection had been raised before him about the competence of further proceedings, which were initiated by Tamarin on the basis of a power of attorney and the Custodian dealt with the question in his observations in para. 31 of his order as under— "It is an admitted position that Tamarin who was all along fighting on the strength of power of attorney executed in his favor on the 11-3-1943 right up to 7-11-1970, when he died, and his unapproved authority as attorney, was also got buried along with his person and the proceedings are being conducted on behalf of his heirs who merit nothing. It 1s doubtful whether the learned Advocate of the respondent has been engaged to conduct the case by deceased Award and as such after his death, could legally prosecute the matter because his power also came to end with the death of his client. So far the legal heirs of deceased Tamarin, they do not hold powers of attorney of the vendees and bad no locus standi or authority to appear or represent the respondents, in manner in these proceedings.” 6. In these circumstances, and since the present petition has been filed by the deceased petitioner through his Legal Representatives Mr. Abdul Aziz learned counsel for the contesting respondents raised a mitral legal objection to the mamtamability of this petition. He contended that the right to file proceedings to challenge the order of the Custodian in this case, was derived by the deceased Award, only from the power of attorney which he claimed, was executed, in his favor by the Muslim Geodes of the property. This power of attorney though not valid, as it was not approved by the Custodian, came to a termination on the date of death of Tamarin. It ceased to be operative and the Legal Representatives of the deceased could not claim to have acquired any right or interest, so as to enable them, in law, to prosecute the cause. The authority to do or perform certain ACTA was given to the deceased under THS power of attorney which constituted him an agent and that authority ceased to be exercisable with the death, as it was personal, and it did not devolve on the legal representatives. The learned counsel submitted that the present petition was totally incompetent in the form in which it was filed, as it was the petition of dead person, brought by orders on whom no right to file devolved, nor could they be said to be aggrieved by the impugned order of the Custodian. He relied on section 201 of the Contract Act which TS as under — “An agency is terminated by THS principal revoking his authority or BV the agent renouncing the business of the agency; or by the business of the agency being completed; or by either the principal or agent dying or becoming of unsound mind; or by the principal being adjudicated an insolvent under the provisions of any Act for the time being in force for the relief of insolvent debtors." 7. The learned counsel then referred to the case of MST. Karma Bibi and others v. Meir Ali Khan and others (1) in which, while considering whether an attorney of a deceased decree-holder could execute the decree it was observed at page 878, that he could not so execute unless he obtained power of attorney from the legal representatives of the deceased decree-holder. 8. Mr. K. Ghazi the learned counsel FER the petitioner be tug confronted with this legal objection referred to ground No. of the petition, wherein it had specifically been contended that the power of attorney of Mr. Tamarin, was for consideration, and irrevocable. The same did not terminate with the death of Mr. Tamarin. He contended Thai this assertion was net controverted by the responding; as no counter- 4ft’IDA\it m deal had bee a filed. He then proceeded to show from the documents, ICR FM;f*s WMD aujuidiftg to Unit outputs the consideration for this power of attorney. These documents were, firstly a forces.ENI to build which TS dated 10-5-1948 and is one day prior to the execution of the power of attorney. Id this agreement deceased Tamarin was described as the “'Builder’”’, and the owners of the plot had to pay to him a total sum OT Rs. 17,500 for carrying out the specified building work, but the excess amount required, TT any, for building the ground Floor was to JC supplied by the “Builder”, On 30-11-1948 again u lease deed was executed of the owner in favor of Tamarin, wherein he was described as a ‘Lessee’ ’ of the same property, and it was stipulated that he would homily construct the first floor on the plot; with the lessors. In clause of this deed however Tamarin was shown to have paid a sum of Rs. 1,200 on account cf rent for three months of the lease in advance to the lessors. 9. According to the learned counsel therefore Award had acquired an interest in the property which was the subject-n-after of the power of attorney, which was heritable. He had also parted with some amounts and undertaken to spend money which was the consideration ultimately for the power of attorney executed by the owners, whereby he was constituted their agent. In his submission section 202 of the Contract Act was applicable to the facts of the case and Tamarin’s power of attorney did not terminate merely on account of his death. Section 202 of the Contract Act reads as under:— “Where the agent has himself an interest in the property which forms the subject-matter of the agency, the agency cannot, in the absence of an express contract, be terminated to the prejudice of such interest.” This argument appears attractive but cannot be sustained upon the language used in section 202 of the Contract Act itself which has the effect only of saving the interest of the agent in the property and not the actual termination of the agency itself’ The interest of the agent petitioner, in the said property, as is claimed, was that of a “Builder” and thereafter of a “Lessee”. Upon an assumption that the petitioner did possess such interest, even that was subservient to the original sale which was sought to be approved but was not approved. Unless the sale was an approved sale, the transferee acquired no rights in the property, so as to be capable of transferring any rights to the petitioner. Section 202 of the Contract Act can have the effect of protecting this merest, whatever be its nature OT extent. The primary need that the petitioner had to face was to opium the approval of the Custodian to the sale so as to legalize it because that was the foundation of the interest that he claimed in the property. To obtain that approval, he had to initiate and also to continue proceedings before the Custodian. For doing this he again needed an authority from time transferees, and which authority is definitely distinct from the interest of the agent, in the property, described above. In such circumstances section 202 of the Contract Act cannot bread to confuse the interest in property with the authority to file or continue proceedings That authority is totally independent of the merest claimed by the pet-, toner in the property which is the subject-matter of the proceedings; and section 202 of the Contract Act is not attracted to such an authority.to protect it from BMG terminated on account of the death of the agent. 10, The learned counsel then relied on the case of Fatal Din v. Lahore Improvement Trust (1) where while considering the nature of the interest necessary for filing a petition, their Lordships observed at page 23 — “TT is clear from the above that the right considered sufficient for main taming a proceeding of this nature is not necessarily a right in the strict juristic sense, but it is enough if the applicant discloses that he had a personal interest in the performance of the legal duty which is not performed or performed in a manner not permitted by law would result in the loss of some personal benefit or advantage or tie curtailment of privilege or liberty or franchise.” The learned counsel contented that the petition filed by the Legal Representatives of the petitioner’s agent, as they had a night to do so, as they were started to secure the property that devolved on them on account of the petitioner’s death. Now, as stated above, the sale not being confirmed by the Custodian, that order could be challenged either by the purchasers or their attorney on their behalf But the right to challenge that order cannot devolve on the legal representatives of the attorney; and unless it so devolves they cannot claim any personal interest within the meaning of the observation of their Lordships quoted above. 11. In the case of Mujib-UN-Nissa v. Abdul Rahim (2) the question under consideration was factually similar to the one in this case. An attorney presented a document for registration, before the Registrar, after the death of the executant. The document was registered, and its legality came to be questioned. It was observed while considering this question at page 22 "Now the esse in hand TS that of a person who, when he presented the deed for registration, as he says he did, on November 4, 1889, stood in no other relation to the deed than that, before the death of the person executing it, he had held his power of attorney, it is perfectly plain, not merely from the general law, but from the terms of this S. 32 itself} that after the man’s death the only attorney who would have any locus standi would have been the attorney of the representatives or assign of the deceased.” I am in respectful agreement with what was held in this case, and in the result, find that the legal representatives of the deceased attorney Tamarin have neither any right nor any personal interest to file or prosecute the petition to challenge the action of the Custodian, as they have done. This petition is therefore dismissed a9 not attainable on this preliminary ground but with no order as to costs. 4s AAA, Petition dismissed. panes

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 162 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1976-10-22): Judgment The facts leading to this Petition, stated briefly are that a plot of land with some hutments, admeasuring about 1866 yes. (Plot No. Survey Sheet No. RY. 9) which originally belonged to two Hindus, was purchased by Woman Heywood Thai and his two sons Paul and Heywood. This transaction took place on 3-11-1947. Subsequently on 25-12-1947, Heywood son of Woman died in an air crash and the plot came to be the property of the renaming two purchasers* 2. On 11-5-1948, they had executed a power of attorney in favor of petitioner Tamarin who in now represented by his Legal Representatives. This power of attorney, a3 described in para. of the petition, was "to authorize him to take steps to put up a new building on the site and to do other acts and things for them, and on the behalf” Subsequent to this on 21-11-1948, they granted a ten-year lease of this plot to the petitioner, who in turn gave a lease for a like period to Messes Sun green Co. on 15-3- 1949. 3. As, under the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance, the sale executed by the Hindu in favor of the Muslim Purchasers, required to be confirmed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, the same was considered and was confirmed by the Deputy Custodian (Judicial) on 20-9- 1952, upon an application made to him mm this behalf This order was subsequently reversed by the Custodian by an order dated 19-11-1955, but that order was quashed in Constitutional Petition No. filed m the High Court. Messes Sun green Co. took the matter to the Supreme Court, whereupon it was ordered to be remitted to the Custodian, for making further inquiry into questions formulated, and thereafter to decide the case in accordance with law. Amongst the questions specified, one was, “whether at all material times the property was evacuee property by virtue of the allegations that the new owners are themselves resident in India, and the agent Tamarin is a person whose appointment has not been approved as required by law. In relation to this question the Custodian will necessarily have to consider whether after the execution of lease deed in his favor Tamarin can be said to be any longer a mere agent of the owners since he has developed an independent interest in the property. This question has another aspect also, namely whether a person who occupies two positions in respect of the property in question, one as agent and the other as a lessee from the owner in his own right TS a suitable person to be approved as an agent. 4. Before the Custodian, the petitioner made applications for confirmation of the lease, and also of the power of attorney, in view of the above-quoted observation of the Supreme Court; but after hearing the matter the Custodian by his order dated 11-11-1961 concluded that the power of attorney executed in favor of Tamarin had not been approved or accepted by the Custodian, hence it

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 162 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1976-10-22): also of the power of attorney, in view of the above-quoted observation of the Supreme Court; but after hearing the matter the Custodian by his order dated 11-11-1961 concluded that the power of attorney executed in favor of Tamarin had not been approved or accepted by the Custodian, hence it was not a valid power of attorney. He further held that since he had no valid power of attorney, his application for confirmation of sale made in favor of the Muslim Purchaser, was itself not competent. He thus finally held the property to be still evacuee. This order was challenged and the matter was once again remanded to the Custodian who on 6-5-74, finally rejected the application for confirmation on merits and this is the impugned order in this Petition. 5. An additional circumstance that need be noticed, is the death of petitioner Tamarin during the pendency of his applications before the Custodian. It it stated that an objection had been raised before him about the competence of further proceedings, which were initiated by Tamarin on the basis of a power of attorney and the Custodian dealt with the question in his observations in para. 31 of his order as under— "It is an admitted position that Tamarin who was all along fighting on the strength of power of attorney executed in his favor on the 11-3-1943 right up to 7-11-1970, when he died, and his unapproved authority as attorney, was also got buried along with his person and the proceedings are being conducted on behalf of his heirs who merit nothing. It 1s doubtful whether the learned Advocate of the respondent has been engaged to conduct the case by deceased Award and as such after his death, could legally prosecute the matter because his power also came to end with the death of his client. So far the legal heirs of deceased Tamarin, they do not hold powers of attorney of the vendees and bad no locus standi or authority to appear or represent the respondents, in manner in these proceedings.” 6. In these circumstances, and since the present petition has been filed by the deceased petitioner through his Legal Representatives Mr. Abdul Aziz learned counsel for the contesting respondents raised a mitral legal objection to the mamtamability of this petition. He contended that the right to file proceedings to challenge the order of the Custodian in this case, was derived by the deceased Award, only from the power of attorney which he claimed, was executed, in his favor by the Muslim Geodes of the property. This power of attorney though not valid, as it was not approved by the Custodian, came to a termination on the date of death of Tamarin. It ceased to be operative and the Legal Representatives of the deceased could not claim to have acquired any right or interest, so as to enable them, in law, to prosecute the cause. The authority to do or perform certain ACTA was given to the deceased under

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 162 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1976-10-22): death of Tamarin. It ceased to be operative and the Legal Representatives of the deceased could not claim to have acquired any right or interest, so as to enable them, in law, to prosecute the cause. The authority to do or perform certain ACTA was given to the deceased under THS power of attorney which constituted him an agent and that authority ceased to be exercisable with the death, as it was personal, and it did not devolve on the legal representatives. The learned counsel submitted that the present petition was totally incompetent in the form in which it was filed, as it was the petition of dead person, brought by orders on whom no right to file devolved, nor could they be said to be aggrieved by the impugned order of the Custodian. He relied on section 201 of the Contract Act which TS as under — “An agency is terminated by THS principal revoking his authority or BV the agent renouncing the business of the agency; or by the business of the agency being completed; or by either the principal or agent dying or becoming of unsound mind; or by the principal being adjudicated an insolvent under the provisions of any Act for the time being in force for the relief of insolvent debtors." 7. The learned counsel then referred to the case of MST. Karma Bibi and others v. Meir Ali Khan and others (1) in which, while considering whether an attorney of a deceased decree-holder could execute the decree it was observed at page 878, that he could not so execute unless he obtained power of attorney from the legal representatives of the deceased decree-holder. 8. Mr. K. Ghazi the learned counsel FER the petitioner be tug confronted with this legal objection referred to ground No. of the petition, wherein it had specifically been contended that the power of attorney of Mr. Tamarin, was for consideration, and irrevocable. The same did not terminate with the death of Mr. Tamarin. He contended Thai this assertion was net controverted by the responding; as no counter- 4ft’IDA\it m deal had bee a filed. He then proceeded to show from the documents, ICR FM;f*s WMD aujuidiftg to Unit outputs the consideration for this power of attorney. These documents were, firstly a forces.ENI to build which TS dated 10-5-1948 and is one day prior to the execution of the power of attorney. Id this agreement deceased Tamarin was described as the “'Builder’”’, and the owners of the plot had to pay to him a total sum OT Rs. 17,500 for carrying out the specified building work, but the excess amount required, TT any, for building the ground Floor was to JC supplied by the “Builder”, On 30-11-1948 again u lease deed was executed of the owner in favor of Tamarin, wherein he was described as a ‘Lessee’ ’ of the same property, and it was stipulated that he would homily construct the first floor on the plot; with the lessors. In

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 162 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1976-10-22): supplied by the “Builder”, On 30-11-1948 again u lease deed was executed of the owner in favor of Tamarin, wherein he was described as a ‘Lessee’ ’ of the same property, and it was stipulated that he would homily construct the first floor on the plot; with the lessors. In clause of this deed however Tamarin was shown to have paid a sum of Rs. 1,200 on account cf rent for three months of the lease in advance to the lessors. 9. According to the learned counsel therefore Award had acquired an interest in the property which was the subject-n-after of the power of attorney, which was heritable. He had also parted with some amounts and undertaken to spend money which was the consideration ultimately for the power of attorney executed by the owners, whereby he was constituted their agent. In his submission section 202 of the Contract Act was applicable to the facts of the case and Tamarin’s power of attorney did not terminate merely on account of his death. Section 202 of the Contract Act reads as under:— “Where the agent has himself an interest in the property which forms the subject-matter of the agency, the agency cannot, in the absence of an express contract, be terminated to the prejudice of such interest.” This argument appears attractive but cannot be sustained upon the language used in section 202 of the Contract Act itself which has the effect only of saving the interest of the agent in the property and not the actual termination of the agency itself’ The interest of the agent petitioner, in the said property, as is claimed, was that of a “Builder” and thereafter of a “Lessee”. Upon an assumption that the petitioner did possess such interest, even that was subservient to the original sale which was sought to be approved but was not approved. Unless the sale was an approved sale, the transferee acquired no rights in the property, so as to be capable of transferring any rights to the petitioner. Section 202 of the Contract Act can have the effect of protecting this merest, whatever be its nature OT extent. The primary need that the petitioner had to face was to opium the approval of the Custodian to the sale so as to legalize it because that was the foundation of the interest that he claimed in the property. To obtain that approval, he had to initiate and also to continue proceedings before the Custodian. For doing this he again needed an authority from time transferees, and which authority is definitely distinct from the interest of the agent, in the property, described above. In such circumstances section 202 of the Contract Act cannot bread to confuse the interest in property with the authority to file or continue proceedings That authority is totally independent of the merest claimed by the pet-, toner in the property which is the subject-matter of the proceedings; and section 202 of the Contract Act is not attracted to such

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 162 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1976-10-22): bread to confuse the interest in property with the authority to file or continue proceedings That authority is totally independent of the merest claimed by the pet-, toner in the property which is the subject-matter of the proceedings; and section 202 of the Contract Act is not attracted to such an authority.to protect it from BMG terminated on account of the death of the agent. 10, The learned counsel then relied on the case of Fatal Din v. Lahore Improvement Trust (1) where while considering the nature of the interest necessary for filing a petition, their Lordships observed at page 23 — “TT is clear from the above that the right considered sufficient for main taming a proceeding of this nature is not necessarily a right in the strict juristic sense, but it is enough if the applicant discloses that he had a personal interest in the performance of the legal duty which is not performed or performed in a manner not permitted by law would result in the loss of some personal benefit or advantage or tie curtailment of privilege or liberty or franchise.” The learned counsel contented that the petition filed by the Legal Representatives of the petitioner’s agent, as they had a night to do so, as they were started to secure the property that devolved on them on account of the petitioner’s death. Now, as stated above, the sale not being confirmed by the Custodian, that order could be challenged either by the purchasers or their attorney on their behalf But the right to challenge that order cannot devolve on the legal representatives of the attorney; and unless it so devolves they cannot claim any personal interest within the meaning of the observation of their Lordships quoted above. 11. In the case of Mujib-UN-Nissa v. Abdul Rahim (2) the question under consideration was factually similar to the one in this case. An attorney presented a document for registration, before the Registrar, after the death of the executant. The document was registered, and its legality came to be questioned. It was observed while considering this question at page 22 "Now the esse in hand TS that of a person who, when he presented the deed for registration, as he says he did, on November 4, 1889, stood in no other relation to the deed than that, before the death of the person executing it, he had held his power of attorney, it is perfectly plain, not merely from the general law, but from the terms of this S. 32 itself} that after the man’s death the only attorney who would have any locus standi would have been the attorney of the representatives or assign of the deceased.” I am in respectful agreement with what was held in this case, and in the result, find that the legal representatives of the deceased attorney Tamarin have neither any right nor any personal interest to file or prosecute the petition to challenge the action of the Custodian, as they have

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1977 PLD 162?
Answer: From case 1977 PLD 162 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1976-10-22): I am in respectful agreement with what was held in this case, and in the result, find that the legal representatives of the deceased attorney Tamarin have neither any right nor any personal interest to file or prosecute the petition to challenge the action of the Custodian, as they have done. This petition is therefore dismissed a9 not attainable on this preliminary ground but with no order as to costs. 4s AAA, Petition dismissed. panes

Question: What is case 1976 SCMR 110 about?
Answer: Case 1976 SCMR 110 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1975-10-13. The case involved PRESIDENT,SARHAD CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES, PESHAWAR CITY (PETITIONER) VERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 4(3),(4 ). The case was heard by ANWARUL HAQ AND MUHAMMAD GUL.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1976 SCMR 110?
Answer: In case 1976 SCMR 110, the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. 4(3),(4 ). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1975-10-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1976 SCMR 110?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1976 SCMR 110 were: PEER BAKHSH KHAN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY M. QASIMIMAM, AD VOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER. 'NEMO FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1. ¢ :' AMIRZADA KHAN, ADVOCATE-ON- RECORD FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.. The judges presiding were: ANWARUL HAQ AND MUHAMMAD GUL.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1976 SCMR 110?
Answer: The parties in case 1976 SCMR 110 were: PRESIDENT,SARHAD CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES, PESHAWAR CITY (PETITIONER) VERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1976 SCMR 110.
Answer: ‘1 JUDOMBNT a'j' -Muhammad GUL, J.-This-petition is from the judgment of the Peshawar High Court dated 25-6-1975, dismissing, what' purported to be an appeal by the petitioner herein, under subsections (3) and (4) of section of the Act 28 of 1958, in the circumstances set out, below. J 1: The Deputy Commissioner, Peshawar acting as the Chairman District Evacuee Trust Committee Peshawar, leased out about 16000 sq. feet situate in the area called ‘Pan. Birth’ for a period of five years to the petitioner herein on annual rental of R». 160. There is no dispute that the lease hold was evacuee trust property and the petitioner was put in its possession and started construction on a plot measuring about 37298 of which area actually leased to the petitioner formed the part. The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board Lahore (respondent 1) being apprised of the lease and the construction started by the petitioner, sent a'telegraphic notice to the petitioner to immediately stop the construction. The petitioner it appears ignored the notice and proceeded with the construction. The matter was then examined by the Chairman (respondent 1) in exercise of his so moth revisional jurisdiction. He again issued a notice to the petitioner on 19–2*1973, to stop the construction. The petitioner appeared before the Chairman through his counsel in support of its right to raise the impugned construction. The Chairman after considering the matter as aforesaid, ordered the petitioner’s ejectment. He held the lease of~~16000 sq. 4eet of evacuee trust property in favor of the petitioner by the Deputy Commissioner Peshawar as “ab initio void” and of no legal effect and the possession of the entire plot measuring 38,130 sq. ft. by the petitioner was unauthorized. The petitioner went in appeal purporting to be under section (3) and (4) of Act 28 of 1958, against the above order. On a preliminary objection taken on behalf of respondent 1 that the nature of the trust property not being in question, no appeal lay under section (3) and (4) of the Act 28 of 1958, the High Court gave effect to this objection and dismissed the appeal as being incompetent., A We have heard Mr. Peer Baths Khan, Advocate at some length INI support of the petition. In our opinion, on the facts of the case, the view taken by the High Court was unassailable and calls for no interference by this Court. The aforesaid provisions of the statute contemplate an appeal where the question is whether the property in dispute is in the nature of trust or not. The petition is accordingly dismissed. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 SCMR 110?
Answer: From case 1976 SCMR 110 (SUPREME COURT, 1975-10-13): ‘1 JUDOMBNT a'j' -Muhammad GUL, J.-This-petition is from the judgment of the Peshawar High Court dated 25-6-1975, dismissing, what' purported to be an appeal by the petitioner herein, under subsections (3) and (4) of section of the Act 28 of 1958, in the circumstances set out, below. J 1: The Deputy Commissioner, Peshawar acting as the Chairman District Evacuee Trust Committee Peshawar, leased out about 16000 sq. feet situate in the area called ‘Pan. Birth’ for a period of five years to the petitioner herein on annual rental of R». 160. There is no dispute that the lease hold was evacuee trust property and the petitioner was put in its possession and started construction on a plot measuring about 37298 of which area actually leased to the petitioner formed the part. The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board Lahore (respondent 1) being apprised of the lease and the construction started by the petitioner, sent a'telegraphic notice to the petitioner to immediately stop the construction. The petitioner it appears ignored the notice and proceeded with the construction. The matter was then examined by the Chairman (respondent 1) in exercise of his so moth revisional jurisdiction. He again issued a notice to the petitioner on 19–2*1973, to stop the construction. The petitioner appeared before the Chairman through his counsel in support of its right to raise the impugned construction. The Chairman after considering the matter as aforesaid, ordered the petitioner’s ejectment. He held the lease of~~16000 sq. 4eet of evacuee trust property in favor of the petitioner by the Deputy Commissioner Peshawar as “ab initio void” and of no legal effect and the possession of the entire plot measuring 38,130 sq. ft. by the petitioner was unauthorized. The petitioner went in appeal purporting to be under section (3) and (4) of Act 28 of 1958, against the above order. On a preliminary objection taken on behalf of respondent 1 that the nature of the trust property not being in question, no appeal lay under section (3) and (4) of the Act 28 of 1958, the High Court gave effect to this objection and dismissed the appeal as being incompetent., A We have heard Mr. Peer Baths Khan, Advocate at some length INI support of the petition. In our opinion, on the facts of the case, the view taken by the High Court was unassailable and calls for no interference by this Court. The aforesaid provisions of the statute contemplate an appeal where the question is whether the property in dispute is in the nature of trust or not. The petition is accordingly dismissed. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1976 SCMR 326 about?
Answer: Case 1976 SCMR 326 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1975-10-13. The case involved PRESIDENT, SARHAD CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES, PESHAWAR CITY—PETITIONER VERSUS THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND ANOTHER—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) S. 4(3) AND (4). The case was heard by ANWARUL HAQ AND MUHAMMAD GUL.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1976 SCMR 326?
Answer: In case 1976 SCMR 326, the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) S. 4(3) AND (4). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1975-10-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1976 SCMR 326?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1976 SCMR 326 were: PEER BAKHSH KHAN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY M. QASIM IMAM, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER. ¢ ‘'e V- *LNEMO FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1. AMIRZADA 'KHAN, ADVOCATE-ON- RECORD FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.. The judges presiding were: ANWARUL HAQ AND MUHAMMAD GUL.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1976 SCMR 326?
Answer: The parties in case 1976 SCMR 326 were: PRESIDENT, SARHAD CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES, PESHAWAR CITY—PETITIONER VERSUS THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND ANOTHER—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1976 SCMR 326.
Answer: Judgment Muhammad Gut, J— This petition is from the judgment of the Peshawar High Court dated 25-6-1975 dismiss mg 'what purported to be an appeal by the petitioner harm, under subsections (3) and (4) of section of the Act 28 of 1958 in the circumstances set out below. - The Deputy Commissioner, Peshawar acting as the Chairman, District Evacuee Trust Committee, Peshawar, leased out about 16000 sq. feet situate 'it the area called ‘Pan Birth* for a period of five years to the petitioner herein on annual rental of Rs. 160. There is no dispute that the leasehold was evacuee trust property and the petitioner was put in its possession and started construction on a plot measuring about 37298 of which area actually leased to the petitioner formed the part. The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore (respondent 1) BMG apprised of the lease and the construction started by the petitioner, sent a telegraphic notice to the petitioner to immediately stop the construction. The petitioner it appears ignored the notice and proceeded with the construction. The matter was then examined by the Chairman (respondent 1) in exercise of his so motor revisional jurisdiction He Adam issued a notice to the petitioner on 19-2-1973 to stop the construction. The petitioner appeared before the Chairman through his counsel in support of its right to raise the impugned construction. The Chairman after considering the matter as aforesaid, ordered the petitioner’s ejectment. He held the lease of 16000 sq. feet of evacuee trust property in favor of the petitioner by the Deputy Commissioner, Peshawar as The petitioner went in appeal purporting to be under section (3) and (4) of Act 28 of 1953 against the above order. On a preliminary objection taken on behalf of respondent 1 that the nature of the trust property no being in question, no appeal lay under section 4(3) and (4) place,Act 28; of 1958, The High Court gave effect to this objection and dismissed the appeal as being competent. -—-—--- —— We have heard Mr. Peer Baths Khan, Advocate at some length 1o support of the petition. In our opinion, on the facts of the case, the view] taken by the High Court was unassailable and calls for no interference by this Court. The aforesaid provisions of the statute WW. contemplate an appeal where the question is whether the property in dispute is in the nature of trust or not. The petition is accordingly dismissed. Petition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 SCMR 326?
Answer: From case 1976 SCMR 326 (SUPREME COURT, 1975-10-13): Judgment Muhammad Gut, J— This petition is from the judgment of the Peshawar High Court dated 25-6-1975 dismiss mg 'what purported to be an appeal by the petitioner harm, under subsections (3) and (4) of section of the Act 28 of 1958 in the circumstances set out below. - The Deputy Commissioner, Peshawar acting as the Chairman, District Evacuee Trust Committee, Peshawar, leased out about 16000 sq. feet situate 'it the area called ‘Pan Birth* for a period of five years to the petitioner herein on annual rental of Rs. 160. There is no dispute that the leasehold was evacuee trust property and the petitioner was put in its possession and started construction on a plot measuring about 37298 of which area actually leased to the petitioner formed the part. The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Lahore (respondent 1) BMG apprised of the lease and the construction started by the petitioner, sent a telegraphic notice to the petitioner to immediately stop the construction. The petitioner it appears ignored the notice and proceeded with the construction. The matter was then examined by the Chairman (respondent 1) in exercise of his so motor revisional jurisdiction He Adam issued a notice to the petitioner on 19-2-1973 to stop the construction. The petitioner appeared before the Chairman through his counsel in support of its right to raise the impugned construction. The Chairman after considering the matter as aforesaid, ordered the petitioner’s ejectment. He held the lease of 16000 sq. feet of evacuee trust property in favor of the petitioner by the Deputy Commissioner, Peshawar as The petitioner went in appeal purporting to be under section (3) and (4) of Act 28 of 1953 against the above order. On a preliminary objection taken on behalf of respondent 1 that the nature of the trust property no being in question, no appeal lay under section 4(3) and (4) place,Act 28; of 1958, The High Court gave effect to this objection and dismissed the appeal as being competent. -—-—--- —— We have heard Mr. Peer Baths Khan, Advocate at some length 1o support of the petition. In our opinion, on the facts of the case, the view] taken by the High Court was unassailable and calls for no interference by this Court. The aforesaid provisions of the statute WW. contemplate an appeal where the question is whether the property in dispute is in the nature of trust or not. The petition is accordingly dismissed. Petition dismissed

Question: What is case 1976 PLD 245 about?
Answer: Case 1976 PLD 245 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1975-11-26. The case involved MST. BEGUM ZOHRA BAI—PETITIONER VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, KARACHI AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF ERACNEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 341) READ WITH SUBSECTION (2)(B). The case was heard by ZAKAULLAH LODHI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1976 PLD 245?
Answer: In case 1976 PLD 245, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF ERACNEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 341) READ WITH SUBSECTION (2)(B). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1975-11-26.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1976 PLD 245?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1976 PLD 245 were: MOHSIN TAYABALLY FOR PETITIONER. SAYEED A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 2.SADIQ AND GHULAM ALLY FOR RESPONDENT NO. 3.. The judges presiding were: ZAKAULLAH LODHI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1976 PLD 245?
Answer: The parties in case 1976 PLD 245 were: MST. BEGUM ZOHRA BAI—PETITIONER VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, KARACHI AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1976 PLD 245.
Answer: Judgment The dispute is in respect of a plot of land bear mg Survey No. 13, Ward No. W. O. 4, measuring 370 square yards. The plot of land also has some construction thereon. It was purchased by respondent No. through a private sale by Females Viral on 3rd May 1948. On 8th September 1949, the respondent No. executed and delivered a power of attorney in favor of one Faiyum for the management of the property. In the year 1949, the attorney moved an application for the confirmation of sale of the property before the Custodian authorities and the Additional Custodian vide his order dated 15th May 1950, confirmed the sale. 2. The disputed property was occupied by several tenants including TNE respondent No. 3. An application was moved by the tenants including respondent No. to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) praying that the property be declared as evacuee property. The Additional Custodian (Judicial) vide his order dated 22nd December 1952, rejected this application and declared that the property was a non-evacuee property. 3. On IST May 1962, the respondent No. gifted the property to the petitioner. The respondent No. again moved an application on 7th January 1963, purporting to be an application'under section 2 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (hereafter referred to as “Act XII of 1957’). They requested the Custodian to declare the property as evacuee property. The Custodian after hearing the parties declared the property to be evacuee property, on 15th June 1970. This petition is directed against the above-said order of the Custodian. 4. The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that once the property had been declared as non-evacuee by the Additional Custodian on 15th May 1950, and the same was confirmed the Custodian could not hold that since the respondent No. was a permanent resident of India and ordinary power of attorney given by him to Kazoo Ali for the management OT the property having not been specifically approved by the Custodian authorities the status of the property remained evacuee. He has relied upon Abdul Valid An sari and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi and another (1) and argued that the expression “accepted” or ‘approved’ used in section 2(2)(c)() of Act XII of 1957 does not envisage that there should be an express order to the effect that the power of attorney was confirmed by the Custodian. According to him the approval can be evidenced by any act of the Custodian and in this case the Additional Custodian had accepted the power of attorney when he declared the property as non-evacuee on 15th May 1950. In this case its hag been held that : ‘The requirement prescribed by this provision of law is that the authority of the agent to manage the property should either be accepted or approved by the Custodian. It would be noted that two words are used together with regard to the s gent’s authority. These words are “accepted” and “approved”. “To approve” means “to confirm authoritatively’. If the Legislature had merely used word “approved”, one could not have hesitation to agree with Mr. Lair that express confirmation of the agent’s authority to manage the property was necessary both under the Ordinance and under the Act. But this word appears with the other word “accepted”, and it would not be unreasonable to say that both the words were not intended to cover the same meaning. The word “accept” has been defined in Shorter Oxford English Dictionary to mean “to take or receive with consenting mind ; to receive with favor.” “To receive with favor” is something different from “to confirm authoritatively’ which is the meaning of the word “approve.” The use of the two words “approve” and “accept” creates the impression that it is not necessary that the agent should be expressly and authoritatively confirm in his authority to manage the property.” In this case the learned Custodian has held that Akbar Ali was an Indian national and was a permanent resident there. He was unable to come and manage the property. He apported Kazoo Alias his attorney in 1949 to manage and supervise his property, but this power of attorney was never got approved by the Custodian. There is no evidence on r record to show that Kazoo Ali was appointed an agent for the management and supervision of the property by Akbar Ali In this case, on the basis of the inquiry held by him, he has reached the conclusion that in spite of the fact that the property was confirmed as non-evacuee property by the. Additional Custodian on 15th May 1950, its status remained that of an evacuee property because there is no evidence that Akbar Ali who is admittedly an Indian national ever had any concern with the property in question. It is strange to note that even the power of attorney was not available on record to show that the same was executed for the specific purpose of getting the property confirmed by the Additional Custodian, or also for other purposes such as management and supervision of the property. No other evidence to show that Akbar Ali retained any interest m the r property when it was being originally managed by his attorney has been produced. The learned counsel for the first respondent (Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi) has argued that the fact that the property was confirmed would not make any difference so far as its evacuee character is concerned. He has placed reliance on Lazar Ali v. Secretary, Industry of Rehabilitation In this case it was held as under : “The third ground is equally hollow. It is wrong to contend that by the mere fact that the sale was confirmed one can conclude that the authority of the attorney who brought about transaction was indirectly approved. On the contrary, it appears that the petitioner névé® asked for an approval of the power of attorney with the result that no attention was paid to it. The omission cannot be used by the petitioner as a post of merit in his case.” In the above case an appeal was filed to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal. It was held by the Supreme Court that since the authority to manage the evacuee property after 20th February 1957, was not approved by the Custodian the property continued to be the evacuee property. Lazar Ali's case applies to the facts of this case in all the fours because in this case also though the confirmation of sale of the property was obtained by the respondent No. (attorney) but the power of attorney to manage the property was never got approved by the Custodian authorities. The learned counsel has further placed reliance on Sun green Co. v. Qatar Din Muhammad Ashwani and others In this case it was held as under : ‘‘Appellant’s contentions are that the order in question should be set aside on two grounds, namely, that the price paid is adequate and that in spite of the orders of confirmation the property in question would remain evacuee property because the Vendée-respondents are residing in India and their property is BMG occupied, supervised or managed by their attorney Qatar Din whose authority to do so has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian as required by section 2 (c)(1). We may state here that it was admitted before us that the authority of Tamarin to occupy, supervise or manage the property MN question has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian as yet. The question opposed by the contention on this ground was therefore one of substantial, not to say of primary importance. If it may be held that the property was evacuee property because a person who qualified for the description of “evacuee” had the interest in it then it was immaterial whether the sale on 3rd November 1974, was confirmed or not. The confirmation by itself could not prevent from being regarded as evacuee property.” The contention of the learned counsel, therefore, that the confirmation had been accorded by the Additional Custodian as far back as 15th September 1950, the power of attorney was therefore accepted automatically, and the property could not be treated as evacuee property has no force, because in spite of the fact that the property was confirmed on [Sth May 1950, the power of attorney to manage or supervise the property on behalf of Akbar Ali who is admittedly an Indian national was never approved or accepted by any authority in the Custodian Department. The property therefore remained evacuee property and the learned Custodian was justified in holding that its character as evacuee property did not change by virtue of the fact that on the basis of the power of attorney issued by the respondent No. to his Attorney an application had been moved for confirmation of the sale and the sale was actually confirmed on 15th May 1950. The learned counsel for the petitioner has next argued that due to mischief of section 3(1) of Act XII of 1957 the disputed property could not be treated as evacuee property after IST January 1957. This argument is equally fallacious because subsection (2)(b) of section 3 creates an exception to the bar created by section 3(1). This subsection lays down as under “Subsection (2).—Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply. (6) to any property which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the 20th day of November 1974, has not been approved or accepted by the Custodian.” Under section 3(1) of the Act XII of 1957 the properties which were managed by an agent and the power of attorney of the agent to manage the property had not been accepted or approved by the Custodian have been excluded from the operation of section 3(1) of Act XI, 1957. The instant case falls within the purview of this subsection, and therefore it cannot be argued that the order of the Custodian was not maintainable under section 3 of Act XII, 1957. 6. The learned counsel for the respondent No. has supported the contention of the petitioner. Obviously, it seems that the petitioner and respondent No. 3’s interests do not clash and therefore respondent No. did not consider it necessary to oppose the petitioner’s contention. 7. As a result of the above discussion, I am of the view that the petition has no substance and the same is therefore dismissed but with no order as to costs, W“-P2klcsaldatabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 245?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 245 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-26): Judgment The dispute is in respect of a plot of land bear mg Survey No. 13, Ward No. W. O. 4, measuring 370 square yards. The plot of land also has some construction thereon. It was purchased by respondent No. through a private sale by Females Viral on 3rd May 1948. On 8th September 1949, the respondent No. executed and delivered a power of attorney in favor of one Faiyum for the management of the property. In the year 1949, the attorney moved an application for the confirmation of sale of the property before the Custodian authorities and the Additional Custodian vide his order dated 15th May 1950, confirmed the sale. 2. The disputed property was occupied by several tenants including TNE respondent No. 3. An application was moved by the tenants including respondent No. to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) praying that the property be declared as evacuee property. The Additional Custodian (Judicial) vide his order dated 22nd December 1952, rejected this application and declared that the property was a non-evacuee property. 3. On IST May 1962, the respondent No. gifted the property to the petitioner. The respondent No. again moved an application on 7th January 1963, purporting to be an application'under section 2 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (hereafter referred to as “Act XII of 1957’). They requested the Custodian to declare the property as evacuee property. The Custodian after hearing the parties declared the property to be evacuee property, on 15th June 1970. This petition is directed against the above-said order of the Custodian. 4. The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that once the property had been declared as non-evacuee by the Additional Custodian on 15th May 1950, and the same was confirmed the Custodian could not hold that since the respondent No. was a permanent resident of India and ordinary power of attorney given by him to Kazoo Ali for the management OT the property having not been specifically approved by the Custodian authorities the status of the property remained evacuee. He has relied upon Abdul Valid An sari and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi and another (1) and argued that the expression “accepted” or ‘approved’ used in section 2(2)(c)() of Act XII of 1957 does not envisage that there should be an express order to the effect that the power of attorney was confirmed by the Custodian. According to him the approval can be evidenced by any act of the Custodian and in this case the Additional Custodian had accepted the power of attorney when he declared the property as non-evacuee on 15th May 1950. In this case its hag been held that : ‘The requirement prescribed by this provision of law is that the authority of the agent to manage the property should either be accepted or approved by the Custodian. It would be noted that two words are used together with regard to the s gent’s authority. These words are “accepted” and “approved”.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 245?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 245 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-26): requirement prescribed by this provision of law is that the authority of the agent to manage the property should either be accepted or approved by the Custodian. It would be noted that two words are used together with regard to the s gent’s authority. These words are “accepted” and “approved”. “To approve” means “to confirm authoritatively’. If the Legislature had merely used word “approved”, one could not have hesitation to agree with Mr. Lair that express confirmation of the agent’s authority to manage the property was necessary both under the Ordinance and under the Act. But this word appears with the other word “accepted”, and it would not be unreasonable to say that both the words were not intended to cover the same meaning. The word “accept” has been defined in Shorter Oxford English Dictionary to mean “to take or receive with consenting mind ; to receive with favor.” “To receive with favor” is something different from “to confirm authoritatively’ which is the meaning of the word “approve.” The use of the two words “approve” and “accept” creates the impression that it is not necessary that the agent should be expressly and authoritatively confirm in his authority to manage the property.” In this case the learned Custodian has held that Akbar Ali was an Indian national and was a permanent resident there. He was unable to come and manage the property. He apported Kazoo Alias his attorney in 1949 to manage and supervise his property, but this power of attorney was never got approved by the Custodian. There is no evidence on r record to show that Kazoo Ali was appointed an agent for the management and supervision of the property by Akbar Ali In this case, on the basis of the inquiry held by him, he has reached the conclusion that in spite of the fact that the property was confirmed as non-evacuee property by the. Additional Custodian on 15th May 1950, its status remained that of an evacuee property because there is no evidence that Akbar Ali who is admittedly an Indian national ever had any concern with the property in question. It is strange to note that even the power of attorney was not available on record to show that the same was executed for the specific purpose of getting the property confirmed by the Additional Custodian, or also for other purposes such as management and supervision of the property. No other evidence to show that Akbar Ali retained any interest m the r property when it was being originally managed by his attorney has been produced. The learned counsel for the first respondent (Custodian, Evacuee Property, Karachi) has argued that the fact that the property was confirmed would not make any difference so far as its evacuee character is concerned. He has placed reliance on Lazar Ali v. Secretary, Industry of Rehabilitation In this case it was held as under : “The third ground is equally hollow. It is wrong to contend that by the mere

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 245?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 245 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-26): confirmed would not make any difference so far as its evacuee character is concerned. He has placed reliance on Lazar Ali v. Secretary, Industry of Rehabilitation In this case it was held as under : “The third ground is equally hollow. It is wrong to contend that by the mere fact that the sale was confirmed one can conclude that the authority of the attorney who brought about transaction was indirectly approved. On the contrary, it appears that the petitioner névé® asked for an approval of the power of attorney with the result that no attention was paid to it. The omission cannot be used by the petitioner as a post of merit in his case.” In the above case an appeal was filed to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal. It was held by the Supreme Court that since the authority to manage the evacuee property after 20th February 1957, was not approved by the Custodian the property continued to be the evacuee property. Lazar Ali's case applies to the facts of this case in all the fours because in this case also though the confirmation of sale of the property was obtained by the respondent No. (attorney) but the power of attorney to manage the property was never got approved by the Custodian authorities. The learned counsel has further placed reliance on Sun green Co. v. Qatar Din Muhammad Ashwani and others In this case it was held as under : ‘‘Appellant’s contentions are that the order in question should be set aside on two grounds, namely, that the price paid is adequate and that in spite of the orders of confirmation the property in question would remain evacuee property because the Vendée-respondents are residing in India and their property is BMG occupied, supervised or managed by their attorney Qatar Din whose authority to do so has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian as required by section 2 (c)(1). We may state here that it was admitted before us that the authority of Tamarin to occupy, supervise or manage the property MN question has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian as yet. The question opposed by the contention on this ground was therefore one of substantial, not to say of primary importance. If it may be held that the property was evacuee property because a person who qualified for the description of “evacuee” had the interest in it then it was immaterial whether the sale on 3rd November 1974, was confirmed or not. The confirmation by itself could not prevent from being regarded as evacuee property.” The contention of the learned counsel, therefore, that the confirmation had been accorded by the Additional Custodian as far back as 15th September 1950, the power of attorney was therefore accepted automatically, and the property could not be treated as evacuee property has no force, because in spite of the fact that the property was confirmed on [Sth May 1950, the power of attorney

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 245?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 245 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-26): the Additional Custodian as far back as 15th September 1950, the power of attorney was therefore accepted automatically, and the property could not be treated as evacuee property has no force, because in spite of the fact that the property was confirmed on [Sth May 1950, the power of attorney to manage or supervise the property on behalf of Akbar Ali who is admittedly an Indian national was never approved or accepted by any authority in the Custodian Department. The property therefore remained evacuee property and the learned Custodian was justified in holding that its character as evacuee property did not change by virtue of the fact that on the basis of the power of attorney issued by the respondent No. to his Attorney an application had been moved for confirmation of the sale and the sale was actually confirmed on 15th May 1950. The learned counsel for the petitioner has next argued that due to mischief of section 3(1) of Act XII of 1957 the disputed property could not be treated as evacuee property after IST January 1957. This argument is equally fallacious because subsection (2)(b) of section 3 creates an exception to the bar created by section 3(1). This subsection lays down as under “Subsection (2).—Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply. (6) to any property which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right so to do after the 20th day of November 1974, has not been approved or accepted by the Custodian.” Under section 3(1) of the Act XII of 1957 the properties which were managed by an agent and the power of attorney of the agent to manage the property had not been accepted or approved by the Custodian have been excluded from the operation of section 3(1) of Act XI, 1957. The instant case falls within the purview of this subsection, and therefore it cannot be argued that the order of the Custodian was not maintainable under section 3 of Act XII, 1957. 6. The learned counsel for the respondent No. has supported the contention of the petitioner. Obviously, it seems that the petitioner and respondent No. 3’s interests do not clash and therefore respondent No. did not consider it necessary to oppose the petitioner’s contention. 7. As a result of the above discussion, I am of the view that the petition has no substance and the same is therefore dismissed but with no order as to costs, W“-P2klcsaldatabase.com

Question: What is case 1976 PLD 109 about?
Answer: Case 1976 PLD 109 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1975-11-17. The case involved MUHAMMAD ALI HEMANT (THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS) (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ARTICLE 250 READ WITH ARTICLE 225(3) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(44) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 2(2)(C) AND 3(2)(B) REVENUE RECORD HINDU LAW PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1976/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1976_109.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 01:39 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1976/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1976_109.html. The case was heard by I. MAHMUD.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: In case 1976 PLD 109, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ARTICLE 250 READ WITH ARTICLE 225(3) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(44) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 2(2)(C) AND 3(2)(B) REVENUE RECORD HINDU LAW PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1976/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1976_109.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 01:39 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1976/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1976_109.html. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1975-11-17.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1976 PLD 109 were: A. A. FAZEEL AND AKHTAR MAHMUD FOR PETITIONER. SAYEED A. SHAIKH FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.8. M. SADIQ FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.. The judges presiding were: I. MAHMUD.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: The parties in case 1976 PLD 109 were: MUHAMMAD ALI HEMANT (THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS) (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1976 PLD 109.
Answer: Judgment This Constitutional Petition is directed against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, the respondent No. dated 9-5-1966 setting aside the order of confirmation of sale passed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property dated 26-9-1959 and declaring that the property in dispute shall retain its character as Evacuee Property. 2. The property in dispute comprises a plot of land with residential building thereon No. 14-J. M. (city survey No. J. M. ) measuring 1355 square yards situated on Clayton Road, Karachi, known as “Moving Maha’ (hereinafter referred to as “the suit property’). Goals Downstream Bhavani (hereafter referred to as Goals), a Hindu, then a Deputy Superintendent of Police, obtained a 99 years’ lease of the plot of land of the suit property in his own name from the Karachi Municipality by a registered Indenture of Lease dated 11-3-1939. Goals mutated this plot of land in the name of his wife, Tulsa Bai in the city survey records on 10-7-1942 on the basis fan oral partition between him, his wife Tulsa Bai and his two sons, Pars ram and Aryan, which TS said to have taken place some time earlier in April, 1942. By a registered sale deed dated 6-12-1947, MST. Rubab Bai wife of Gum Hussain Matcheswala, the respondent No. 4, purchased the suit property for a consideration of Rs. 80,000 from Goals and his wife Tulsa Bai. In the sale deed, Goals and his wife Tulsa Bai were together shown as Vendors and the sale deed recited that Goals had obtained the lease of the suit property in his name from the Karachi Municipality and had since mutated the said hereditaments in the name of his wife Tulsa Bai in the records of the city Deputy Collector, Karachi, with the result that her name appeared as the owner in the Property Register. The sale deed was executed by Goals for self and as attorney of Tulsa Bai. The attesting witnesses thereto were P. G. Bhavani and N. N. Kowal, Advocate. The deed was registered by the Sub-Registrar on 17-3-1949. 3. Rubab Bai applied for the confirmation of the said sale, but the Deputy Custodian (Judicial), Evacuee Property, rejected her application on 5-5-1959 on the ground that the Extract from the Property Register showed that Tulsa Bai had only a life interest in the property under Hindu Law and that as the property would revert to her sons after her death, Rubab Bai did not acquire title to full ownership, but only to a life interest, and further that she had failed to establish that Tulsa Bai was still alive. 4. Rubab Bai preferred an Appeal to the Additional Custodian (Judicial), who allowed her appeal and confirmed the sale transaction by his dated 26-9-1959. He held that Goals alone was the real owner of the suit property, as the lease from the Municipality stood in his sole name and that there was nothing to show that there was an oral partition and, in any case, if there was an oral partition, no title passed to Tulsa Bai in the absence of registration of a instrument of partition and that the entry relating to the alleged life interest under Hindu Law appeared to be the result of a document made by Goals or a legal misconception of the clerk, who made the entry as to the Hindu Law. 5. Rubab Bai conveyed the suit property to Muhammad Ali Herman, the predecessor of the petitioner, through a registered sale deed on 23- 9-1960 for a consideration of Rs. 45,000. 6. K. A. Marked, the respondent No. 2, a displaced person, who was occupying a portion of the bungalow on the suit property, applied on C. H. Form for its. Transfer to him, but his application was rejected on 17-11-1959 on the ground that the suit property had already been confirmed in favor. of Rubab Bai. Therefore, Marked, who was also holding the influential position of Commissioner of Income-tax at Karachi, addressed a letter dated 6-4-1961 to the Director of Enforcement (Evacuee Property and Clams), South Zone, Lahore, the respondent No. 3, alleging that the order of the confirmation of the sale passed by the Additional Custodian in Appeal was obtained by misrepresentation of facts by Rubab Bai that Downstream was owner of the property, whereas it was Tulsa Bai, who owned only a life interest therein and that, therefore, the sale deed was void and the property remained evacuee property. He therefore, prayed that further investigation may be made in the case and the property be transferred to him as informer against his verified clam. Accordingly, the Custodian of Evacuee Property was directed by the Director of Enforcement, respondent No. 3, to hold an inquiry under Martial Law Regulation No. 49 and initiate a so moth revision. He sent the case to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) for inquiry and report. The latter, after issuing notices on 5-7-1962 to the petitioner as well as to Rubab Bai and Marked under M. L. R. 49, held the inquiry, in which the petitioner as well as Marked were represented by Advocates. He submitted his report on 15-12-1962 to the effect that no fraud or misrepresentation was practiced by Rubab Bai and that there was no substance in the allegation put forward by the former, Marked as well as by the Income-tax Department, that the issuance of the Income-tax Clearance Certificate to Rubab Bai was obtained by misrepresentation. He observed that the order of confirmation of THS suit property dated 26-9-1959 passed by the Additional Custodian, Mr. Riazuddin was a perfectly valid order. 7. When this report was put up before the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Marked as well as respondent No. made representations to him that on further probe, new evidence had come in light that Rubab Bai was an Indian national and, therefore, an evacuee and that consideration paid by the petitioner to Rubab Bai was not adequate, and that evidence of oral partition exists in the office of the City Deputy Collector, Karachi in the form of letter dated June 1942 signed by Doula tram, Tulsa Bai and their two sons, requesting for mutation of names on the basis of an oral partition of Jolt Hindu Family Property. Therefore, the Custodian sent the case back to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) on 18-4- 1963 for a further report on the new issues raised in the case. 8. This time, the Additional Custodian recorded the evidence of three witnesses and also of the petitioner and, after customizing the evidence both oral and documentary, he submitted his report on 7-11-1963, to the Custodian on all the aspects of the case with his recommendation for his consideration. 9. After hearing the parties, except Rubab Bai who failed to appear, the Custodian by the impugned order dated 9-5-1966, set aside the order of confirmation of the sale passed by the Additional Custodian dated 26-9-1959 and restored the order of the Deputy Custodian dated 5-5- 1959. He held that oral partition stood proved and that BMG a family settlement, no registration was necessary in order to pass title to Tulsa Bai, that Rubab Bai was an evacuee and there was absence of adequate consideration from petitioner, for the transfer of the suit property to him. Accordingly, he declared that the property shall retain its character as Evacuee Property and shall continue to be such. The present Petition seeks to challenge the aforesaid impugned order. 10. Mr. Alt Ahmed Feel, learned counsel for the petitioner assailed the impugned order of the Custodian on several grounds. His first submission was that the Custodian could not assume jurisdiction to question the order of the Additional Custodian dated 26-9-1959, confirming the sale to Rubab Bai by issuing notice dated 5-7-1962 under M. L. R. No. 49 on the ground that the M. L. R. stood repealed on 7-6-1962 from the commencing date of the 1962 Constitution by Article 225 In reply Mr. S. M. Sadiq, learned counsel for K. A. Marked, respondent No. submitted, rightly in my opinion, that as the Director of Enforcement, Lahore had directed the Custodian to hold an inquiry under M.L.R. No. 49 on the earlier representation of Majid, the investigation started on 24-2-1962 was saved by Art. 250 of the said Constitution notwithstanding the repeal of the M. L. R. He further submitted that even if the proceedings were not saved by the M. L. R. all the orders culminating in the impugned order were passed by the Custodian in the exercise of his so moth jurisdiction under section 43(4) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. This submission of Mr. Feel is therefore, not acceptable. 11. The next submission of Mr. Feel was that conceding that the Custodian has full power of so moth revision under section 43(4) of the said Act, the Revision could not be made under that provision because neither Marked nor the Director of Enforcement were parties to the Revision and in this connection, he relied on certain passing observations of the Supreme Court in Muhammad Kiddie and others v. Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore and others (1) m connection with the corresponding section 20 (3) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1957. I am not inclined to accept this submission because although these persons were not aggrieved parties, nevertheless they had sufficient interest to initiate action by the Custodian under his so moth powers, in the exercise of his discretion. 12. Mr. Feel then submitted that the exercise of so moth power by the Custodian under section 43 is subject to section 3 of the said Act which provides that notwithstanding anything contamed in the said Act, no property not treated as evacuee property, immediately before 1-1- 1957 shall be treated as evacuee property on or after the said date, unless proceedings were pending before that date for treating such property as evacuee property. He submitted that proceedings for confirmation, which were pending on the relevant date, cannot be said to be proceedings for “treating” the property as evacuee property and that treating required some conscious overt act on the part of the authorities. But Mr. S. M. Sadiq showed from the record that the Rehabilitation Authority had treated the suit property as evacuee property and, in fact issued notices of intention to allot the upper storey of the bungalow, whereupon Mr. M. N. Kowal, Advocate for Rubab Bai, submitted an application on 6-5- 1955 in paragraph 5 of which he has stated that the Rehabilitation Authority has “treated” the property as an evacuee property and prayed for stay of the allotment proceedings until disposal of the confirmation application then pending. The interim stay was granted, and the stay was later confirmed. Mr. Feel then sought to rely on subsection of section 3 of the said Act and submitted that the General Power of Attorney executed by Rubab Bai in favor of her husband dated 7-2-1951 authorizing him to manage the suit property, was “accepted” by the Custodian on 9-2-1957 and that amounted to acceptance or approval by the Custodian of the authority of the attorney of Rubab Bai and hence, the Custodian had no jurisdiction to declare the suit property as Evacuee Property any longer. But Mr. Sadiq’s submission is that the( power of attorney did not satisfy the requirements of the definition of “Evacuee” in section 2(2) (c) of the Act, as that applied to a person who is resident in India, whereas the power of attorney of Rubab Bai showed that she was residing in the suit property at Karachi. Moreover it appears that the attention of the Custodian, who had accepted the power, was not drawn to this point. Therefore, in my opinion, the endorsement by him on the power “before me accepted Akbar Hussain 1957” was not a proper order contemplated under section 3(2) (b) of the said Act. 13. The next submission of Mr. Feel was that the Custodian acted illegally and without Jurisdiction in accepting an oral family arrangement said to have come into existence in 1942 under which Tulsa Bai is said to have acquired an interest in the suit property, without there being any evidence to prove its existence. Mr. Feel’s contention is that the oral family arrangement has not been proved as a valid transaction. The Custodian on the other hand, relied on mutation proceedings in which the “oral partition” is referred to, as proof that the oral family arrangement had existed. The mutation proceedings comprised of a letter addressed to the City Deputy Collector, Karachi, said to have been signed by Goals, Tulsa Bai and their two sons, requesting mutation in their respective names of properties divided between them by an oral partition made sometime before IST April, 1942. The date of the letter was torn from the original but from internal evidence, was placed as 27-6-1942. A copy of this letter was produced by Initial Ahmed P. W. 2, the City Surveyed, before the Additional Custodian, who was holding the inquiry, and was exhibited as document Ex. P. W. without any objection from petitioner’s Advocate. The other document relied on by the Custodian as proof of the era family arrangement, was the extract from the Property Register Ex. A/2, which shows that the suit property was mutated in the name of Tulsa Bai on 10-7-1942 against entry “by oral partition” which was made pursuant to the aforesaid request for mutation Ex. P.W. As observed by the Privy Council in Thakur Norman Singh and others v. Thakur Lai Rudra Partan Na rain Singh and others it is an error to assume that proceedings for mutation of names are judicial proceedings in which title to and the proprietary rights in immovable property are determined. They are more in the nature of fiscal inquiries instituted in the name of the state in the interest of collecting revenue from the claiming occupants. Following the Privy Council case, it was held by the erstwhile High Court of West Pakistan in Firdausi Khan v. Said Adam Shah and others (2) that mutation and subsequent entries in the record-of-rights do not create title in favor of any person, as these documents are not deeds of title. The validity or otherwise of a transaction depends not on the mutation or entries in the record-of rights but on the fact whether there was a valid transaction in existence which was given effect to in the revenue papers. Therefore, accept the submission of Mr. Feel that in the absence of any independent proof of the existence of the oral family arrangement, reliance on the letter requesting mutation Ex. £ P. W. and the mutation entries Ex. A/2 were no substitutes for such proof. There is also no evidence that the alleged oral partition was acted upon ; nor was it even accepted by the Income-tax Officer, who treated the property as belonging to Goals and not to his wife, Tulsa JAI. 14. Mr. Feel also contended that the mutation letter Ex. P. W. could not be brought on record without formal proof of the signatures of the four executants, as required under section 67 of the Evidence Act and in this connection, he referred to the majority view of the Supreme Court in Muhammad Yousuf Khan Kathak v. S. M. Ayub I am bound to accept the majority view despite Mr. Sadiq’s submission relying on Abdullah and others v. Abdul Karim and others (2) AR d Malik Din and others v. Muhammad Islam (3) that the petitioner is debarred from raising objection at this late stage to the mode of proof of the letter which was admitted to the record and marked as an exhibit during the inquiry before the Additional Custodian without any objection. 15. Even if the mutation letter P. W. is evidence, and it is considered that the oral family arrangement of 1942 has been established, the question still is whether Tulsa Bai had acquired a valid title to the suit property in law, without registration. This question was considered by the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Removal v. Tulsa Ram and others They held that a family arrangement dealing with immovable property of the value of Rs. 100 and upwards, can be made orally and if it is not reduced to the form of document, no question of registration arises and possession may be lawfully taken by the parties under it of their respective shares. In Gutta Radhakrist-Nadya etc. v. Gutta Sarasota it was also observed that partition between co-larceners does not amount to, nor requires a conveyance because: “Partition, therefore is really a process in and by which a joint enjoyment is transformed into an enjoyment in severalty. Each one of the sharers had an antecedent title and therefore no conveyance is involved in the process as a conferment of anew title is not necessary.” And Mr. Sadiq relied on this case to show that under Hindu Law, partition of joint family properties may be orally effected, and no registration was required and that as under Hindu Law, Tulsa Bai became entitled to receive the same share as that of a son, she was allotted the suit property in lieu of her share. But where a property is brought within the scope of the family arrangement and is allotted to one or other of the parties, it may be that qua that property, there would be a transfer of ownership and in the absence of registration, it would pass no title. In the instant case, the suit property stood exclusively in the name of Goals in his individual capacity and not as a karma of the joint Hindu family. There is no evidence whether the suit property became joint family property. And, even if it did, Tulsa Bai not being a co-larcener, had no antecedent title to any undivided share in it Therefore, even if the oral partition or family arrangement is accepted, the inference is that by allotment of it to Tulsa Bai, a new and distinct title was being conferred on her, and, in the absence of registration, no such title could pass to her. Goals remained the real owner of the suit property and Rubab Bai acquired a valid title from him. Tulsa Bai was domed (1)P LD 1973 S C 160 (2) PLD 1968 S C 140 (3) PL1) 969 SC 136 4) AIR 1928 All 641 '<"(S)AT£ 1951 Mad. 213 IFL the sale-deed only because the property was mutated in her name. I am therefore, in agreement with ‘the submission of Mr. Feel that the acceptance by the Custodian of the oral family arrangement as conferring a title on Tulsa Bai was illegal and without jurisdiction. 16 Mr. Feel next submitted that the Custodian exceeded his jurisdiction in declaring by the impugned order dated 9-5-1966 that Rubab Bai was an evacuee despite the bar created by section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. That section expressly states that no person not treated as evacuee immediately before IST day of Jun nary, 1957, shall be treated as an evacuee on or after the said date. There is no evidence that prior to 1*1-1957, Rubab Bai was ever treated as an evacuee or that proceedings were pending in that regard before 1-1-3 957, although the suit property itself was treated as evacuee property by the Rehabilitation Authorities, as stated earlier. I therefore, accept the submission of Mr. Feel that the Custodian’s order declaring Rubab Bai as an evacuee, was without jurisdiction. It is, therefore, not necessary to consider Mr. Feel’s submission that there was no material evidence to substantiate the finding by the Custodian as to the evacuee status of Rubab Bai. Therefore, the sale transaction in favor of the petitioner from Rubab Bai did not require confirmation. It is also not necessary to consider the submission of Mr. Feel with regard to the powers of the Income-tax Department, to cancel the Income-tax Certificate once granted, because the impugned order is not based on TT. 17. For the forego mg reasons, I would accept this petition. It is hereby declared that the impugned order passed by the Custodian dated 9-5- 1966 is without lawful authority and is of no legal effect. The petition is accordingly, allowed with costs. s. a. h. Petition allowed. wwwpaklcgaldatabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 109 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-17): Judgment This Constitutional Petition is directed against the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property, the respondent No. dated 9-5-1966 setting aside the order of confirmation of sale passed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property dated 26-9-1959 and declaring that the property in dispute shall retain its character as Evacuee Property. 2. The property in dispute comprises a plot of land with residential building thereon No. 14-J. M. (city survey No. J. M. ) measuring 1355 square yards situated on Clayton Road, Karachi, known as “Moving Maha’ (hereinafter referred to as “the suit property’). Goals Downstream Bhavani (hereafter referred to as Goals), a Hindu, then a Deputy Superintendent of Police, obtained a 99 years’ lease of the plot of land of the suit property in his own name from the Karachi Municipality by a registered Indenture of Lease dated 11-3-1939. Goals mutated this plot of land in the name of his wife, Tulsa Bai in the city survey records on 10-7-1942 on the basis fan oral partition between him, his wife Tulsa Bai and his two sons, Pars ram and Aryan, which TS said to have taken place some time earlier in April, 1942. By a registered sale deed dated 6-12-1947, MST. Rubab Bai wife of Gum Hussain Matcheswala, the respondent No. 4, purchased the suit property for a consideration of Rs. 80,000 from Goals and his wife Tulsa Bai. In the sale deed, Goals and his wife Tulsa Bai were together shown as Vendors and the sale deed recited that Goals had obtained the lease of the suit property in his name from the Karachi Municipality and had since mutated the said hereditaments in the name of his wife Tulsa Bai in the records of the city Deputy Collector, Karachi, with the result that her name appeared as the owner in the Property Register. The sale deed was executed by Goals for self and as attorney of Tulsa Bai. The attesting witnesses thereto were P. G. Bhavani and N. N. Kowal, Advocate. The deed was registered by the Sub-Registrar on 17-3-1949. 3. Rubab Bai applied for the confirmation of the said sale, but the Deputy Custodian (Judicial), Evacuee Property, rejected her application on 5-5-1959 on the ground that the Extract from the Property Register showed that Tulsa Bai had only a life interest in the property under Hindu Law and that as the property would revert to her sons after her death, Rubab Bai did not acquire title to full ownership, but only to a life interest, and further that she had failed to establish that Tulsa Bai was still alive. 4. Rubab Bai preferred an Appeal to the Additional Custodian (Judicial), who allowed her appeal and confirmed the sale transaction by his dated 26-9-1959. He held that Goals alone was the real owner of the suit property, as the lease from the Municipality stood in his sole name and that there was nothing to show that there was an oral partition and, in any case, if there

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 109 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-17): the sale transaction by his dated 26-9-1959. He held that Goals alone was the real owner of the suit property, as the lease from the Municipality stood in his sole name and that there was nothing to show that there was an oral partition and, in any case, if there was an oral partition, no title passed to Tulsa Bai in the absence of registration of a instrument of partition and that the entry relating to the alleged life interest under Hindu Law appeared to be the result of a document made by Goals or a legal misconception of the clerk, who made the entry as to the Hindu Law. 5. Rubab Bai conveyed the suit property to Muhammad Ali Herman, the predecessor of the petitioner, through a registered sale deed on 23- 9-1960 for a consideration of Rs. 45,000. 6. K. A. Marked, the respondent No. 2, a displaced person, who was occupying a portion of the bungalow on the suit property, applied on C. H. Form for its. Transfer to him, but his application was rejected on 17-11-1959 on the ground that the suit property had already been confirmed in favor. of Rubab Bai. Therefore, Marked, who was also holding the influential position of Commissioner of Income-tax at Karachi, addressed a letter dated 6-4-1961 to the Director of Enforcement (Evacuee Property and Clams), South Zone, Lahore, the respondent No. 3, alleging that the order of the confirmation of the sale passed by the Additional Custodian in Appeal was obtained by misrepresentation of facts by Rubab Bai that Downstream was owner of the property, whereas it was Tulsa Bai, who owned only a life interest therein and that, therefore, the sale deed was void and the property remained evacuee property. He therefore, prayed that further investigation may be made in the case and the property be transferred to him as informer against his verified clam. Accordingly, the Custodian of Evacuee Property was directed by the Director of Enforcement, respondent No. 3, to hold an inquiry under Martial Law Regulation No. 49 and initiate a so moth revision. He sent the case to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) for inquiry and report. The latter, after issuing notices on 5-7-1962 to the petitioner as well as to Rubab Bai and Marked under M. L. R. 49, held the inquiry, in which the petitioner as well as Marked were represented by Advocates. He submitted his report on 15-12-1962 to the effect that no fraud or misrepresentation was practiced by Rubab Bai and that there was no substance in the allegation put forward by the former, Marked as well as by the Income-tax Department, that the issuance of the Income-tax Clearance Certificate to Rubab Bai was obtained by misrepresentation. He observed that the order of confirmation of THS suit property dated 26-9-1959 passed by the Additional Custodian, Mr. Riazuddin was a perfectly valid order. 7. When this report was put up before the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Marked as well as respondent No. made

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 109 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-17): Bai was obtained by misrepresentation. He observed that the order of confirmation of THS suit property dated 26-9-1959 passed by the Additional Custodian, Mr. Riazuddin was a perfectly valid order. 7. When this report was put up before the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Marked as well as respondent No. made representations to him that on further probe, new evidence had come in light that Rubab Bai was an Indian national and, therefore, an evacuee and that consideration paid by the petitioner to Rubab Bai was not adequate, and that evidence of oral partition exists in the office of the City Deputy Collector, Karachi in the form of letter dated June 1942 signed by Doula tram, Tulsa Bai and their two sons, requesting for mutation of names on the basis of an oral partition of Jolt Hindu Family Property. Therefore, the Custodian sent the case back to the Additional Custodian (Judicial) on 18-4- 1963 for a further report on the new issues raised in the case. 8. This time, the Additional Custodian recorded the evidence of three witnesses and also of the petitioner and, after customizing the evidence both oral and documentary, he submitted his report on 7-11-1963, to the Custodian on all the aspects of the case with his recommendation for his consideration. 9. After hearing the parties, except Rubab Bai who failed to appear, the Custodian by the impugned order dated 9-5-1966, set aside the order of confirmation of the sale passed by the Additional Custodian dated 26-9-1959 and restored the order of the Deputy Custodian dated 5-5- 1959. He held that oral partition stood proved and that BMG a family settlement, no registration was necessary in order to pass title to Tulsa Bai, that Rubab Bai was an evacuee and there was absence of adequate consideration from petitioner, for the transfer of the suit property to him. Accordingly, he declared that the property shall retain its character as Evacuee Property and shall continue to be such. The present Petition seeks to challenge the aforesaid impugned order. 10. Mr. Alt Ahmed Feel, learned counsel for the petitioner assailed the impugned order of the Custodian on several grounds. His first submission was that the Custodian could not assume jurisdiction to question the order of the Additional Custodian dated 26-9-1959, confirming the sale to Rubab Bai by issuing notice dated 5-7-1962 under M. L. R. No. 49 on the ground that the M. L. R. stood repealed on 7-6-1962 from the commencing date of the 1962 Constitution by Article 225 In reply Mr. S. M. Sadiq, learned counsel for K. A. Marked, respondent No. submitted, rightly in my opinion, that as the Director of Enforcement, Lahore had directed the Custodian to hold an inquiry under M.L.R. No. 49 on the earlier representation of Majid, the investigation started on 24-2-1962 was saved by Art. 250 of the said Constitution notwithstanding the repeal of the M. L. R. He further submitted that even if the proceedings were not saved by the M. L.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 109 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-17): hold an inquiry under M.L.R. No. 49 on the earlier representation of Majid, the investigation started on 24-2-1962 was saved by Art. 250 of the said Constitution notwithstanding the repeal of the M. L. R. He further submitted that even if the proceedings were not saved by the M. L. R. all the orders culminating in the impugned order were passed by the Custodian in the exercise of his so moth jurisdiction under section 43(4) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. This submission of Mr. Feel is therefore, not acceptable. 11. The next submission of Mr. Feel was that conceding that the Custodian has full power of so moth revision under section 43(4) of the said Act, the Revision could not be made under that provision because neither Marked nor the Director of Enforcement were parties to the Revision and in this connection, he relied on certain passing observations of the Supreme Court in Muhammad Kiddie and others v. Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore and others (1) m connection with the corresponding section 20 (3) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1957. I am not inclined to accept this submission because although these persons were not aggrieved parties, nevertheless they had sufficient interest to initiate action by the Custodian under his so moth powers, in the exercise of his discretion. 12. Mr. Feel then submitted that the exercise of so moth power by the Custodian under section 43 is subject to section 3 of the said Act which provides that notwithstanding anything contamed in the said Act, no property not treated as evacuee property, immediately before 1-1- 1957 shall be treated as evacuee property on or after the said date, unless proceedings were pending before that date for treating such property as evacuee property. He submitted that proceedings for confirmation, which were pending on the relevant date, cannot be said to be proceedings for “treating” the property as evacuee property and that treating required some conscious overt act on the part of the authorities. But Mr. S. M. Sadiq showed from the record that the Rehabilitation Authority had treated the suit property as evacuee property and, in fact issued notices of intention to allot the upper storey of the bungalow, whereupon Mr. M. N. Kowal, Advocate for Rubab Bai, submitted an application on 6-5- 1955 in paragraph 5 of which he has stated that the Rehabilitation Authority has “treated” the property as an evacuee property and prayed for stay of the allotment proceedings until disposal of the confirmation application then pending. The interim stay was granted, and the stay was later confirmed. Mr. Feel then sought to rely on subsection of section 3 of the said Act and submitted that the General Power of Attorney executed by Rubab Bai in favor of her husband dated 7-2-1951 authorizing him to manage the suit property, was “accepted” by the Custodian on 9-2-1957 and that amounted to acceptance or approval by the Custodian of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 109 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-17): 3 of the said Act and submitted that the General Power of Attorney executed by Rubab Bai in favor of her husband dated 7-2-1951 authorizing him to manage the suit property, was “accepted” by the Custodian on 9-2-1957 and that amounted to acceptance or approval by the Custodian of the authority of the attorney of Rubab Bai and hence, the Custodian had no jurisdiction to declare the suit property as Evacuee Property any longer. But Mr. Sadiq’s submission is that the( power of attorney did not satisfy the requirements of the definition of “Evacuee” in section 2(2) (c) of the Act, as that applied to a person who is resident in India, whereas the power of attorney of Rubab Bai showed that she was residing in the suit property at Karachi. Moreover it appears that the attention of the Custodian, who had accepted the power, was not drawn to this point. Therefore, in my opinion, the endorsement by him on the power “before me accepted Akbar Hussain 1957” was not a proper order contemplated under section 3(2) (b) of the said Act. 13. The next submission of Mr. Feel was that the Custodian acted illegally and without Jurisdiction in accepting an oral family arrangement said to have come into existence in 1942 under which Tulsa Bai is said to have acquired an interest in the suit property, without there being any evidence to prove its existence. Mr. Feel’s contention is that the oral family arrangement has not been proved as a valid transaction. The Custodian on the other hand, relied on mutation proceedings in which the “oral partition” is referred to, as proof that the oral family arrangement had existed. The mutation proceedings comprised of a letter addressed to the City Deputy Collector, Karachi, said to have been signed by Goals, Tulsa Bai and their two sons, requesting mutation in their respective names of properties divided between them by an oral partition made sometime before IST April, 1942. The date of the letter was torn from the original but from internal evidence, was placed as 27-6-1942. A copy of this letter was produced by Initial Ahmed P. W. 2, the City Surveyed, before the Additional Custodian, who was holding the inquiry, and was exhibited as document Ex. P. W. without any objection from petitioner’s Advocate. The other document relied on by the Custodian as proof of the era family arrangement, was the extract from the Property Register Ex. A/2, which shows that the suit property was mutated in the name of Tulsa Bai on 10-7-1942 against entry “by oral partition” which was made pursuant to the aforesaid request for mutation Ex. P.W. As observed by the Privy Council in Thakur Norman Singh and others v. Thakur Lai Rudra Partan Na rain Singh and others it is an error to assume that proceedings for mutation of names are judicial proceedings in which title to and the proprietary rights in immovable property are determined. They are more in the nature of fiscal

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 109 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-17): Norman Singh and others v. Thakur Lai Rudra Partan Na rain Singh and others it is an error to assume that proceedings for mutation of names are judicial proceedings in which title to and the proprietary rights in immovable property are determined. They are more in the nature of fiscal inquiries instituted in the name of the state in the interest of collecting revenue from the claiming occupants. Following the Privy Council case, it was held by the erstwhile High Court of West Pakistan in Firdausi Khan v. Said Adam Shah and others (2) that mutation and subsequent entries in the record-of-rights do not create title in favor of any person, as these documents are not deeds of title. The validity or otherwise of a transaction depends not on the mutation or entries in the record-of rights but on the fact whether there was a valid transaction in existence which was given effect to in the revenue papers. Therefore, accept the submission of Mr. Feel that in the absence of any independent proof of the existence of the oral family arrangement, reliance on the letter requesting mutation Ex. £ P. W. and the mutation entries Ex. A/2 were no substitutes for such proof. There is also no evidence that the alleged oral partition was acted upon ; nor was it even accepted by the Income-tax Officer, who treated the property as belonging to Goals and not to his wife, Tulsa JAI. 14. Mr. Feel also contended that the mutation letter Ex. P. W. could not be brought on record without formal proof of the signatures of the four executants, as required under section 67 of the Evidence Act and in this connection, he referred to the majority view of the Supreme Court in Muhammad Yousuf Khan Kathak v. S. M. Ayub I am bound to accept the majority view despite Mr. Sadiq’s submission relying on Abdullah and others v. Abdul Karim and others (2) AR d Malik Din and others v. Muhammad Islam (3) that the petitioner is debarred from raising objection at this late stage to the mode of proof of the letter which was admitted to the record and marked as an exhibit during the inquiry before the Additional Custodian without any objection. 15. Even if the mutation letter P. W. is evidence, and it is considered that the oral family arrangement of 1942 has been established, the question still is whether Tulsa Bai had acquired a valid title to the suit property in law, without registration. This question was considered by the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Removal v. Tulsa Ram and others They held that a family arrangement dealing with immovable property of the value of Rs. 100 and upwards, can be made orally and if it is not reduced to the form of document, no question of registration arises and possession may be lawfully taken by the parties under it of their respective shares. In Gutta Radhakrist-Nadya etc. v. Gutta Sarasota it

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 109 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-17): the value of Rs. 100 and upwards, can be made orally and if it is not reduced to the form of document, no question of registration arises and possession may be lawfully taken by the parties under it of their respective shares. In Gutta Radhakrist-Nadya etc. v. Gutta Sarasota it was also observed that partition between co-larceners does not amount to, nor requires a conveyance because: “Partition, therefore is really a process in and by which a joint enjoyment is transformed into an enjoyment in severalty. Each one of the sharers had an antecedent title and therefore no conveyance is involved in the process as a conferment of anew title is not necessary.” And Mr. Sadiq relied on this case to show that under Hindu Law, partition of joint family properties may be orally effected, and no registration was required and that as under Hindu Law, Tulsa Bai became entitled to receive the same share as that of a son, she was allotted the suit property in lieu of her share. But where a property is brought within the scope of the family arrangement and is allotted to one or other of the parties, it may be that qua that property, there would be a transfer of ownership and in the absence of registration, it would pass no title. In the instant case, the suit property stood exclusively in the name of Goals in his individual capacity and not as a karma of the joint Hindu family. There is no evidence whether the suit property became joint family property. And, even if it did, Tulsa Bai not being a co-larcener, had no antecedent title to any undivided share in it Therefore, even if the oral partition or family arrangement is accepted, the inference is that by allotment of it to Tulsa Bai, a new and distinct title was being conferred on her, and, in the absence of registration, no such title could pass to her. Goals remained the real owner of the suit property and Rubab Bai acquired a valid title from him. Tulsa Bai was domed (1)P LD 1973 S C 160 (2) PLD 1968 S C 140 (3) PL1) 969 SC 136 4) AIR 1928 All 641 '<"(S)AT£ 1951 Mad. 213 IFL the sale-deed only because the property was mutated in her name. I am therefore, in agreement with ‘the submission of Mr. Feel that the acceptance by the Custodian of the oral family arrangement as conferring a title on Tulsa Bai was illegal and without jurisdiction. 16 Mr. Feel next submitted that the Custodian exceeded his jurisdiction in declaring by the impugned order dated 9-5-1966 that Rubab Bai was an evacuee despite the bar created by section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. That section expressly states that no person not treated as evacuee immediately before IST day of Jun nary, 1957, shall be treated as an evacuee on or after the said date. There is no evidence that prior to 1*1-1957, Rubab

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1976 PLD 109?
Answer: From case 1976 PLD 109 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1975-11-17): 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. That section expressly states that no person not treated as evacuee immediately before IST day of Jun nary, 1957, shall be treated as an evacuee on or after the said date. There is no evidence that prior to 1*1-1957, Rubab Bai was ever treated as an evacuee or that proceedings were pending in that regard before 1-1-3 957, although the suit property itself was treated as evacuee property by the Rehabilitation Authorities, as stated earlier. I therefore, accept the submission of Mr. Feel that the Custodian’s order declaring Rubab Bai as an evacuee, was without jurisdiction. It is, therefore, not necessary to consider Mr. Feel’s submission that there was no material evidence to substantiate the finding by the Custodian as to the evacuee status of Rubab Bai. Therefore, the sale transaction in favor of the petitioner from Rubab Bai did not require confirmation. It is also not necessary to consider the submission of Mr. Feel with regard to the powers of the Income-tax Department, to cancel the Income-tax Certificate once granted, because the impugned order is not based on TT. 17. For the forego mg reasons, I would accept this petition. It is hereby declared that the impugned order passed by the Custodian dated 9-5- 1966 is without lawful authority and is of no legal effect. The petition is accordingly, allowed with costs. s. a. h. Petition allowed. wwwpaklcgaldatabase.com

Question: What is case 1985 CLC 395 about?
Answer: Case 1985 CLC 395 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-06-20. The case involved MST.KHURSHID BIBI (PETITIONER) VERSUS «THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, SIND* AND 23 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 BENAMI TRANSACTION REGISTRATION ACT (XIV OF 1908) - SS.17, 23, 24, 25 AND 26 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S.36(4) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - §.16(3)(A)(I) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XII OF 1957) - https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_ 395.html 1/25 28/10/2025, 01:39 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_395.htm! S.20 (3)(A) (I) GENERAL CLAUSES ACT (X OF 1697) - 8.21 PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S.8(3)(4) TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - SS.118, 119, 120, 55(4), AND 55(6). The case was heard by SALEEM AKHTAR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: In case 1985 CLC 395, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 BENAMI TRANSACTION REGISTRATION ACT (XIV OF 1908) - SS.17, 23, 24, 25 AND 26 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S.36(4) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - §.16(3)(A)(I) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XII OF 1957) - https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_ 395.html 1/25 28/10/2025, 01:39 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_395.htm! S.20 (3)(A) (I) GENERAL CLAUSES ACT (X OF 1697) - 8.21 PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S.8(3)(4) TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - SS.118, 119, 120, 55(4), AND 55(6). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-06-20.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 CLC 395 were: MAROOF ALI KHAN AND KHALID M. ISHAQUE FOR PETITIONERS. MUHAMMAD SHARIF, MUHAMMAD ALI SAYED* IQBALAHMAD AND ABDUL SATTAR FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SALEEM AKHTAR.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 CLC 395 were: MST.KHURSHID BIBI (PETITIONER) VERSUS «THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, SIND* AND 23 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 CLC 395.
Answer: By this judgment the following petitions shall be disposed of- Constitutional Petition No.S. "n", ""M, "11 11, » "", In all these petitions the order of the Custodian, the respondent No.], dated 27-6-1974 has been challenged, whereby the application for confirmation of exchange under sections 16 and 17 of the Ordinance XV of 1949 originally filed by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq in respect of properties of which petitioners claim to be the transferees from the Settlement Department has been granted. In petition No.S. the petitioners have stated that evacuee plots bear mg No.G.R.E,2 k 3 situated at Karachi were purchased by the petitioners m an auction held on 11- 6-1960, by the Settlement Authorities at Karachi. On approval of the auction and on payment of the auction price P.T.O. dated 27-8-1962 was issued in the petitioner's name. However, during 1965 the petitioners Nazi was made a respondent in the proceedings which had been initiated on behalf of Muhammad Iraq under sections 16 and 17 of the Ordinance XV of 1949 with regard to an exchange allegedly made by him on 1-5-1961 at Delhi for his and measure 4,65,600 sq. yards out of a big plot in an area known as Hear New Delhi with Karachi Evacuee Property belonging to Paradab Dayak Was and three other Hindu evacuees permanently settled in India. In Petition No. the petitioners are displaced persons and on 28-7-1948 they purchased plot bear mg No.A M 281 JJI-B- 18, Karachi, measuring 960 sq. yes. with possession in their firm's name known as International Trade Agency from its original owner Balsam Dallas while he was at Karachi, and was a Pakistani citizen, and had not migrated to India. It is alleged that the sale was confirmed by an order of the Additional Custodian dated 13-5-1951, and a charge of Rs.25, /7 was created on the property. The petitioners thereafter, sold out share in the charge to Muhammad Basin. Again on 20th September, 1960 the parties entered into another agreement to settle their shares and got the said plot transferred jointly MN their names under P.T.O dated 5-11-1960 and obtained the transfer order dated 14-6-1974 in the same manner. These petitioners were also made parties in the proceedings filed by late Muhammad Iraq as stated above. In Petition No. the petitioner's predecessor-in-interest and mother late Qatar Jean was a claimant displaced person and being in possession of a portion of evacuee house bear mg No.C.S. No.G.R.E- Germander, Karachi applied for its transfer under scheme No.] of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. The other occupant of the house had also applied for transfer, and the matter remained under litigation which resulted in a settlement whereby it was agreed that half of the house in possession of MST*. Qatar Jean be transferred to her, and the other half be transferred to the other occupant. Accordingly transfer price was paid and P. T. D. dated 25-3-1964 was issued in their names. In 1967 notice of proceedings initiated by late Muhammad Iraq was published in Daily Dawn to which MST. Qatar Jean joined as respondent No. 5. During the pendency of those proceedings MST. Qatar Jean by a registered deed transferred her half share to,a the petitioner which was duly notified to the Additional Custodial; In Petition No. petitioner No.2 was a partnership firm of Sh. Muhammad Yaseen the predecessor-in-interest of petitioner No.! (a) to Under an agreement of sale, dated 30th August, 1948 he agreed to purchase plot No.A.M.281 measuring 960 sq. yards situated in the Artillery Maidan Quarter from its Hindu owner Balsam Dallas respondent No. 14 who is alleged to be present in Pakistan at that time and had not migrated. In pursuance of the agreement, the petitioner No.2 obtained possession and raised permanent construction at a substantial investment. The agreed price was Rs.60,000 and since the petitioner No.2 had not paid 80% of this price, permission for filing a but for Specific Performance was refused, but by order dated 13-11-1956 a charge for Rs.25, /9 with interest at 6% was created in favor of the petitioner No.2. The original petitioner No.l] Fe 2 entered into an agreement under which Sheikh Muhammad Yaseen purchased share of the charge so created and the Additional Custodian (Judy) by order dated 29-7-1954 allowed Muhammad Yaseen's name to be substituted as holder of the charge created on the plot in place of International Trading Agency. The petitioners have alleged that they have made additions and alterations paid taxes, and are in continuous possession and occupation of the building. A P.T.O. dated 5-11-1960 was issued in the joint names of Muhammad Yaseen and M/s. International Trading Agency. In 1965 Muhammad Yaseen came to know of the proceedings and claim made by late Muhammad Iraq the predecessor in interest of the respondent No.2 to 11 and on their application they were imp leaded as party in the said proceedings before the Custodian. TN Petition No. the petitioner's predecessor in interest and father late Heidi Sushi Raza Khan was a displaced person and being in possession of evacuee house bear mg No.CS No.GRE/ Germander, Karachi applied for its transfer under settlement scheme No.], However, MST. Qatar Jean the other occupant of a portion also made a claim resulting into a litigation which ended in a settlement whereby half of the portion was transferred to him. Accordingly on 25-3-1964 P.T.D for their separate shares was issued. In 1967 notice of proceedings initiated by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq was published in Daily Dawn, inviting the transferees of the subject property to job the said proceedings. The petitioner therefore, domed proceedings as respondent No.6 before the Custodian. In Constitution Petition No. the petitioner is a statutory Body established under the provisions of West Pakistan Cooperative Board Dissolution Act II of 1966 as successor of West Pakistan Cooperative Development Board Lahore. Plots bearing Nos.267, 268, 269, 288, 289, 290 and 291 situated at Victoria Road, now known as Abdullah Maroon Road, Karachi were acquired by the Government of Pakistan under Notification No.F/6(6) 57-P-IJI dated 8-2-1957. In the records of right Hindu evacuee Thai Partan Dallas was recorded as the owner of these’ plots. The said plots were transferred to K.D.A. who constructed building thereon known as "Super Market Building". K.D.A. transferred the said building to West Pakistan Cooperative Development Board which paid on 25-4-1963 a sum of Rs. 15,74,500 being the cost of superstructure. The petitioners also paid transfer price, interest and settlement fee in respect of these plots amounting to Rs.10,25,762.50, Rs. 1,25,905 and Rs.5,109 respectively to the Settlement Rehabilitation Commissioner. The petitioners were therefore, joined the proceedings initiated by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq which inter alia related to these plots. All these petitions were originally filed against the official respondents and legal heirs of late Heidi Muhammad Iraq. In petition No. besides the afore stated respondents the Hindu evacuees have also been joined as respondents. During the pendency of these petitions the legal hers of Ghulam Paula filed application for coming them as respondents which was granted on 6-11-1977. Thereafter, certain respondents died whose legal heirs have been brought on record. The facts of the proceedings filed by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq in which the petitioners in the afore stated petitions were joined as respondents are as follows Late Heidi Muhammad Iraq through his attorney Heidi Hafeezuddin filed an application under sections 16 and 17 of the Ordnance XV of 1949 before the Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property, Karachi on 14-6-1951 for permission to get the Exchange Deed registered which he had entered with Thai Partan Dayak Was, Sasha Akmal Triplane, Bai ram Dallas and Dhabi Na rain was Manzoni on 1-5-1951 at Delhi and for its confirmation. It was alleged that he was the owner of a big plot of land measuring 11 lacs sq. yards situated at New Delhi in the area known as Hear. Out of this property he exchanged 4,65,000 sq. yards with Thai Partan Dayak Was and three other Hindu evacuees who are permanently settled in India. It was stated in the application that the Hindu evacuees have executed a general power of attorney in favor of his two relations to act on their behalf: It was further stated that price of Delhi land was Rs.9,75,000 while the Karachi property was evaluated at Rs.9,00,000. Muhammad Iraq alleged that he received Rs.75,000 in cash and delivered the possession to those evacuees. The particulars of the Karachi Properties which were exchanged and were subject-matter of the application are as follows:- (a) Open plots of land bearing S. Nos. 267, 268, 280, 289, 290 and 291. Sheet No.A.M. of Artillery Maidan Quarter, Victoria Road, Karachi. (b) Bungalow at Survey No. 120 J.M. Quarter, Muhammad Ali Jinnah Road, Karachi. (c) Two bungalows bearing S. No. Sheet G.R.E. Garden Quarter, Karachi. (d) A plot of land bearing S. No.664, Sheet Garden East, Jail Road, Karachi’. The Agreement of exchange was made at Delhi on 25-12-1949, the Deed of Exchange was executed on IST May, 1951 and registered on 5-5-1951. A certified copy of the general power of attorney executed by the Hindu owners in favor of the relations of the applicant was stated to have been filed with the application. On 15th June, 1951 the said attorney of the Hindu evacuees filed a written statement before the Deputy Custodian admitting the applicant's claim for confirmation of the exchange and the registration of the deed of exchange. The application was opposed by the Pakistan General Hawkers Union (Registered) Saddam, Cloth Market, Karachi, who contended that the transaction contravened in the Notification dated 10-1-1950 under Ordinance XV of 1949 as amended by Notification dated 9th April, 1951 restricting the transfer of evacuee property. It was also averred that on the dates when the agreement of exchange and deed of exchange were executed. Heidi Muhammad Iraq was not a refugee, nor his property situated in New Delhi evacuee property and that permission for the registration of the deed of exchange by the Custodian of the Evacuee Property Delhi was obtained by misrepresentation and suppression of material facts. Four other persons namely M. Muhammad Ahmad, Shameful Hag, Muhammad Faizuddin Brahmani and S. Khali+-Brahman who were in possession of the vacant plot bearing survey Nos.288, 289’and 290 raised objections as those of Pakistan General Hawkers Union. On ATH March, 1952 late Heidi Muhammad Iraq replied to both the objections and asserted that objectors were not parties to the proceedings, and they had no locus standi to object the confirmation of the exchange. During the pendency. Of these proceedings, the learned Dy. Custodian ordered late Heidi Muhammad Iraq to produce (1) the requisite income-tax clearance certificate, (2) Notification in the official Gazette of the property in India having been treated as evacuee property prior to transaction, (3) copy of Certificate permitting registration of exchange in India, (4) Notice under sub-rules (4) (5) of rule 20 the Indian Evacuee Property Rules, (5) Certified copy of order confirming transfer of property in Indian, and (6) affidavit to the effect that the property in India was not declared as non-evacuee after the Notification, and that the same has not been released or restored since then. As Heidi Muhammad Iraq could not produce all these documents and absented himself for one reason or the other, the learned Deputy Custodian on 22-11-1962 dismissed the application. Heidi Muhammad Iraq went up in appeal to the Additional Custodian (Judy). The appeal remained pending for more than one year and was dismissed on 28-4-1953 on the ground that in essence the application before the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property was UN/air section 17 of the Ordinance for the grant of certificate for the registration of a deed of exchange aid no appeal lay from that order. Heidi Muhammad Iraq invoked the Revisional Jurisdiction of the Custodian Evacuee Property, Karachi. The petition was dismissed by Mr. Monsieur Adam, the then Custodian of the Evacuee Property who affirmed the view expressed by the Additional Custodian. However, by an order dated 21-12-1954 Mr. Monsieur Adam so moth issued notice to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi and to the parties to appear before the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, to show cause as to why the order dated 22nd November, 1962 dismissing the application for confirmation of the Exchange deed and its registration may not be revised. In the order it was observed that although at the time when the Deputy Custodian passed the order there was every justification for it, but the position has since then changed, and the policy in' the matter of such exchange has been relaxed. The learned Custodian placed reliance on the Notification dated 30th August, 1954 thereunder the exchange in question was not restricted and could be considered for confirmation. After the issue of notice the hearing of the case was fixed on 1-3-1955 which continued to be adjourned and eventually arguments were heard on 13-10-1956 and order was reserved. On 30- 10-1956 Mr. Monsieur Adam the learned Custodian passed an order that in view of the contention of Heidi Muhammad Iraq that the exchange is not prohibited under law a reference shall be made to the Central Government. He accordingly made a reference to Mr. Y.A. Khan the Deputy Secretary by means of which he made a quarry to the Ministry of Refugees and Rehabilitation, whether the exchange MN question between the Urban Property in Karachi and the agricultural land in Delhi should be. allowed or not. It was pointed out that the latest Notification restricting such transactions was Silent and that is why clarification of the Central Government was sought. On 14-12- 1956 Mr.Y.A. Khan referring to Notification dated 10-4-1956 replied that the Ministry has no objection to the confirmation provided it is otherwise unobjectionable. In the meantime Muhammad Iraq had in support of his claim placed before the Custodian a copy of the deed of exchange and a copy of the. order of the Deputy Custodian (General) Punjab Lahore dated 5-12-1955 in appeal No. whereby a similar exchange was confirmed in his favor by Mr. Abdul Marked Affair. On 2-3-1957 Mr. Muhammad Bush A. Memon who had succeeded Mr. Monsieur Adam passed an order observing that under Notification No.F-9(4) 56-B, dated 11-4-1956 transfer of any urban immovable evacuee property by exchange with such immovable property which has not been treated as evacuee property under any law for the time being in force in India is prohibited, but there was no prohibition whatsoever for transfer by exchange of urban immovable evacuee property in Pakistan with any agricultural property in India. According to the learned Custodian the exchange was valid and must be confirmed, and that he would have immediately set aside the order of the Dy. Custodian dated 22-11-1952, but another complication had arisen in the meantime namely the open plots situated in Saddam had been acquired by the Central Government for constructing a must storeyed building to rehabilitate the refugees. He accordingly thought it fit to stay his hand till the matter was clarified by the Government as granting. sanction for the exchange would have obstructed the construction and rehabilitation work. With regard to the remaining property involved in the exchange the learned Custodian thought that there will be no objection to sanction the exchange and to issue the requisite certificate for registration of the exchange deed, but as the deed was a consolidated one, he cannot pass order piecemeal because the deed of exchange was one and could not’ be vitiated. For these reasons he postponed the announcement of the final order in the case for a week. Heidi Muhammad Iraq challenged this order in Writ Petition No. which was dismissed on 14-6-1958. Heidi Muhammad Iraq filed Latter Patent Appeal against the judgment passed in the Writ Petition. Dur mg the harem of the appeal a statement was filed on behalf of the Custodian and Government of Pakistan in which it was stated that if Heidi M. Iraq withdrew the appeal and moved the Custodian to decide the pending Revision Petition No.239 of 1955 the Custodian will hear and decide the matter according to law not influenced by any observation contained in judgment passed in the Writ Petition No. Upon this statement Heidi Muhammad Iraq withdrew the appeal which was dismissed on 10-4-1963. In the year 1965 the matter came before the learned Custodian, and he directed late Heidi Muhammad Iraq to imp lead the transferees of Karachi properties. Some of the transferees were joined but some other were left out. In the meantime the learned Custodian was replaced by another Custodian Mr. Manor Elah, and he took the view that the learned Dy. Custodian while passing the order dated 22-11-1952 did not allow late Heidi Muhammad Iraq to produce evidence and this by order dated 26-5- 1967 remanded the case to the Additional Custodian, Karachi for disposal with direction that parties be given opportunity to lead evidence. When the matter came up before the learned Additional Custodian, a notice was published in Daily Dawn and served other transferees of Karachi properties joined the proceedings as respondents and submitted their objections. Before the Additional Custodian documents were produced and statement was recorded. Hafeezuddin son of Fariduddin, Aladdin son of Ghulam July, Abdul Rahman and Heidi Muhammad Iraq who was suffer mg from disability and was unable to speak were examined. The learned Additional Custodian by his order dated 28-2-1974 refused to confirm the exchange on the ground that despite repeated orders respondents Nos. to 10 did not produce the clam verification order passed in favor of late Heidi Muhammad Iraq by a competent authority under the provision of Registration of Claims (Displaced. Persons) Act of 1958, and it was presumed that he must have got the subject land also included in the claim filed by him. Both the parties challenged this order, before the Custodian. In those proceedings the respondents instead of producing the claim verification order in favor of late Heidi M. Ishaq produced the verification order passed by the Deputy Claims Commissioner, Karachi in favor of the legal heirs of Ghulam Paula including. Salahuddiri for the properties of late Ghulam Julia, and it was stated that late. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had NBT filed any clam at all. From this order of claim verification dated 27-8-1959 it transpired that the land in New Delhi actually belonged to Ghulam Julia and late Heidi Muhammad Iraq and Muhammad Suleman were became owners. This was also. Confirmed by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq before the claim authorities. The learned Custodian therefore, dismissed the Revision Application filed by the petitioner and allowed the Revision of the respondent 1e. the legal heirs of the Muhammad Iraq and confirmed the exchange by the impugned order dated 27-6-1974. Mr. Maroof Ali Khan the learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that in the absence of any documentary evidence to show that Heidi M* Iraq was the owner of the New Delhi property, exchange with the evacuee property of Hindus at Karachi was not competent. In this regard the learned counsel has referred to the evidence produced before the Additional Custodian in which Kara and Keaton were i' produced. According to the learned counsel as it is authenticated by the High Commission of Pakistan in India as required by sections 78 and 84 of. The Evidence Act, it is not admissible in evidence. The same objection has also been raised in respect of certified true, copy of the exchange deed registered with the Registrar at New Delhi. The learned counsel contended that Kara and Keaton are public documents and unless the same are proved in terms of the provisions of the. Evidence Act they cannot be accepted m evidence before a Court or Tribunal. The learned counsel has referred to Muhammad Usman v. Lai Muhammad PLD 1975 Keir. 352 where in an appeal from the judgment of the Election Tribunal, the question came for consideration about the admissibility of birth certificate which was issued by the Ajmer Municipality and because the same was not authenticated in terms of sections 78 (6) of the Evidence Act, it was held to be admissible. In M/s. Bengal Friends Co. v. Four Be node Saga Co. Calcutta and another PLD 1969 S C 477 the copies of extract from the Register of Miscellaneous. Cases mentioned in the Court of Third Presiding Magistrate Calcutta per taming to a criminal complaint were held admissible, as they did "not bear certificate of genuine and accuracy by a Representative of the Government of Pakistan in India as required by section, 86 of the Evidence Act". With regard to copies of application for export of Collar to East Pakistan in 1948 and licenses for export purported to have been granted by the Government of India, as well as two telegrams received from some customers in East Pakistan it was observed that they "stand at still lower footing as they are not copies of any judicial record, and could not be received in evidence without proof of signature and handwriting of persons alleged to have been signed or written them as required by section 67 of the Evidence. Act11. Mr. Muhammad Sharif the learned counsel has contended that the proceedings before the Custodian are not governed by the provision of Evidence Act, and the same is not applicable, and therefore, for any non-compliance of the provisions of the Evidence Acct, the order cannot be said to have been passed without lawful authority. The learned counsel relied on MST. Moselle Ellis v. Khadija Ahmed Said PLD 1959 Keir. 760 where it was held that "section 86 of the Evidence Act does not relate to \the admissibility or otherwise of a copy of a judicial record of a foreign country. It merely -enables the Court to raise a presumption that judicial record of a foreign country is genuine and accurate if it bears a certificate as required by that section11. It is thus plain that the genuineness of the record 1s certainly capable of being proved by other means. The absence of the certificate merely excludes the raising of a presumption. The section nowhere says that a copy of judicial record of foreign country is not admissible in evidence, unless it bears the certificate. As required by it". The documents which have been questioned are not judicial records. They are public documents, and were produced to establish that the land was in the name of Muhammad Iraq. In fact the land was recorded in the name of Muhammad Iraq but from evidence it is established that he was became of Ghulam Julia. The fact that his name was on record seems to have been established by the private respondents by produced oral evidence also. The Additional Custodian and the Custodian have accepted this evidence and have not given finding that he was not competent to file this application for exchange. In Muhammad Usman's case although it was held that the copy of the birth certificate was not admissible in evidence, the Court considering the fact that oral evidence of the applicant's father including a medical certificate of X-Ray Specialist to prove the age at the relevant time was accepted by the Court below, it was observed that determination of age is a question of fact, and if the learned Judge relying on other evidence on record given its finding it cannot be vitiated in that proceedings, which was in the nature of second appeal. Somewhat similar situation has arisen in the present case. Whether Muhammad Iraq's name appeared in the records of rights or not is purely a question of fact. On the basis of evidence on record which included the oral testimony of witnesses, the order of verification of claim, which makes reference to the order of the Collector, in 1939, the registered deed of exchange supported by the witness before whom it was executed the Additional Custodian and the Custodian have given finding m favor of the respondent. The proceedings in Constitutional Petitions are completely different from appeal, and finding of fact, unless they are found to be completely perverse and not based on any evidence at all cannot be disturbed. As the finding is nota solely based on the inadmissible documents, but on other evidence on record, neither such a finding can be struck down nor the order can be said to have been passed without lawful authority. r The other leg of argument challenging the competency of Heidi Muhammad Iraq is that he and Suleman are the became of Ghulam Julia who was the real owner of the property. In this regard Mr. Maroon Ali Khan the learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to the Verification Order and stated that in 1939 land was declared to belong to Ghulam Julia and Muhammad Iraq and Suleman were held as benamidars. He further stated that Muhammad Iraq is nephew of Ghulam Julia and that he and Suleman not his legal heirs, therefore, these persons have no title on the land. According to the petitioners themselves Iraq was a beamier, therefore, his name would have appeared in the record of right, although it is a different question, whether he was a real owner or not. The petitioners have not produced any evidence to show that Heidi Muhammad Iraq had ceased to exercise any authority on the property or that he had been dispossessed or Ghulam Julia had at any time objected to the Became character and possession of Muhammad Iraq. In fact the son of Ghulam Julia has appeared as witness and did not object to the application filed by Heidi Muhammad Shag, but supported the application for confirmation of exchange. Mr. Muhammad Sharif the learned counsel for the respondent has contended that a beamier could enter into a transaction of exchange and even sell the property. A beamier is a ostensible owner and has title to the property. In this regard the learned counsel has referred to Na rain Roy and others v. Hanuman tram AIR 1930 Nag. 273, where it was held that "a beamier or an ostensible owner can buy transfer pass a good title to the property in the transferee admits of no doubt. Section 41, Transfer of Property Act expressly recognizes such transfers to be valid and not voidable on the ground that the transfer or was not authorized to make the transfer 'provided that'a transferee after taking reasonable care to ascertain that the transferor had power to make the transfer has acted in good faith11. It was further held that a beamier was entitled to file a suit for recovery of the amount on the basis of mortgage. Reliance was placed on Bursaries v. She Lai Singh AIR 1918 PC 140, Bola Parsed v. Ram All I R 24 Cal. 34, Raji v. Maha dev I R 22 BOM. 672 and Had Ram v. MRO Singh I LR 21 All 380. it is well-settled that a Became owner TS an ostensible owner of the property apparently enjoying all the rights, accidents* and privileges of a real owner with his implied or express consent such person can sell, mortgage, or transfer the property and even file suit for clam arising out of or relating to such property, provided the transferee has acted with care and in good faith. In the present case the evacuee owner of the. property at Karachi have not objected to the title or the claim of Heidi Muhammad Iraq. Even the real owners have not challenged his action, and therefore, it is not possible for the petitioner to challenge the deed of exchange on this ground. The next contention of the petitioner was that the transaction of exchange was made at Delhi by a Muslim with Hindu MN respect of the property owned by him in Pakistan who had migrated to India, and therefore, in view of the prohibition under law, the application could not be granted. The facts are that agreement of exchange was made at New Delhi on 25- 12-1949. The deed of exchange was executed on 1-5-1949, and it was registered on 5-5- 1951 at New Delhi. The learned counsel for the petitioner first contended that Pakistan (Dealing in Immovable Evacuee Properties) Ordinance XI of 1949 prohibited any sale, proposal for sale, exchange or other dealings relating to any immovable evacuee property and any agreement made before(e the promulgation of this Ordinance or during its currency was not to be accepted, and such agreement executed or registered in contravention of this Ordinance was to be null and void. This Ordinance was enforced on 26-7-1949 for a period of two months and the Central Government was authorized to extend this period by Notification for another period or periods not exceeding two months at a time. Mr. Maroon Ali Khan as referred to the Notifications issued from time to time from which TT seems clear that the last Notification was issued on 8-12-1949 extending the life of the Ordinance for a period of one month beginning from 11-12-1949. It may be noted that Ordinance XV of 1949 was enforced on 15-10-1949. Mr. Muhammad Sharif the learned counsel for the respondents contended that as the Ordinance was a temporary, legislation with the afflux of time it died its natural death. The learned counsel has referred to. The case of Muhammad Sharif PLD 1960 LAH. 236 where it has been held that where a temporary statute expires it is deemed never to have existed except for transaction past and closed and even section 6 of the General Clauses Act does not apply to temporary legislation. Ordinance XI of 1949 came to an end on 10-1-1950. The prohibition under Ordinance XI of 1949 expired with the life of the Ordinance itself The deed of exchange was executed on 1-5-1951 and registered on 5-5-1951 1e. after the expiry of the Ordinance, therefore, the prohibition imposed under Ordinance XI of 1949 cannot be applied to the deed of exchange. By that time Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of 1949 had come into force which governed the field. It has therefore, to be examined whether the deed of exchange was hit by the provision of Ordinance XV of 1949. In this regard reference can be made to section 15 which provided that the Central Government by notification declare the area and period during which sale, creation of interest or encumbrance of any property shall be prohibited and except with the prior approval in writing of the Custodian no such transaction shall be made during the prohibited period. In this regard Notification dated 10-1-1951 was issued which prohibited transfer of properties. The transfer and exchange prohibited by the Notification reads as follows:- «(2) Transfer of any urban immovable evacuee property, and such urban immovable property as a person intends to alienate in anticipation of his becoming an evacuee. (b) by exchange, with such urban immovable property as is not treated as evacuee property under any law for the time being in force in India, or m any area occupied by India, or if it is so treated* is not situated i any of the following areas, namely: The Province of East Punjab, Himachal Pardesh, Delhi... n At the time when the deed of exchange was made between the parties and application for its confirmation was filed this Notification was in operation. This Notification was considered by the learned Custodian, and it also fell for consideration in Writ Petition No. where Yahoo Ali, J. (as he then was) observed that: "If there was an exchange between any kind of the properties situated in West Pakistan with agricultural property situated in India or the aforesaid Provinces of India, there was no bar to it, under the notification. This was possibly a lacuna in the Notification and continued to be repeated, in a number of subsequent Notifications until it was removed in the latest Notification dated 6-4-1957. In the last mentioned notification the word ‘urban’ has been dropped so as to include all kinds of movable properties with its preview." This being the nature of prohibition at the relevant time, it has to be considered, whether the property of the respondent at New Delhi was an agricultural property. It is correct that in the application under sections 16 and 17 filed before the Custodian, the nature of the property has not been stated at all. However, in the deed of exchange it is clearly mentioned to be an agricultural property, and its particulars are given in Schedule 'Al to the deed. It is thus clear that the prohibition imposed under law could not be a bar to the exchange. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that as the deed of exchange was neither executed nor registered m Pakistan, the same could not be confirmed. In this regard reference has been made to the Custodian Evacuee Property West Pakistan, Lahore v. Rais Ghazi Muhammad PLD 1973 S C 537. In this case property was purchased in Pakistan by an unregistered sale-deed dated 6th June, 1947 written on 2 Anna non-judicial stamp paper. It was held that the document in question could not be received in evidence as TT offended the provision of section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act and therefore, the transfer could not be confirmed by the Custodian. In the present case, the Deed of Exchange was executed at New Delhi and was registered there. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had filed application seeking permission to register it, in Pakistan. Therefore, in my opinion, the authority cited is not applicable to the present case. The learned counsel for the petitioner has not shown any provision of law under which a conveyance deed or document creating any interest in immovable property in Pakistan can not be executed outside Pakistan.* The restriction imposed by the Registration Act is that document which should be compulsorily registered under section 17 should be registered in Pakistan within a specified date. Section. 23 provides that subject to. sections 24, 25 and 26 a document other than a Will shall be accepted for registration provided it is presented for that purpose within four months of the date of its execution. Section 24 deals with cases where several persons execute document at different times, such document may be presented for registration within for months from each execution. Under section 25 an extension up to four months may be granted provided due to urged necessity or unavoidable accident, the document could not be presented within the specified period. The extension is restricted to a period of four months only and on payment of fine. Section 26 is the relevant provision which deals with documents executed outside Pakistan affecting immovable property situated m Pakistan. It reads as under;,26,- "When a document purporting to have been executed by all or any of the parties but of (Pakistan) is not presented for registration till after the.e expiration of the time herein-before prescribed in that behalf, the registering officer, if satisfied.- T " (a) that the instrument was so executed, and <t f'. A" 1'fFL1 (b) that it has been presented for registration with in four months after its arrival in (Pakistan), |. JJ may on payment of the proper registration fee, accept such. document for registration. p 1A bare reading of this provision makes it plain that it admits for registration documents executed outside Pakistan effecting immovable property situated in Pakistan. It does not require fresh execution in Pakistan. The pre-condition for registration of such documents are that the registering officer has to satisfy himself that the party or parties have executed it and it, has been presented for registration within four months of its arrival in Pakistan. Once.these two conditions are satisfied the document may be registered irrespective of the fact that it was executed outside Pakistan. It '"' « Now reverting to the facts of the case, it may be noticed that section; 17 of 6th. XV of 1949 had placed a bar on the registration of a document deal mg with evacuee property. Heidi Muhammad Iraq therefore, filed application under sections 16 and 17 for confirmation of exchange deed and issuance of certificate for its registration*. Mr: Maroon Ali Khan and Mr. Khalid M. Issue the learned counsel for the petitioners con ten d ed that the. order for so moth revision dated 21-12-1954. was illegal, and without jurisdiction, and therefore, all subsequent proceedings based on the said order were also without lawful authority. Reference has been made to Yousuf Kai’s case PLD 1958 S C 104 and Mansab Ali's case PLD 1971 S C 124. It may be recalled, that while dismissing the Revision Application by order dated 21-12-1954 the learned Custodian by a,separate order of the same date ordered for so moth revision on a completely different ground namely that in. view, of the Notifications, it was possible to consider the respondent's claim for confirmation of exchange. The petitioners have challenged the jurisdiction of the Custodian on the grounds firstly that after the Revision Application was dismissed so moth jurisdiction to revise could not be exercised and secondly, the so moth proceedings did not survive the repeal of Ordinance XV of 1949. Mr. Muhammad Sharif the learned counsel has contended that considering the nature of the proceedings, the object of the legislation and the circumstances in which the Revision Application was dismissed, the learned Custodian had the jurisdiction to so moth revise the order. The application was dismissed for non-prosecution, as according to the learned Additional Custodian the respondent was not able to produce necessary documents to substantiate his claim. The Revision against this order was also dismissed without considering the reality of the case. Section 36 (4) of the Ordinance XV of 1949 conferred revisional power in the Custodian. In Sun Green Co. Ltd. v. Qatar Din Ashwani and others PLD 1958 S C 144 the purpose and object and the manner in which the Revisional Power can be exercised has been laid down as follows:- "The aim and purpose of the Evacuee Property Ordinance is wholly different* It is clear that the primary duty of the Custodian of Evacuee property is to place himself in possession of all evacuee property with the object that it should not be used in an unauthorized manner by unentitled persons* but that it should be applied by due process of law to the relief of distress among refugees and the rehabilitation of economic conditions in the country at large. For the due discharge of these functions it is essential that the Custodian should have the widest power that may be necessary for the ascertainment of what is and what is not evacuee property. It is unnecessary to emphasize the difficulties which by the nature of the circumstances, or by the art and guile of those who are interested to retain evacuee property for their own illegal profit, might lie in the way of a Custodian in discharging his functions. It might require a series of proceedings before the truth might at last stand revealed." In Sahib Rat's case PLD 1957 S C 63 the following observation was made on the jurisdiction of the Custodian to review conferred under Ordinance XV of 1949: "It will be seen that the substantive law does not require that for the purposes of review, a Custodian or an Additional Custodian should be moved by any party in that behalf. This was not to be expected, since these authorities do not exercise purely judicial powers. It will be evident from the fact that all evacuee property vests in the Custodian by virtue of section 6 of the Ordinance, that the power which he and his substitutes and subordinates exercise is essentially an executive power, for carrying out the purposes of the law, namely the ascertainment, seizure and administration of evacuee property. Bearing in mind the conditions which resulted from the sudden shifts of population between Pakistan and India which occurred in the immediately following the partition and that for the purpose of the exercise of the Custodian's powers, evidence x>f title to abandoned properties was not always readily available, it must necessarily be assumed that the provision for the review in section 36 of the Ordinance was intended to cover review by the Custodian acting so moth on the basis of information coming to his notice otherwise than from parties directly interested in the properties in question. 11 It is thus clear that the Custodian has been vested with the the widest possible powers of Revision -and Review, and he could himself! initiate proceedings for so moth revision if any fact material for determination of a case comes to his notice. In the-present case although the Additional Custodian had dismissed the application which order wad. Confirmed by the Custodian as on the material before the Additional! Custodian no other order could be passed, m view of. The notification the learned Custodian perhaps thought that the case required reconsideration as for an exchange in respect of agricultural property in India there did not seem to be any prohibition. There is no bar in law that after exercise revisional power the Custodian cannot exercise} his so moth revisional jurisdiction. The learned counsel for the petitioner referred to Sushi Ram. Asmara Jaisinghani v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others PLD 1965 S C 453. In this case, the question before the Supreme Court was whether the Custodians power of review under section 43 (6) of Act XII of 1957 which was taken away by Ordinance LXII of 1962 was still available in regard to pending proceedings. On construction of the* saving clause in Ordinance LXII of 1962 it was observed that it clearly spelled out a different intention as according to it review application pending immediately before the promulgation of the Amending Ordinance remained unaffected, and therefore, the power of so moth review was not intended to be saved. In the present case, Ordinance XV of 1949 was repealed by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. 1956. This Ordinance was also repealed by Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property Second) Ordinance, 1956. Again by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, this second Ordinance of 1956 was also repealed. There is nothing in the repeal mg Ordinances or the Act XII of 1957 from which a contrary intention may be deduced that the pending proceedings are not saved. The rule laid down in Jaisinghani's case will not be applicable to the present case, which is completely distinguishable, as there the repealing provision of the Ordinance clearly showed the mention of the Legislature not to continue with the so moth power of Review. ; The learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that as the so moth proceedings were not at the stance of any party no right is created in favor of any party, and therefore, after the repeal no party can insist on continued the so moth proceedings. In support of this contention reliance, has been placed on Jaisinghani's case which as stated earlier and for reasons stated above is completely distinguishable. In my humble opinion the so moth Revision proceedings initiated by the learned Custodian on 21-12-1954 were pending at the time when the Ordinance XV of 1949 was repealed and there being no intention to discontinue such proceedings, the same was validly continued. Consequently the contention of the learned counsel! that all subsequent orders passed on the basis of the Order dated] 21-12-1954 are illegal, and void is not tenable. r Mr. Maroon Ali Khan the learned counsel contended that no Income-tax Certificate was filed by the respondents therefore, the exchange could not be confirmed. He has relied on Commissioner of Income-tax v. Ash fag Ahmed and others P LD 1973 S C 406. The observations in this case do not support the petitioner's contention. It was also held that "in our opinion, there must be a subsisting certificate as required under section 20 (3) (a) (i) of the Act 1957 corresponding to section 16 (3) (a) (a) of the 1949 Ordinance on the date when the confirmation is sought for or is granted'd". The respondents had produced an Income-tax Certificate dated 9-12-1968. The learned Additional Custodian after considering the evidence came to the conclusion that it was not a forged certificate. It was for a period of six months, but ASL the matter could not be decided within that period it expired. If the! case would have been decided with six months possibly no objection! could have been raised to its validity. Mere expiry of a valid certificate! during pendency of the proceedings will not prevent the Custodian from confirming the transaction provided there is no other objection. The acceptance of such certificate by the Custodian and Additional] Custodian does not render the impugned order illegal. Mr. Maroon Ali Khan has contended that as the property has been acquired under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation. Rehabilitation.) Act, 1958 the Custodian had no jurisdiction to decide the matter, and confirm the exchange deed. In this regard the learned counsel has referred to four Notifications issued by the Central Government which are reproduced as follows (1) NS.R.O. 383, 8th August, 1949 (Gazette, Extraordinary, 8th August, 1959).- In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 (XXVIII of 1958), the Central Government is pleased to acquire, with immediate effect, all evacuees properties within the Federal Capital other than- (1) agricultural land; and (1) the evacuee property for the acquisition of which proceedings* under any law other than the said Act have been taken and are pending". (2) S.R.O* 573, 30th November 1959, (Gazette, Extraordinary, 30th November, 1959).- In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 (XXVIII of 1958), the Central Government is pleased to acquire, with immediate effect, all evacuee property (other than agricultural land) within the.e Federal Capital, with regard to which any proceedings were pending under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 CXII of 1957), on the 8th August, 1959, and are not so pending on the date of this notification. (3) S.R.O. 488 In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 (XXVIII of 1958), the Central Government is pleased to acquire with immediate effect, all evacuee property (other than agricultural land) within the Federal Capital, with regard to which any proceedings were pending under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957 (XII of 1957), on the 1st December, 1959, and are not so pending on the date of this notification. (4) S.R.O. 1816 In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation, Act, 1958 (XXVIII of 1958), the Central Government is pleased to acquire, with immediate effect all evacuee property (other than agricultural land) within the Federal Territory of Karachi with regard to which any proceedings under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII r of 1957) were pending on the first day of May, 1960 or were commenced. On any date after 8th August, 1959, and have been finally disposed of before the date of this notification. (Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, dated 29-12-1960)." The learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that as held in M. Ghulam Muhammad's case PLD 1966 LAH. 953 these Notifications. read together lead to the conclusion that the subject properties were acquired. The First Notification dated 8-8- 1959 acquires all evacuee properties within the Federal Capital with the exception, of agricultural land. It also does not apply to evacuee properties which are subject-matter of pending proceedings which have been taken for its acquisition under any law other than the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, The learned counsel for the parties have not produced the Notification dated 12-9-1959 which amends the notification dated 8-8-1959. In Natural v. Secretary Ministry of Rehabilitation 1973 S C M R 441 while referring to the Notification dated 8-8-1959 it was observed as follows: "In accordance with the notification the property in dispute would stand acquired by the Government on 8th August, 1959. There was a subsequent notification of 12th September, 1959, which purported to be an amendment of the first notification and in which it was stated that property with respect to which any proceedings were pending before the Custodian would not be covered by the notification of 8th of August, 1959." The petitioners, therefore, cannot press notification dated 8-8-1959 for ousting the jurisdiction of the Custodian as proceedings! under Act XII of 195711 were pending. The notification dated 30-11-1959 and subsequent notifications clearly demonstrate that the evacuee properties which were subject-matter of Anya proceeding under Act XII of 1957 were not acquired. Such properties were acquired progressively after the pending proceedings had term mated. The observation in Lazar All’s case completely destroys the* petitioner's objection. Even otherwise subsequent notifications completely nullify the effect of the first notification, so far it relates to pending proceedings specified in the subsequent notifications. Under section 21 of the General Clauses Act where a power to issue notification order or rule 1s conferred then that power includes the power to add, amend, vary or rescind it. The first notification therefore, stands - amended as stated above. 1A scrutiny of these Notifications issued from time to time makes it play that the intention of the Government was not to acquire properties in respect of which any proceedings under Act XII of 1957 year pending. M. Ghulam Muhammad's case cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner is completely distinguishable. In that case. The first Notification was issued JA respect of land allotted under the Rehabilitation Scheme. The second Notification was issued in respect of all the evacuee land, therefore, it was held that the Notification issued earlier related to the land which had been allotted, and the second Notification dealt with the remain mg lands which were evacuee properties. Here the Notifications are completely different in nature, and context and therefore the Rule laid down in M. Ghulam Muhammad's case is not applicable. In view of the Notifications governing the present case the evacuee properties in respect of which proceedings under Act XII of 1957 were pending were not acquired. In the present case proceeding was pending before the Custodian when Mr. Muhammad Baths Demon passed the order on 2-3-1957 against which a Writ Petition was filed which was disposed of on 14-6-1958. Against this judgment Letters Patent Appeal was filed which was disposed of on 10-4- 1963 on statement made on behalf of the Custodian. The case was taken up by the Custodian for hearing the pending revision who passed the order on 26-5-1967 directing the Additional Custodian to hear the matter on merits which was ultimately decided by him on 28-2-1974. Against this order Revision was filed before the. Custodian of Evacuee Property Sind which was decided by the impugned order dated 27-6-1976. This clearly shows that the proceedings initiated in 1951 continued under the provisions of Act XII of 1957 till it \was decided on 27-6-1974. The properties have been subject-matter of pending proceedings, continuously and therefore, by these Notifications the properties were not acquired, and the Custodian had the jurisdiction to decide the matter. It was also argued on behalf of the petitioners that the power of attorney executed by Dhabi Haciendas in favor of Kesha Bokmål Triplane has been not produced. It was not necessary to produce that power of attorney here. It must have been produced before the Registrar at New Delhi who after satisfaction would have allowed the exchange deed to be executed by her attorney. So far the power of attorney executed by Heidi Muhammad Iraq in favor of Hafizuddin is concerned, its certified copy was produced as is evident from the order of the Add Custodian. These objections are therefore of no consequence. Rely mg on Naval's case 1973 S C M R 441 the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the power of attorney executed by the evacuee owners in favor of the nominee of Heidi Iraq is not legal and operative as such authority has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian. This contention must fail as the authority was list to manage the property but merely to complete the transaction. T Mr. Abdul Attar, the learned counsel for the Custodian did not support the impugned order on the ground that notice of proceedings was not issued to the Rehabilitation Authorities. He has relied on Zahid Ali v. Chief Settlement Commissioner, Lahore PLD 1969 LAH. 850 where the order of the Custodian confirming the. Sale was held to have vitiated for want of statutory notice as contemplated under rule 12(5) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950. In the first paragraph of the order of the Additional Custodian it has been stated that after Mr. Monsieur Adam had'dismissed the revision application of Heidi Muhammad Iraq on 27-12-1954, he "issued a notice to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi and to other parties to show cause why the order dated 22-11-1952 dismissing the application for confirmation of exchange deed and its registration may not be revised. None of the petitioners or the learned counsel for the Custodian have challenged this observation as incorrect. Further it may be noted that all the transferees of the properties in dispute were joined as parties before the Additional Custodian/Custodian. In these circumstances the contention of Mr. Attar has no force. Besides the afore stated contentions certain facts and contentions in Petition. No.1I76/v74 are somewhat different from the other petitions. As stated earlier the properties which are subject-matter of this petition were requisitioned and acquired by the Government of Pakistan by Notification No.F-16 (6)/57-P-H, dated 8-2-1957 issued under section 8 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956. Section 8 (1) empowers the Central Government to requisition any movable or immovable property not used for religious worship, for the'purpose of the Act. Section 8 (2) authorizes the Central Government to use the requisitioned property and to acquire by serving notice on the owner or where the owner is not traceable or ownership is MN dispute by publication in the official Gazette. The consequences of acquisition have been stated in sections 8 (3) ft (4) which run as follows’ k Where a notice of acquisition is served on the owner of the property or published in the official Gazette under subsection (2) then at the beginning of the day on which the notice is so served or published, the property shall vest in the Central Government free from any mortgage, pledge, lien or other similar encumbrance, and the period of the requisition thereof shall end. (4) Whenever in pursuance of subsection (1) or subsection (2) the Central Government requisition or acquires any property, the owner thereof and any person having a charge, pledge or Len or other encumbrances on such property shall be paid such compensation as the Government may, having regard to the. provisions, so far as may be applicable of subsection (1) of section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1984* determine and the compensation so determined shall not be called in question m any Court." Under these provisions the property may be acquired on payment of compensation to any person who is the owner, mortgagee, or holding any lien, charge or encumbrance. The nature of the encumbrance will be similar to mortgage or charge. This interpretation.is in consonance with the language of sections 8 (3) ft The words "similar encumbrance" following the words "mortgage, charge, linen lead to the conclusion that the encumbrance on the property should be similar to the particular preceding words. The interpretation will be governed by the rule of system generic 1.e. where general words immediately follow specific words are closely associated with specific words their meaning should be restricted by reference to the preceding words. It] may be mentioned that exchange is a legally recognized method of transfer of property. Section 118 of the Transfer of Property Act defines "Exchange" as mutual transfer of ownership of one thing phon ownership of another. For a valid exchange there should be mutual consent of both the owners of the properties. In exchange either both! the things should be properties or monies. There can be no exchange between properties and monies. It will amount to sale which has been defined by section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act as "transfer of ownership in exchange for a price, paid or promised, paid or part paid or part promised". It is pertinent to note that subject to section 119 of the Transfer of Property Act each party to the exchange has the rights and subject to abilities of a seller in respect of property which he gives and that of a buyer which he takes. This right is conferred on t.he parties by section 120 of the Transfer of Property Act which refers back to section 55 which enumerate the rights and abilities of buyer and seller, section 55 (6) creates a charge in famous of a buyer to the extent of the sellers interest in the property for the money paid m anticipation of the delivery. The statutory provision entitles a buyer, if he has not improperly declined to accept delivery of the property, to a charge on the property. This charge create a right in the buyer (charge-holder) to receive payment out of the specified property. Such a charge is not a mortgage, but it confers right to realize claim by enforcing it by sale of the specified property as in the case of simple mortgage. In Muhammad Iqbal v. Additional Settlement Commissioner PLD 1971 S C 318 while discussing the nature of the charge created MN favor of the sellers under section 55 (4) of the Transfer of Property Act the following observation was made;- "Thus a charge, which a vendor obtains under the Transfer of Property Act, is not only different in its origin and nature from the simple vendor's lien given by the Courts of equity in England to an unpaid vendor, but it stands on somewhat higher footing and can be enforced by the sale of the property under section 100 of the Transfer of Property Act read with Order XXXIV, rule 15 of the Code of Civil Procedure as' in the case of a simple mortgage,19 as was pointed out by the Privy Council in the subsequent case of Raja Kooharlakota Renata Jagannath Rao Gary v. Maharajah Rave Renata Kumar Tahiti Surya Rao Broader 63 IA 3104. It is true that NBA charge there is transfer of any interest in the property but by operation of law a right is created in the charge-holder to receive payment out of the property specified, and this right can be enforced in the same manner as a simple mortgage by a preliminary decree for sale, vide Ram Affair Lai and others v. United Refineries (Burma) Limited and others 60 I A 183. For all practical purposes, therefore, the charge created by subsection (4) of section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act partakes substantially of the same manner. Even though such a charge does not create right in rem it is a just ad rem and not a money claim simpliciter* Even though a charge created, under section 55 (4) of the Transfer of Property Act is not an interest in property it is a right to receive payment out of a specific property." These observations equally apply to the charge created. under section 55 (6) in favor of buyer. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had a charge on the property subject to confirmation of a deed of exchange. Considering the nature of acquisition as discussed hereunder, the right of an owner to claim compensation was preserved. The learned counsel for the petitioner on the basis of several authorities cited by him contended that as the property has vested in the Central Government free from encumbrances, the private respondents have no right or interest in the property. This contention is not well-founded as section 8 (4) of Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 contemplates payment of compensation to owner and charge-holder. I need not discuss the authorities cited by the petitioner's counsel as they are completely irrelevant and deal with acquisition under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation Rehabilitation) Act which does not provide for payment of compensation. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had claimed the disputed property not on the basis of any mortgage, lien or charge on the property. He was claiming ownership of the property under the exchange. His claim for ownership depended on the confirmation and registration of the deed of exchange. This claim of ownership was under dispute, and he could not claim compensation till such time his title had perfected. Section 8 (2) of Pakistan Rehabilitation Act contemplates service of notice of acquisition, in the case of disputed ownership by publication in the official Gazette. Section 8 (4) provides payment of compensation to the owner in the manner provided by section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, so far as may be applicable. Therefore, in case of disputed ownership compensation may be paid to the person who has been declared owner. Mr. Akhtar Mahmood the learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that if the confirmation of exchange does not affect the night of the petitioner as the owner of the property, then he has no dispute with the Custodian's impugned order. Mr. Muhammad Sharif and Mr. Iqbal Ahmed the learned counsel for the private respondents have stated that if the exchange is confirmed these respondents will not claim the property, but will seek their remedy for realization of compensation in. terms of section 8 (4) from the Government. The statement make the matter simple and the entire exercise of the private respondent is for claim mg compensation. In any event, even on the confirmation of the exchange deed in private respondents cannot claim the property “as it stands acquired and vests in the Central Government. As a consequence of acquisition only compensation is to be paid to the owner or the charge-holder. m Although the learned counsel for the parties restricted their arguments to the payment of compensation which depended on the confirmation of the exchange, I had to keep this matter reserved till such time other connected petitions dealing with exchange were argued. As I have maintained the order of Custodian confirming the deed of exchange Petition No. 11. is dismissed subject to the statement and consent of the private respondents that they will have no right to the properties in dispute (in Petition No. ) and on the basis of the Custodian's impugned order they would only claim compensation which shall be decided by the appropriate authority according to law. In the result, Petitions Nos.,,, and are dismissed with no order as to costs. L. ™ " Before parting with the ' judgment I must place on record my appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by Mr. Muhammad Sharif and Mr. Maroon Ali Khan Advocates, whose arguments were adopted by all other Advocates appearing for the petitioners and private respondents in these petitions. _' Order accordingly.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): By this judgment the following petitions shall be disposed of- Constitutional Petition No.S. "n", ""M, "11 11, » "", In all these petitions the order of the Custodian, the respondent No.], dated 27-6-1974 has been challenged, whereby the application for confirmation of exchange under sections 16 and 17 of the Ordinance XV of 1949 originally filed by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq in respect of properties of which petitioners claim to be the transferees from the Settlement Department has been granted. In petition No.S. the petitioners have stated that evacuee plots bear mg No.G.R.E,2 k 3 situated at Karachi were purchased by the petitioners m an auction held on 11- 6-1960, by the Settlement Authorities at Karachi. On approval of the auction and on payment of the auction price P.T.O. dated 27-8-1962 was issued in the petitioner's name. However, during 1965 the petitioners Nazi was made a respondent in the proceedings which had been initiated on behalf of Muhammad Iraq under sections 16 and 17 of the Ordinance XV of 1949 with regard to an exchange allegedly made by him on 1-5-1961 at Delhi for his and measure 4,65,600 sq. yards out of a big plot in an area known as Hear New Delhi with Karachi Evacuee Property belonging to Paradab Dayak Was and three other Hindu evacuees permanently settled in India. In Petition No. the petitioners are displaced persons and on 28-7-1948 they purchased plot bear mg No.A M 281 JJI-B- 18, Karachi, measuring 960 sq. yes. with possession in their firm's name known as International Trade Agency from its original owner Balsam Dallas while he was at Karachi, and was a Pakistani citizen, and had not migrated to India. It is alleged that the sale was confirmed by an order of the Additional Custodian dated 13-5-1951, and a charge of Rs.25, /7 was created on the property. The petitioners thereafter, sold out share in the charge to Muhammad Basin. Again on 20th September, 1960 the parties entered into another agreement to settle their shares and got the said plot transferred jointly MN their names under P.T.O dated 5-11-1960 and obtained the transfer order dated 14-6-1974 in the same manner. These petitioners were also made parties in the proceedings filed by late Muhammad Iraq as stated above. In Petition No. the petitioner's predecessor-in-interest and mother late Qatar Jean was a claimant displaced person and being in possession of a portion of evacuee house bear mg No.C.S. No.G.R.E- Germander, Karachi applied for its transfer under scheme No.] of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. The other occupant of the house had also applied for transfer, and the matter remained under litigation which resulted in a settlement whereby it was agreed that half of the house in possession of MST*. Qatar Jean be transferred to her, and the other half be transferred to the other occupant. Accordingly transfer price was paid and P. T. D. dated 25-3-1964 was issued in their names. In 1967 notice of proceedings initiated by late

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): agreed that half of the house in possession of MST*. Qatar Jean be transferred to her, and the other half be transferred to the other occupant. Accordingly transfer price was paid and P. T. D. dated 25-3-1964 was issued in their names. In 1967 notice of proceedings initiated by late Muhammad Iraq was published in Daily Dawn to which MST. Qatar Jean joined as respondent No. 5. During the pendency of those proceedings MST. Qatar Jean by a registered deed transferred her half share to,a the petitioner which was duly notified to the Additional Custodial; In Petition No. petitioner No.2 was a partnership firm of Sh. Muhammad Yaseen the predecessor-in-interest of petitioner No.! (a) to Under an agreement of sale, dated 30th August, 1948 he agreed to purchase plot No.A.M.281 measuring 960 sq. yards situated in the Artillery Maidan Quarter from its Hindu owner Balsam Dallas respondent No. 14 who is alleged to be present in Pakistan at that time and had not migrated. In pursuance of the agreement, the petitioner No.2 obtained possession and raised permanent construction at a substantial investment. The agreed price was Rs.60,000 and since the petitioner No.2 had not paid 80% of this price, permission for filing a but for Specific Performance was refused, but by order dated 13-11-1956 a charge for Rs.25, /9 with interest at 6% was created in favor of the petitioner No.2. The original petitioner No.l] Fe 2 entered into an agreement under which Sheikh Muhammad Yaseen purchased share of the charge so created and the Additional Custodian (Judy) by order dated 29-7-1954 allowed Muhammad Yaseen's name to be substituted as holder of the charge created on the plot in place of International Trading Agency. The petitioners have alleged that they have made additions and alterations paid taxes, and are in continuous possession and occupation of the building. A P.T.O. dated 5-11-1960 was issued in the joint names of Muhammad Yaseen and M/s. International Trading Agency. In 1965 Muhammad Yaseen came to know of the proceedings and claim made by late Muhammad Iraq the predecessor in interest of the respondent No.2 to 11 and on their application they were imp leaded as party in the said proceedings before the Custodian. TN Petition No. the petitioner's predecessor in interest and father late Heidi Sushi Raza Khan was a displaced person and being in possession of evacuee house bear mg No.CS No.GRE/ Germander, Karachi applied for its transfer under settlement scheme No.], However, MST. Qatar Jean the other occupant of a portion also made a claim resulting into a litigation which ended in a settlement whereby half of the portion was transferred to him. Accordingly on 25-3-1964 P.T.D for their separate shares was issued. In 1967 notice of proceedings initiated by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq was published in Daily Dawn, inviting the transferees of the subject property to job the said proceedings. The petitioner therefore, domed proceedings as respondent No.6 before the Custodian. In Constitution Petition No. the petitioner is a statutory Body

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): issued. In 1967 notice of proceedings initiated by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq was published in Daily Dawn, inviting the transferees of the subject property to job the said proceedings. The petitioner therefore, domed proceedings as respondent No.6 before the Custodian. In Constitution Petition No. the petitioner is a statutory Body established under the provisions of West Pakistan Cooperative Board Dissolution Act II of 1966 as successor of West Pakistan Cooperative Development Board Lahore. Plots bearing Nos.267, 268, 269, 288, 289, 290 and 291 situated at Victoria Road, now known as Abdullah Maroon Road, Karachi were acquired by the Government of Pakistan under Notification No.F/6(6) 57-P-IJI dated 8-2-1957. In the records of right Hindu evacuee Thai Partan Dallas was recorded as the owner of these’ plots. The said plots were transferred to K.D.A. who constructed building thereon known as "Super Market Building". K.D.A. transferred the said building to West Pakistan Cooperative Development Board which paid on 25-4-1963 a sum of Rs. 15,74,500 being the cost of superstructure. The petitioners also paid transfer price, interest and settlement fee in respect of these plots amounting to Rs.10,25,762.50, Rs. 1,25,905 and Rs.5,109 respectively to the Settlement Rehabilitation Commissioner. The petitioners were therefore, joined the proceedings initiated by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq which inter alia related to these plots. All these petitions were originally filed against the official respondents and legal heirs of late Heidi Muhammad Iraq. In petition No. besides the afore stated respondents the Hindu evacuees have also been joined as respondents. During the pendency of these petitions the legal hers of Ghulam Paula filed application for coming them as respondents which was granted on 6-11-1977. Thereafter, certain respondents died whose legal heirs have been brought on record. The facts of the proceedings filed by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq in which the petitioners in the afore stated petitions were joined as respondents are as follows Late Heidi Muhammad Iraq through his attorney Heidi Hafeezuddin filed an application under sections 16 and 17 of the Ordnance XV of 1949 before the Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property, Karachi on 14-6-1951 for permission to get the Exchange Deed registered which he had entered with Thai Partan Dayak Was, Sasha Akmal Triplane, Bai ram Dallas and Dhabi Na rain was Manzoni on 1-5-1951 at Delhi and for its confirmation. It was alleged that he was the owner of a big plot of land measuring 11 lacs sq. yards situated at New Delhi in the area known as Hear. Out of this property he exchanged 4,65,000 sq. yards with Thai Partan Dayak Was and three other Hindu evacuees who are permanently settled in India. It was stated in the application that the Hindu evacuees have executed a general power of attorney in favor of his two relations to act on their behalf: It was further stated that price of Delhi land was Rs.9,75,000 while the Karachi property was evaluated at Rs.9,00,000. Muhammad Iraq alleged that he received Rs.75,000 in cash and delivered the possession to those evacuees. The particulars

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): of attorney in favor of his two relations to act on their behalf: It was further stated that price of Delhi land was Rs.9,75,000 while the Karachi property was evaluated at Rs.9,00,000. Muhammad Iraq alleged that he received Rs.75,000 in cash and delivered the possession to those evacuees. The particulars of the Karachi Properties which were exchanged and were subject-matter of the application are as follows:- (a) Open plots of land bearing S. Nos. 267, 268, 280, 289, 290 and 291. Sheet No.A.M. of Artillery Maidan Quarter, Victoria Road, Karachi. (b) Bungalow at Survey No. 120 J.M. Quarter, Muhammad Ali Jinnah Road, Karachi. (c) Two bungalows bearing S. No. Sheet G.R.E. Garden Quarter, Karachi. (d) A plot of land bearing S. No.664, Sheet Garden East, Jail Road, Karachi’. The Agreement of exchange was made at Delhi on 25-12-1949, the Deed of Exchange was executed on IST May, 1951 and registered on 5-5-1951. A certified copy of the general power of attorney executed by the Hindu owners in favor of the relations of the applicant was stated to have been filed with the application. On 15th June, 1951 the said attorney of the Hindu evacuees filed a written statement before the Deputy Custodian admitting the applicant's claim for confirmation of the exchange and the registration of the deed of exchange. The application was opposed by the Pakistan General Hawkers Union (Registered) Saddam, Cloth Market, Karachi, who contended that the transaction contravened in the Notification dated 10-1-1950 under Ordinance XV of 1949 as amended by Notification dated 9th April, 1951 restricting the transfer of evacuee property. It was also averred that on the dates when the agreement of exchange and deed of exchange were executed. Heidi Muhammad Iraq was not a refugee, nor his property situated in New Delhi evacuee property and that permission for the registration of the deed of exchange by the Custodian of the Evacuee Property Delhi was obtained by misrepresentation and suppression of material facts. Four other persons namely M. Muhammad Ahmad, Shameful Hag, Muhammad Faizuddin Brahmani and S. Khali+-Brahman who were in possession of the vacant plot bearing survey Nos.288, 289’and 290 raised objections as those of Pakistan General Hawkers Union. On ATH March, 1952 late Heidi Muhammad Iraq replied to both the objections and asserted that objectors were not parties to the proceedings, and they had no locus standi to object the confirmation of the exchange. During the pendency. Of these proceedings, the learned Dy. Custodian ordered late Heidi Muhammad Iraq to produce (1) the requisite income-tax clearance certificate, (2) Notification in the official Gazette of the property in India having been treated as evacuee property prior to transaction, (3) copy of Certificate permitting registration of exchange in India, (4) Notice under sub-rules (4) (5) of rule 20 the Indian Evacuee Property Rules, (5) Certified copy of order confirming transfer of property in Indian, and (6) affidavit to the effect that the property in India was not declared as non-evacuee after the Notification, and that the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): exchange in India, (4) Notice under sub-rules (4) (5) of rule 20 the Indian Evacuee Property Rules, (5) Certified copy of order confirming transfer of property in Indian, and (6) affidavit to the effect that the property in India was not declared as non-evacuee after the Notification, and that the same has not been released or restored since then. As Heidi Muhammad Iraq could not produce all these documents and absented himself for one reason or the other, the learned Deputy Custodian on 22-11-1962 dismissed the application. Heidi Muhammad Iraq went up in appeal to the Additional Custodian (Judy). The appeal remained pending for more than one year and was dismissed on 28-4-1953 on the ground that in essence the application before the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property was UN/air section 17 of the Ordinance for the grant of certificate for the registration of a deed of exchange aid no appeal lay from that order. Heidi Muhammad Iraq invoked the Revisional Jurisdiction of the Custodian Evacuee Property, Karachi. The petition was dismissed by Mr. Monsieur Adam, the then Custodian of the Evacuee Property who affirmed the view expressed by the Additional Custodian. However, by an order dated 21-12-1954 Mr. Monsieur Adam so moth issued notice to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi and to the parties to appear before the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, to show cause as to why the order dated 22nd November, 1962 dismissing the application for confirmation of the Exchange deed and its registration may not be revised. In the order it was observed that although at the time when the Deputy Custodian passed the order there was every justification for it, but the position has since then changed, and the policy in' the matter of such exchange has been relaxed. The learned Custodian placed reliance on the Notification dated 30th August, 1954 thereunder the exchange in question was not restricted and could be considered for confirmation. After the issue of notice the hearing of the case was fixed on 1-3-1955 which continued to be adjourned and eventually arguments were heard on 13-10-1956 and order was reserved. On 30- 10-1956 Mr. Monsieur Adam the learned Custodian passed an order that in view of the contention of Heidi Muhammad Iraq that the exchange is not prohibited under law a reference shall be made to the Central Government. He accordingly made a reference to Mr. Y.A. Khan the Deputy Secretary by means of which he made a quarry to the Ministry of Refugees and Rehabilitation, whether the exchange MN question between the Urban Property in Karachi and the agricultural land in Delhi should be. allowed or not. It was pointed out that the latest Notification restricting such transactions was Silent and that is why clarification of the Central Government was sought. On 14-12- 1956 Mr.Y.A. Khan referring to Notification dated 10-4-1956 replied that the Ministry has no objection to the confirmation provided it is otherwise unobjectionable. In the meantime Muhammad Iraq had in support of his claim placed before

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): Silent and that is why clarification of the Central Government was sought. On 14-12- 1956 Mr.Y.A. Khan referring to Notification dated 10-4-1956 replied that the Ministry has no objection to the confirmation provided it is otherwise unobjectionable. In the meantime Muhammad Iraq had in support of his claim placed before the Custodian a copy of the deed of exchange and a copy of the. order of the Deputy Custodian (General) Punjab Lahore dated 5-12-1955 in appeal No. whereby a similar exchange was confirmed in his favor by Mr. Abdul Marked Affair. On 2-3-1957 Mr. Muhammad Bush A. Memon who had succeeded Mr. Monsieur Adam passed an order observing that under Notification No.F-9(4) 56-B, dated 11-4-1956 transfer of any urban immovable evacuee property by exchange with such immovable property which has not been treated as evacuee property under any law for the time being in force in India is prohibited, but there was no prohibition whatsoever for transfer by exchange of urban immovable evacuee property in Pakistan with any agricultural property in India. According to the learned Custodian the exchange was valid and must be confirmed, and that he would have immediately set aside the order of the Dy. Custodian dated 22-11-1952, but another complication had arisen in the meantime namely the open plots situated in Saddam had been acquired by the Central Government for constructing a must storeyed building to rehabilitate the refugees. He accordingly thought it fit to stay his hand till the matter was clarified by the Government as granting. sanction for the exchange would have obstructed the construction and rehabilitation work. With regard to the remaining property involved in the exchange the learned Custodian thought that there will be no objection to sanction the exchange and to issue the requisite certificate for registration of the exchange deed, but as the deed was a consolidated one, he cannot pass order piecemeal because the deed of exchange was one and could not’ be vitiated. For these reasons he postponed the announcement of the final order in the case for a week. Heidi Muhammad Iraq challenged this order in Writ Petition No. which was dismissed on 14-6-1958. Heidi Muhammad Iraq filed Latter Patent Appeal against the judgment passed in the Writ Petition. Dur mg the harem of the appeal a statement was filed on behalf of the Custodian and Government of Pakistan in which it was stated that if Heidi M. Iraq withdrew the appeal and moved the Custodian to decide the pending Revision Petition No.239 of 1955 the Custodian will hear and decide the matter according to law not influenced by any observation contained in judgment passed in the Writ Petition No. Upon this statement Heidi Muhammad Iraq withdrew the appeal which was dismissed on 10-4-1963. In the year 1965 the matter came before the learned Custodian, and he directed late Heidi Muhammad Iraq to imp lead the transferees of Karachi properties. Some of the transferees were joined but some other were left out. In the meantime the learned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): the appeal which was dismissed on 10-4-1963. In the year 1965 the matter came before the learned Custodian, and he directed late Heidi Muhammad Iraq to imp lead the transferees of Karachi properties. Some of the transferees were joined but some other were left out. In the meantime the learned Custodian was replaced by another Custodian Mr. Manor Elah, and he took the view that the learned Dy. Custodian while passing the order dated 22-11-1952 did not allow late Heidi Muhammad Iraq to produce evidence and this by order dated 26-5- 1967 remanded the case to the Additional Custodian, Karachi for disposal with direction that parties be given opportunity to lead evidence. When the matter came up before the learned Additional Custodian, a notice was published in Daily Dawn and served other transferees of Karachi properties joined the proceedings as respondents and submitted their objections. Before the Additional Custodian documents were produced and statement was recorded. Hafeezuddin son of Fariduddin, Aladdin son of Ghulam July, Abdul Rahman and Heidi Muhammad Iraq who was suffer mg from disability and was unable to speak were examined. The learned Additional Custodian by his order dated 28-2-1974 refused to confirm the exchange on the ground that despite repeated orders respondents Nos. to 10 did not produce the clam verification order passed in favor of late Heidi Muhammad Iraq by a competent authority under the provision of Registration of Claims (Displaced. Persons) Act of 1958, and it was presumed that he must have got the subject land also included in the claim filed by him. Both the parties challenged this order, before the Custodian. In those proceedings the respondents instead of producing the claim verification order in favor of late Heidi M. Ishaq produced the verification order passed by the Deputy Claims Commissioner, Karachi in favor of the legal heirs of Ghulam Paula including. Salahuddiri for the properties of late Ghulam Julia, and it was stated that late. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had NBT filed any clam at all. From this order of claim verification dated 27-8-1959 it transpired that the land in New Delhi actually belonged to Ghulam Julia and late Heidi Muhammad Iraq and Muhammad Suleman were became owners. This was also. Confirmed by late Heidi Muhammad Iraq before the claim authorities. The learned Custodian therefore, dismissed the Revision Application filed by the petitioner and allowed the Revision of the respondent 1e. the legal heirs of the Muhammad Iraq and confirmed the exchange by the impugned order dated 27-6-1974. Mr. Maroof Ali Khan the learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that in the absence of any documentary evidence to show that Heidi M* Iraq was the owner of the New Delhi property, exchange with the evacuee property of Hindus at Karachi was not competent. In this regard the learned counsel has referred to the evidence produced before the Additional Custodian in which Kara and Keaton were i' produced. According to the learned counsel as it is authenticated by the High Commission of Pakistan

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): with the evacuee property of Hindus at Karachi was not competent. In this regard the learned counsel has referred to the evidence produced before the Additional Custodian in which Kara and Keaton were i' produced. According to the learned counsel as it is authenticated by the High Commission of Pakistan in India as required by sections 78 and 84 of. The Evidence Act, it is not admissible in evidence. The same objection has also been raised in respect of certified true, copy of the exchange deed registered with the Registrar at New Delhi. The learned counsel contended that Kara and Keaton are public documents and unless the same are proved in terms of the provisions of the. Evidence Act they cannot be accepted m evidence before a Court or Tribunal. The learned counsel has referred to Muhammad Usman v. Lai Muhammad PLD 1975 Keir. 352 where in an appeal from the judgment of the Election Tribunal, the question came for consideration about the admissibility of birth certificate which was issued by the Ajmer Municipality and because the same was not authenticated in terms of sections 78 (6) of the Evidence Act, it was held to be admissible. In M/s. Bengal Friends Co. v. Four Be node Saga Co. Calcutta and another PLD 1969 S C 477 the copies of extract from the Register of Miscellaneous. Cases mentioned in the Court of Third Presiding Magistrate Calcutta per taming to a criminal complaint were held admissible, as they did "not bear certificate of genuine and accuracy by a Representative of the Government of Pakistan in India as required by section, 86 of the Evidence Act". With regard to copies of application for export of Collar to East Pakistan in 1948 and licenses for export purported to have been granted by the Government of India, as well as two telegrams received from some customers in East Pakistan it was observed that they "stand at still lower footing as they are not copies of any judicial record, and could not be received in evidence without proof of signature and handwriting of persons alleged to have been signed or written them as required by section 67 of the Evidence. Act11. Mr. Muhammad Sharif the learned counsel has contended that the proceedings before the Custodian are not governed by the provision of Evidence Act, and the same is not applicable, and therefore, for any non-compliance of the provisions of the Evidence Acct, the order cannot be said to have been passed without lawful authority. The learned counsel relied on MST. Moselle Ellis v. Khadija Ahmed Said PLD 1959 Keir. 760 where it was held that "section 86 of the Evidence Act does not relate to \the admissibility or otherwise of a copy of a judicial record of a foreign country. It merely -enables the Court to raise a presumption that judicial record of a foreign country is genuine and accurate if it bears a certificate as required by that section11. It is thus plain that the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): admissibility or otherwise of a copy of a judicial record of a foreign country. It merely -enables the Court to raise a presumption that judicial record of a foreign country is genuine and accurate if it bears a certificate as required by that section11. It is thus plain that the genuineness of the record 1s certainly capable of being proved by other means. The absence of the certificate merely excludes the raising of a presumption. The section nowhere says that a copy of judicial record of foreign country is not admissible in evidence, unless it bears the certificate. As required by it". The documents which have been questioned are not judicial records. They are public documents, and were produced to establish that the land was in the name of Muhammad Iraq. In fact the land was recorded in the name of Muhammad Iraq but from evidence it is established that he was became of Ghulam Julia. The fact that his name was on record seems to have been established by the private respondents by produced oral evidence also. The Additional Custodian and the Custodian have accepted this evidence and have not given finding that he was not competent to file this application for exchange. In Muhammad Usman's case although it was held that the copy of the birth certificate was not admissible in evidence, the Court considering the fact that oral evidence of the applicant's father including a medical certificate of X-Ray Specialist to prove the age at the relevant time was accepted by the Court below, it was observed that determination of age is a question of fact, and if the learned Judge relying on other evidence on record given its finding it cannot be vitiated in that proceedings, which was in the nature of second appeal. Somewhat similar situation has arisen in the present case. Whether Muhammad Iraq's name appeared in the records of rights or not is purely a question of fact. On the basis of evidence on record which included the oral testimony of witnesses, the order of verification of claim, which makes reference to the order of the Collector, in 1939, the registered deed of exchange supported by the witness before whom it was executed the Additional Custodian and the Custodian have given finding m favor of the respondent. The proceedings in Constitutional Petitions are completely different from appeal, and finding of fact, unless they are found to be completely perverse and not based on any evidence at all cannot be disturbed. As the finding is nota solely based on the inadmissible documents, but on other evidence on record, neither such a finding can be struck down nor the order can be said to have been passed without lawful authority. r The other leg of argument challenging the competency of Heidi Muhammad Iraq is that he and Suleman are the became of Ghulam Julia who was the real owner of the property. In this regard Mr. Maroon Ali Khan the learned counsel for the petitioners

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): been passed without lawful authority. r The other leg of argument challenging the competency of Heidi Muhammad Iraq is that he and Suleman are the became of Ghulam Julia who was the real owner of the property. In this regard Mr. Maroon Ali Khan the learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to the Verification Order and stated that in 1939 land was declared to belong to Ghulam Julia and Muhammad Iraq and Suleman were held as benamidars. He further stated that Muhammad Iraq is nephew of Ghulam Julia and that he and Suleman not his legal heirs, therefore, these persons have no title on the land. According to the petitioners themselves Iraq was a beamier, therefore, his name would have appeared in the record of right, although it is a different question, whether he was a real owner or not. The petitioners have not produced any evidence to show that Heidi Muhammad Iraq had ceased to exercise any authority on the property or that he had been dispossessed or Ghulam Julia had at any time objected to the Became character and possession of Muhammad Iraq. In fact the son of Ghulam Julia has appeared as witness and did not object to the application filed by Heidi Muhammad Shag, but supported the application for confirmation of exchange. Mr. Muhammad Sharif the learned counsel for the respondent has contended that a beamier could enter into a transaction of exchange and even sell the property. A beamier is a ostensible owner and has title to the property. In this regard the learned counsel has referred to Na rain Roy and others v. Hanuman tram AIR 1930 Nag. 273, where it was held that "a beamier or an ostensible owner can buy transfer pass a good title to the property in the transferee admits of no doubt. Section 41, Transfer of Property Act expressly recognizes such transfers to be valid and not voidable on the ground that the transfer or was not authorized to make the transfer 'provided that'a transferee after taking reasonable care to ascertain that the transferor had power to make the transfer has acted in good faith11. It was further held that a beamier was entitled to file a suit for recovery of the amount on the basis of mortgage. Reliance was placed on Bursaries v. She Lai Singh AIR 1918 PC 140, Bola Parsed v. Ram All I R 24 Cal. 34, Raji v. Maha dev I R 22 BOM. 672 and Had Ram v. MRO Singh I LR 21 All 380. it is well-settled that a Became owner TS an ostensible owner of the property apparently enjoying all the rights, accidents* and privileges of a real owner with his implied or express consent such person can sell, mortgage, or transfer the property and even file suit for clam arising out of or relating to such property, provided the transferee has acted with care and in good faith. In the present case the evacuee owner of the. property at

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): his implied or express consent such person can sell, mortgage, or transfer the property and even file suit for clam arising out of or relating to such property, provided the transferee has acted with care and in good faith. In the present case the evacuee owner of the. property at Karachi have not objected to the title or the claim of Heidi Muhammad Iraq. Even the real owners have not challenged his action, and therefore, it is not possible for the petitioner to challenge the deed of exchange on this ground. The next contention of the petitioner was that the transaction of exchange was made at Delhi by a Muslim with Hindu MN respect of the property owned by him in Pakistan who had migrated to India, and therefore, in view of the prohibition under law, the application could not be granted. The facts are that agreement of exchange was made at New Delhi on 25- 12-1949. The deed of exchange was executed on 1-5-1949, and it was registered on 5-5- 1951 at New Delhi. The learned counsel for the petitioner first contended that Pakistan (Dealing in Immovable Evacuee Properties) Ordinance XI of 1949 prohibited any sale, proposal for sale, exchange or other dealings relating to any immovable evacuee property and any agreement made before(e the promulgation of this Ordinance or during its currency was not to be accepted, and such agreement executed or registered in contravention of this Ordinance was to be null and void. This Ordinance was enforced on 26-7-1949 for a period of two months and the Central Government was authorized to extend this period by Notification for another period or periods not exceeding two months at a time. Mr. Maroon Ali Khan as referred to the Notifications issued from time to time from which TT seems clear that the last Notification was issued on 8-12-1949 extending the life of the Ordinance for a period of one month beginning from 11-12-1949. It may be noted that Ordinance XV of 1949 was enforced on 15-10-1949. Mr. Muhammad Sharif the learned counsel for the respondents contended that as the Ordinance was a temporary, legislation with the afflux of time it died its natural death. The learned counsel has referred to. The case of Muhammad Sharif PLD 1960 LAH. 236 where it has been held that where a temporary statute expires it is deemed never to have existed except for transaction past and closed and even section 6 of the General Clauses Act does not apply to temporary legislation. Ordinance XI of 1949 came to an end on 10-1-1950. The prohibition under Ordinance XI of 1949 expired with the life of the Ordinance itself The deed of exchange was executed on 1-5-1951 and registered on 5-5-1951 1e. after the expiry of the Ordinance, therefore, the prohibition imposed under Ordinance XI of 1949 cannot be applied to the deed of exchange. By that time Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of 1949 had come into force which governed the field.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): on 1-5-1951 and registered on 5-5-1951 1e. after the expiry of the Ordinance, therefore, the prohibition imposed under Ordinance XI of 1949 cannot be applied to the deed of exchange. By that time Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of 1949 had come into force which governed the field. It has therefore, to be examined whether the deed of exchange was hit by the provision of Ordinance XV of 1949. In this regard reference can be made to section 15 which provided that the Central Government by notification declare the area and period during which sale, creation of interest or encumbrance of any property shall be prohibited and except with the prior approval in writing of the Custodian no such transaction shall be made during the prohibited period. In this regard Notification dated 10-1-1951 was issued which prohibited transfer of properties. The transfer and exchange prohibited by the Notification reads as follows:- «(2) Transfer of any urban immovable evacuee property, and such urban immovable property as a person intends to alienate in anticipation of his becoming an evacuee. (b) by exchange, with such urban immovable property as is not treated as evacuee property under any law for the time being in force in India, or m any area occupied by India, or if it is so treated* is not situated i any of the following areas, namely: The Province of East Punjab, Himachal Pardesh, Delhi... n At the time when the deed of exchange was made between the parties and application for its confirmation was filed this Notification was in operation. This Notification was considered by the learned Custodian, and it also fell for consideration in Writ Petition No. where Yahoo Ali, J. (as he then was) observed that: "If there was an exchange between any kind of the properties situated in West Pakistan with agricultural property situated in India or the aforesaid Provinces of India, there was no bar to it, under the notification. This was possibly a lacuna in the Notification and continued to be repeated, in a number of subsequent Notifications until it was removed in the latest Notification dated 6-4-1957. In the last mentioned notification the word ‘urban’ has been dropped so as to include all kinds of movable properties with its preview." This being the nature of prohibition at the relevant time, it has to be considered, whether the property of the respondent at New Delhi was an agricultural property. It is correct that in the application under sections 16 and 17 filed before the Custodian, the nature of the property has not been stated at all. However, in the deed of exchange it is clearly mentioned to be an agricultural property, and its particulars are given in Schedule 'Al to the deed. It is thus clear that the prohibition imposed under law could not be a bar to the exchange. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that as the deed of exchange was neither executed nor registered m Pakistan, the same could

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): particulars are given in Schedule 'Al to the deed. It is thus clear that the prohibition imposed under law could not be a bar to the exchange. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that as the deed of exchange was neither executed nor registered m Pakistan, the same could not be confirmed. In this regard reference has been made to the Custodian Evacuee Property West Pakistan, Lahore v. Rais Ghazi Muhammad PLD 1973 S C 537. In this case property was purchased in Pakistan by an unregistered sale-deed dated 6th June, 1947 written on 2 Anna non-judicial stamp paper. It was held that the document in question could not be received in evidence as TT offended the provision of section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act and therefore, the transfer could not be confirmed by the Custodian. In the present case, the Deed of Exchange was executed at New Delhi and was registered there. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had filed application seeking permission to register it, in Pakistan. Therefore, in my opinion, the authority cited is not applicable to the present case. The learned counsel for the petitioner has not shown any provision of law under which a conveyance deed or document creating any interest in immovable property in Pakistan can not be executed outside Pakistan.* The restriction imposed by the Registration Act is that document which should be compulsorily registered under section 17 should be registered in Pakistan within a specified date. Section. 23 provides that subject to. sections 24, 25 and 26 a document other than a Will shall be accepted for registration provided it is presented for that purpose within four months of the date of its execution. Section 24 deals with cases where several persons execute document at different times, such document may be presented for registration within for months from each execution. Under section 25 an extension up to four months may be granted provided due to urged necessity or unavoidable accident, the document could not be presented within the specified period. The extension is restricted to a period of four months only and on payment of fine. Section 26 is the relevant provision which deals with documents executed outside Pakistan affecting immovable property situated m Pakistan. It reads as under;,26,- "When a document purporting to have been executed by all or any of the parties but of (Pakistan) is not presented for registration till after the.e expiration of the time herein-before prescribed in that behalf, the registering officer, if satisfied.- T " (a) that the instrument was so executed, and <t f'. A" 1'fFL1 (b) that it has been presented for registration with in four months after its arrival in (Pakistan), |. JJ may on payment of the proper registration fee, accept such. document for registration. p 1A bare reading of this provision makes it plain that it admits for registration documents executed outside Pakistan effecting immovable property situated in Pakistan. It does not require fresh execution in Pakistan. The pre-condition for registration

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): may on payment of the proper registration fee, accept such. document for registration. p 1A bare reading of this provision makes it plain that it admits for registration documents executed outside Pakistan effecting immovable property situated in Pakistan. It does not require fresh execution in Pakistan. The pre-condition for registration of such documents are that the registering officer has to satisfy himself that the party or parties have executed it and it, has been presented for registration within four months of its arrival in Pakistan. Once.these two conditions are satisfied the document may be registered irrespective of the fact that it was executed outside Pakistan. It '"' « Now reverting to the facts of the case, it may be noticed that section; 17 of 6th. XV of 1949 had placed a bar on the registration of a document deal mg with evacuee property. Heidi Muhammad Iraq therefore, filed application under sections 16 and 17 for confirmation of exchange deed and issuance of certificate for its registration*. Mr: Maroon Ali Khan and Mr. Khalid M. Issue the learned counsel for the petitioners con ten d ed that the. order for so moth revision dated 21-12-1954. was illegal, and without jurisdiction, and therefore, all subsequent proceedings based on the said order were also without lawful authority. Reference has been made to Yousuf Kai’s case PLD 1958 S C 104 and Mansab Ali's case PLD 1971 S C 124. It may be recalled, that while dismissing the Revision Application by order dated 21-12-1954 the learned Custodian by a,separate order of the same date ordered for so moth revision on a completely different ground namely that in. view, of the Notifications, it was possible to consider the respondent's claim for confirmation of exchange. The petitioners have challenged the jurisdiction of the Custodian on the grounds firstly that after the Revision Application was dismissed so moth jurisdiction to revise could not be exercised and secondly, the so moth proceedings did not survive the repeal of Ordinance XV of 1949. Mr. Muhammad Sharif the learned counsel has contended that considering the nature of the proceedings, the object of the legislation and the circumstances in which the Revision Application was dismissed, the learned Custodian had the jurisdiction to so moth revise the order. The application was dismissed for non-prosecution, as according to the learned Additional Custodian the respondent was not able to produce necessary documents to substantiate his claim. The Revision against this order was also dismissed without considering the reality of the case. Section 36 (4) of the Ordinance XV of 1949 conferred revisional power in the Custodian. In Sun Green Co. Ltd. v. Qatar Din Ashwani and others PLD 1958 S C 144 the purpose and object and the manner in which the Revisional Power can be exercised has been laid down as follows:- "The aim and purpose of the Evacuee Property Ordinance is wholly different* It is clear that the primary duty of the Custodian of Evacuee property is to place himself in possession

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): and object and the manner in which the Revisional Power can be exercised has been laid down as follows:- "The aim and purpose of the Evacuee Property Ordinance is wholly different* It is clear that the primary duty of the Custodian of Evacuee property is to place himself in possession of all evacuee property with the object that it should not be used in an unauthorized manner by unentitled persons* but that it should be applied by due process of law to the relief of distress among refugees and the rehabilitation of economic conditions in the country at large. For the due discharge of these functions it is essential that the Custodian should have the widest power that may be necessary for the ascertainment of what is and what is not evacuee property. It is unnecessary to emphasize the difficulties which by the nature of the circumstances, or by the art and guile of those who are interested to retain evacuee property for their own illegal profit, might lie in the way of a Custodian in discharging his functions. It might require a series of proceedings before the truth might at last stand revealed." In Sahib Rat's case PLD 1957 S C 63 the following observation was made on the jurisdiction of the Custodian to review conferred under Ordinance XV of 1949: "It will be seen that the substantive law does not require that for the purposes of review, a Custodian or an Additional Custodian should be moved by any party in that behalf. This was not to be expected, since these authorities do not exercise purely judicial powers. It will be evident from the fact that all evacuee property vests in the Custodian by virtue of section 6 of the Ordinance, that the power which he and his substitutes and subordinates exercise is essentially an executive power, for carrying out the purposes of the law, namely the ascertainment, seizure and administration of evacuee property. Bearing in mind the conditions which resulted from the sudden shifts of population between Pakistan and India which occurred in the immediately following the partition and that for the purpose of the exercise of the Custodian's powers, evidence x>f title to abandoned properties was not always readily available, it must necessarily be assumed that the provision for the review in section 36 of the Ordinance was intended to cover review by the Custodian acting so moth on the basis of information coming to his notice otherwise than from parties directly interested in the properties in question. 11 It is thus clear that the Custodian has been vested with the the widest possible powers of Revision -and Review, and he could himself! initiate proceedings for so moth revision if any fact material for determination of a case comes to his notice. In the-present case although the Additional Custodian had dismissed the application which order wad. Confirmed by the Custodian as on the material before the Additional! Custodian no other order could be passed, m view of.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): moth revision if any fact material for determination of a case comes to his notice. In the-present case although the Additional Custodian had dismissed the application which order wad. Confirmed by the Custodian as on the material before the Additional! Custodian no other order could be passed, m view of. The notification the learned Custodian perhaps thought that the case required reconsideration as for an exchange in respect of agricultural property in India there did not seem to be any prohibition. There is no bar in law that after exercise revisional power the Custodian cannot exercise} his so moth revisional jurisdiction. The learned counsel for the petitioner referred to Sushi Ram. Asmara Jaisinghani v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others PLD 1965 S C 453. In this case, the question before the Supreme Court was whether the Custodians power of review under section 43 (6) of Act XII of 1957 which was taken away by Ordinance LXII of 1962 was still available in regard to pending proceedings. On construction of the* saving clause in Ordinance LXII of 1962 it was observed that it clearly spelled out a different intention as according to it review application pending immediately before the promulgation of the Amending Ordinance remained unaffected, and therefore, the power of so moth review was not intended to be saved. In the present case, Ordinance XV of 1949 was repealed by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance. 1956. This Ordinance was also repealed by Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property Second) Ordinance, 1956. Again by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, this second Ordinance of 1956 was also repealed. There is nothing in the repeal mg Ordinances or the Act XII of 1957 from which a contrary intention may be deduced that the pending proceedings are not saved. The rule laid down in Jaisinghani's case will not be applicable to the present case, which is completely distinguishable, as there the repealing provision of the Ordinance clearly showed the mention of the Legislature not to continue with the so moth power of Review. ; The learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that as the so moth proceedings were not at the stance of any party no right is created in favor of any party, and therefore, after the repeal no party can insist on continued the so moth proceedings. In support of this contention reliance, has been placed on Jaisinghani's case which as stated earlier and for reasons stated above is completely distinguishable. In my humble opinion the so moth Revision proceedings initiated by the learned Custodian on 21-12-1954 were pending at the time when the Ordinance XV of 1949 was repealed and there being no intention to discontinue such proceedings, the same was validly continued. Consequently the contention of the learned counsel! that all subsequent orders passed on the basis of the Order dated] 21-12-1954 are illegal, and void is not tenable. r Mr. Maroon Ali Khan the learned counsel contended that no Income-tax Certificate

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): intention to discontinue such proceedings, the same was validly continued. Consequently the contention of the learned counsel! that all subsequent orders passed on the basis of the Order dated] 21-12-1954 are illegal, and void is not tenable. r Mr. Maroon Ali Khan the learned counsel contended that no Income-tax Certificate was filed by the respondents therefore, the exchange could not be confirmed. He has relied on Commissioner of Income-tax v. Ash fag Ahmed and others P LD 1973 S C 406. The observations in this case do not support the petitioner's contention. It was also held that "in our opinion, there must be a subsisting certificate as required under section 20 (3) (a) (i) of the Act 1957 corresponding to section 16 (3) (a) (a) of the 1949 Ordinance on the date when the confirmation is sought for or is granted'd". The respondents had produced an Income-tax Certificate dated 9-12-1968. The learned Additional Custodian after considering the evidence came to the conclusion that it was not a forged certificate. It was for a period of six months, but ASL the matter could not be decided within that period it expired. If the! case would have been decided with six months possibly no objection! could have been raised to its validity. Mere expiry of a valid certificate! during pendency of the proceedings will not prevent the Custodian from confirming the transaction provided there is no other objection. The acceptance of such certificate by the Custodian and Additional] Custodian does not render the impugned order illegal. Mr. Maroon Ali Khan has contended that as the property has been acquired under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation. Rehabilitation.) Act, 1958 the Custodian had no jurisdiction to decide the matter, and confirm the exchange deed. In this regard the learned counsel has referred to four Notifications issued by the Central Government which are reproduced as follows (1) NS.R.O. 383, 8th August, 1949 (Gazette, Extraordinary, 8th August, 1959).- In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 (XXVIII of 1958), the Central Government is pleased to acquire, with immediate effect, all evacuees properties within the Federal Capital other than- (1) agricultural land; and (1) the evacuee property for the acquisition of which proceedings* under any law other than the said Act have been taken and are pending". (2) S.R.O* 573, 30th November 1959, (Gazette, Extraordinary, 30th November, 1959).- In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 (XXVIII of 1958), the Central Government is pleased to acquire, with immediate effect, all evacuee property (other than agricultural land) within the.e Federal Capital, with regard to which any proceedings were pending under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 CXII of 1957), on the 8th August, 1959, and are not so pending on the date of this notification. (3) S.R.O. 488 In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): Capital, with regard to which any proceedings were pending under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 CXII of 1957), on the 8th August, 1959, and are not so pending on the date of this notification. (3) S.R.O. 488 In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 (XXVIII of 1958), the Central Government is pleased to acquire with immediate effect, all evacuee property (other than agricultural land) within the Federal Capital, with regard to which any proceedings were pending under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act 1957 (XII of 1957), on the 1st December, 1959, and are not so pending on the date of this notification. (4) S.R.O. 1816 In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) of section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation, Act, 1958 (XXVIII of 1958), the Central Government is pleased to acquire, with immediate effect all evacuee property (other than agricultural land) within the Federal Territory of Karachi with regard to which any proceedings under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII r of 1957) were pending on the first day of May, 1960 or were commenced. On any date after 8th August, 1959, and have been finally disposed of before the date of this notification. (Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, dated 29-12-1960)." The learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that as held in M. Ghulam Muhammad's case PLD 1966 LAH. 953 these Notifications. read together lead to the conclusion that the subject properties were acquired. The First Notification dated 8-8- 1959 acquires all evacuee properties within the Federal Capital with the exception, of agricultural land. It also does not apply to evacuee properties which are subject-matter of pending proceedings which have been taken for its acquisition under any law other than the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, The learned counsel for the parties have not produced the Notification dated 12-9-1959 which amends the notification dated 8-8-1959. In Natural v. Secretary Ministry of Rehabilitation 1973 S C M R 441 while referring to the Notification dated 8-8-1959 it was observed as follows: "In accordance with the notification the property in dispute would stand acquired by the Government on 8th August, 1959. There was a subsequent notification of 12th September, 1959, which purported to be an amendment of the first notification and in which it was stated that property with respect to which any proceedings were pending before the Custodian would not be covered by the notification of 8th of August, 1959." The petitioners, therefore, cannot press notification dated 8-8-1959 for ousting the jurisdiction of the Custodian as proceedings! under Act XII of 195711 were pending. The notification dated 30-11-1959 and subsequent notifications clearly demonstrate that the evacuee properties which were subject-matter of Anya proceeding under Act XII of 1957 were not acquired. Such properties were acquired progressively after the pending proceedings had term mated. The observation in Lazar All’s case completely destroys the*

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): were pending. The notification dated 30-11-1959 and subsequent notifications clearly demonstrate that the evacuee properties which were subject-matter of Anya proceeding under Act XII of 1957 were not acquired. Such properties were acquired progressively after the pending proceedings had term mated. The observation in Lazar All’s case completely destroys the* petitioner's objection. Even otherwise subsequent notifications completely nullify the effect of the first notification, so far it relates to pending proceedings specified in the subsequent notifications. Under section 21 of the General Clauses Act where a power to issue notification order or rule 1s conferred then that power includes the power to add, amend, vary or rescind it. The first notification therefore, stands - amended as stated above. 1A scrutiny of these Notifications issued from time to time makes it play that the intention of the Government was not to acquire properties in respect of which any proceedings under Act XII of 1957 year pending. M. Ghulam Muhammad's case cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner is completely distinguishable. In that case. The first Notification was issued JA respect of land allotted under the Rehabilitation Scheme. The second Notification was issued in respect of all the evacuee land, therefore, it was held that the Notification issued earlier related to the land which had been allotted, and the second Notification dealt with the remain mg lands which were evacuee properties. Here the Notifications are completely different in nature, and context and therefore the Rule laid down in M. Ghulam Muhammad's case is not applicable. In view of the Notifications governing the present case the evacuee properties in respect of which proceedings under Act XII of 1957 were pending were not acquired. In the present case proceeding was pending before the Custodian when Mr. Muhammad Baths Demon passed the order on 2-3-1957 against which a Writ Petition was filed which was disposed of on 14-6-1958. Against this judgment Letters Patent Appeal was filed which was disposed of on 10-4- 1963 on statement made on behalf of the Custodian. The case was taken up by the Custodian for hearing the pending revision who passed the order on 26-5-1967 directing the Additional Custodian to hear the matter on merits which was ultimately decided by him on 28-2-1974. Against this order Revision was filed before the. Custodian of Evacuee Property Sind which was decided by the impugned order dated 27-6-1976. This clearly shows that the proceedings initiated in 1951 continued under the provisions of Act XII of 1957 till it \was decided on 27-6-1974. The properties have been subject-matter of pending proceedings, continuously and therefore, by these Notifications the properties were not acquired, and the Custodian had the jurisdiction to decide the matter. It was also argued on behalf of the petitioners that the power of attorney executed by Dhabi Haciendas in favor of Kesha Bokmål Triplane has been not produced. It was not necessary to produce that power of attorney here. It must have been produced before the Registrar at New Delhi who

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): was also argued on behalf of the petitioners that the power of attorney executed by Dhabi Haciendas in favor of Kesha Bokmål Triplane has been not produced. It was not necessary to produce that power of attorney here. It must have been produced before the Registrar at New Delhi who after satisfaction would have allowed the exchange deed to be executed by her attorney. So far the power of attorney executed by Heidi Muhammad Iraq in favor of Hafizuddin is concerned, its certified copy was produced as is evident from the order of the Add Custodian. These objections are therefore of no consequence. Rely mg on Naval's case 1973 S C M R 441 the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the power of attorney executed by the evacuee owners in favor of the nominee of Heidi Iraq is not legal and operative as such authority has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian. This contention must fail as the authority was list to manage the property but merely to complete the transaction. T Mr. Abdul Attar, the learned counsel for the Custodian did not support the impugned order on the ground that notice of proceedings was not issued to the Rehabilitation Authorities. He has relied on Zahid Ali v. Chief Settlement Commissioner, Lahore PLD 1969 LAH. 850 where the order of the Custodian confirming the. Sale was held to have vitiated for want of statutory notice as contemplated under rule 12(5) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950. In the first paragraph of the order of the Additional Custodian it has been stated that after Mr. Monsieur Adam had'dismissed the revision application of Heidi Muhammad Iraq on 27-12-1954, he "issued a notice to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi and to other parties to show cause why the order dated 22-11-1952 dismissing the application for confirmation of exchange deed and its registration may not be revised. None of the petitioners or the learned counsel for the Custodian have challenged this observation as incorrect. Further it may be noted that all the transferees of the properties in dispute were joined as parties before the Additional Custodian/Custodian. In these circumstances the contention of Mr. Attar has no force. Besides the afore stated contentions certain facts and contentions in Petition. No.1I76/v74 are somewhat different from the other petitions. As stated earlier the properties which are subject-matter of this petition were requisitioned and acquired by the Government of Pakistan by Notification No.F-16 (6)/57-P-H, dated 8-2-1957 issued under section 8 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956. Section 8 (1) empowers the Central Government to requisition any movable or immovable property not used for religious worship, for the'purpose of the Act. Section 8 (2) authorizes the Central Government to use the requisitioned property and to acquire by serving notice on the owner or where the owner is not traceable or ownership is MN dispute by publication in the official Gazette. The consequences of acquisition have been stated in sections 8 (3) ft (4)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): (2) authorizes the Central Government to use the requisitioned property and to acquire by serving notice on the owner or where the owner is not traceable or ownership is MN dispute by publication in the official Gazette. The consequences of acquisition have been stated in sections 8 (3) ft (4) which run as follows’ k Where a notice of acquisition is served on the owner of the property or published in the official Gazette under subsection (2) then at the beginning of the day on which the notice is so served or published, the property shall vest in the Central Government free from any mortgage, pledge, lien or other similar encumbrance, and the period of the requisition thereof shall end. (4) Whenever in pursuance of subsection (1) or subsection (2) the Central Government requisition or acquires any property, the owner thereof and any person having a charge, pledge or Len or other encumbrances on such property shall be paid such compensation as the Government may, having regard to the. provisions, so far as may be applicable of subsection (1) of section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1984* determine and the compensation so determined shall not be called in question m any Court." Under these provisions the property may be acquired on payment of compensation to any person who is the owner, mortgagee, or holding any lien, charge or encumbrance. The nature of the encumbrance will be similar to mortgage or charge. This interpretation.is in consonance with the language of sections 8 (3) ft The words "similar encumbrance" following the words "mortgage, charge, linen lead to the conclusion that the encumbrance on the property should be similar to the particular preceding words. The interpretation will be governed by the rule of system generic 1.e. where general words immediately follow specific words are closely associated with specific words their meaning should be restricted by reference to the preceding words. It] may be mentioned that exchange is a legally recognized method of transfer of property. Section 118 of the Transfer of Property Act defines "Exchange" as mutual transfer of ownership of one thing phon ownership of another. For a valid exchange there should be mutual consent of both the owners of the properties. In exchange either both! the things should be properties or monies. There can be no exchange between properties and monies. It will amount to sale which has been defined by section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act as "transfer of ownership in exchange for a price, paid or promised, paid or part paid or part promised". It is pertinent to note that subject to section 119 of the Transfer of Property Act each party to the exchange has the rights and subject to abilities of a seller in respect of property which he gives and that of a buyer which he takes. This right is conferred on t.he parties by section 120 of the Transfer of Property Act which refers back to section 55 which enumerate the rights

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): the rights and subject to abilities of a seller in respect of property which he gives and that of a buyer which he takes. This right is conferred on t.he parties by section 120 of the Transfer of Property Act which refers back to section 55 which enumerate the rights and abilities of buyer and seller, section 55 (6) creates a charge in famous of a buyer to the extent of the sellers interest in the property for the money paid m anticipation of the delivery. The statutory provision entitles a buyer, if he has not improperly declined to accept delivery of the property, to a charge on the property. This charge create a right in the buyer (charge-holder) to receive payment out of the specified property. Such a charge is not a mortgage, but it confers right to realize claim by enforcing it by sale of the specified property as in the case of simple mortgage. In Muhammad Iqbal v. Additional Settlement Commissioner PLD 1971 S C 318 while discussing the nature of the charge created MN favor of the sellers under section 55 (4) of the Transfer of Property Act the following observation was made;- "Thus a charge, which a vendor obtains under the Transfer of Property Act, is not only different in its origin and nature from the simple vendor's lien given by the Courts of equity in England to an unpaid vendor, but it stands on somewhat higher footing and can be enforced by the sale of the property under section 100 of the Transfer of Property Act read with Order XXXIV, rule 15 of the Code of Civil Procedure as' in the case of a simple mortgage,19 as was pointed out by the Privy Council in the subsequent case of Raja Kooharlakota Renata Jagannath Rao Gary v. Maharajah Rave Renata Kumar Tahiti Surya Rao Broader 63 IA 3104. It is true that NBA charge there is transfer of any interest in the property but by operation of law a right is created in the charge-holder to receive payment out of the property specified, and this right can be enforced in the same manner as a simple mortgage by a preliminary decree for sale, vide Ram Affair Lai and others v. United Refineries (Burma) Limited and others 60 I A 183. For all practical purposes, therefore, the charge created by subsection (4) of section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act partakes substantially of the same manner. Even though such a charge does not create right in rem it is a just ad rem and not a money claim simpliciter* Even though a charge created, under section 55 (4) of the Transfer of Property Act is not an interest in property it is a right to receive payment out of a specific property." These observations equally apply to the charge created. under section 55 (6) in favor of buyer. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had a charge on the property subject to confirmation of a deed of exchange.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): not an interest in property it is a right to receive payment out of a specific property." These observations equally apply to the charge created. under section 55 (6) in favor of buyer. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had a charge on the property subject to confirmation of a deed of exchange. Considering the nature of acquisition as discussed hereunder, the right of an owner to claim compensation was preserved. The learned counsel for the petitioner on the basis of several authorities cited by him contended that as the property has vested in the Central Government free from encumbrances, the private respondents have no right or interest in the property. This contention is not well-founded as section 8 (4) of Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 contemplates payment of compensation to owner and charge-holder. I need not discuss the authorities cited by the petitioner's counsel as they are completely irrelevant and deal with acquisition under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation Rehabilitation) Act which does not provide for payment of compensation. Heidi Muhammad Iraq had claimed the disputed property not on the basis of any mortgage, lien or charge on the property. He was claiming ownership of the property under the exchange. His claim for ownership depended on the confirmation and registration of the deed of exchange. This claim of ownership was under dispute, and he could not claim compensation till such time his title had perfected. Section 8 (2) of Pakistan Rehabilitation Act contemplates service of notice of acquisition, in the case of disputed ownership by publication in the official Gazette. Section 8 (4) provides payment of compensation to the owner in the manner provided by section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, so far as may be applicable. Therefore, in case of disputed ownership compensation may be paid to the person who has been declared owner. Mr. Akhtar Mahmood the learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that if the confirmation of exchange does not affect the night of the petitioner as the owner of the property, then he has no dispute with the Custodian's impugned order. Mr. Muhammad Sharif and Mr. Iqbal Ahmed the learned counsel for the private respondents have stated that if the exchange is confirmed these respondents will not claim the property, but will seek their remedy for realization of compensation in. terms of section 8 (4) from the Government. The statement make the matter simple and the entire exercise of the private respondent is for claim mg compensation. In any event, even on the confirmation of the exchange deed in private respondents cannot claim the property “as it stands acquired and vests in the Central Government. As a consequence of acquisition only compensation is to be paid to the owner or the charge-holder. m Although the learned counsel for the parties restricted their arguments to the payment of compensation which depended on the confirmation of the exchange, I had to keep this matter reserved till such time other connected petitions dealing with exchange were argued. As

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 395?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 395 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-06-20): paid to the owner or the charge-holder. m Although the learned counsel for the parties restricted their arguments to the payment of compensation which depended on the confirmation of the exchange, I had to keep this matter reserved till such time other connected petitions dealing with exchange were argued. As I have maintained the order of Custodian confirming the deed of exchange Petition No. 11. is dismissed subject to the statement and consent of the private respondents that they will have no right to the properties in dispute (in Petition No. ) and on the basis of the Custodian's impugned order they would only claim compensation which shall be decided by the appropriate authority according to law. In the result, Petitions Nos.,,, and are dismissed with no order as to costs. L. ™ " Before parting with the ' judgment I must place on record my appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by Mr. Muhammad Sharif and Mr. Maroon Ali Khan Advocates, whose arguments were adopted by all other Advocates appearing for the petitioners and private respondents in these petitions. _' Order accordingly.

Question: What is case 1985 CLC 1411 about?
Answer: Case 1985 CLC 1411 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-12-11. The case involved JAMAL BHAI AND OTHERS—APPLICANTSVERSUS » ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTYAND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_1411.html 1/14 28/10/2025, 01:40 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_1411.html DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - SS.4(3), 22, 25 AND 26 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - 8.115 EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.8(1) LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. WORDS AND PHRASESVOID ORDER. The case was heard by MUNAWAR ALI KHAN%.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: In case 1985 CLC 1411, the court applied the following statutes: https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_1411.html 1/14 28/10/2025, 01:40 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_1411.html DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - SS.4(3), 22, 25 AND 26 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - 8.115 EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.8(1) LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. WORDS AND PHRASESVOID ORDER. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-12-11.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 CLC 1411 were: MUHAMMADALLY SAYEED(CIN R.A. 108/1975 FOR APPELLANT). MUHAMMADALLY SAYEED AND AKHTAR MAHMOOD FOR APPELLANT CIN R.A. 118 OF 1975). H&BIBULLAH SAMO AND A. T.MAHM OOD FOR APPELLANT (IN RA 231 OFHABIBULLAH SAMO AND A.T.MAHM OOD FOR RESPONDENT (IN RA 108 OF 1975). sHABIBULLAH SAMO AND A.T.MUHAMMAD FOR RESPONDENT (IN RA 118 OF 1975).M UHAMMADALLAY SAYEED FOR RESPONDENT (IN RA 231 OF 1975).. The judges presiding were: MUNAWAR ALI KHAN%.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 CLC 1411 were: JAMAL BHAI AND OTHERS—APPLICANTSVERSUS » ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTYAND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 CLC 1411.
Answer: By this judgment I propose to dispose three Revision Applications bearing Nos. and which are interlinked, and relate to the same controversy. Brief facts giving rise to the controversy between the parties are these. The immovable property bearing Custodian No. G-2, which is comprised in the northern part of the Plot No. NP/15(257 sq. yards) in Jodi Bazaar, Karachi, is a godown. It TS said to belong to the Public Charitable Trust called Dedharbai Prague Sanitorium Trust Mali and have remained under control and management of Administrator Evacuee Trust Property Southern Zone, Karachi (hereinafter referred to as the Administrator, Evacuee Trust), since 1960. Moose Thai who had been tenant in respect of the above godown and had been paying rent to the Administrator Evacuee Trust applied for its transfer in 1959 but without any success. It is alleged that after Moose Thai's death which occurred on 5-4-1967, the applicant Jamal Thai, his son and other two applicants Heidi Tanya and Heidi Shaffer, his partners in business, conspired to secure the transfer of the godown in dispute by fraudulent means. Towards this end they were AUEGED to have forged various documents and made some misrepresentations. Although Moose Thai was dead, the Chief Settlement Commissioner was moved in his name to declare the disputed godown as non-trust property. By his order dated 12-12- 1968, the Settlement Commissioner made the requisite declaration. This order was assailed in appeal before the High Court, but on coming to know that Moose Thai had expired much before the application purported to have been made by him to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, the Administrator, Evacuee Trust withdrew the IP peal, which was accordingly dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 23-4-1969. Meanwhile the godown in dispute had been transferred to Moose Thai under order dated 26-8-1968 of the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Karachi. Some how the permanent Transfer Deed No. WW. 2114 14101 r dated 5-6-1970 in respect of the said godown was issued in the name of applicants Jamal Thai and others. Since the applicants in Revision Application No. had entered into agreement with respondents Nos. to 7 in the said Revision Application for sale of the disputed premises and published a public notice in the Daily Gang, the Administrator Evacuee Trust opposed the proposed sale of property sending his objections against the contemplated transaction of sale. The Administrator, Evacuee Trust also filed a suit No. 1951 of 1974 on 12-12- 1974 praying therein that the order of the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, dated 26-8- 1968 by which the -disputed godown was transferred to the dead man namely Moose Thai and so also the order of the Settlement Commissioner, dated 12-121968 whereby he had declared the said godown as non-trust property, be declared as null and void, having been obtained through Freida and misrepresentation. Instead of filing their reply to the suit the defendants moved an application under Order VII, rule 11, C.P.C, seeking rejection of the plant. The application was allowed, vide order of the ETH Senior Civil Judge, Karachi dated 13-1-1975. The Administrator Evacuee, Must preferred appeal No. 19 of 1975 from the said order which was allowed by the ETH Additional District Judge, Karachi by his judgment dated 24-4-1975. It is the last mentioned judgment which has been called in question in the Revision Applications Nos. 108 of 1975 and 118 of 1973. So far Revision Application No.231 of 1975 is concerned, it is filed by the Administrator Evacuee Trust, and is directed against the order of the Additional District Judge, Karachi, dated 15-7-1975 whereby he vacated his earlier order dated 7-6-1975 granting stay in favor of the Administrator, Evacuee Trust, as the High Court on entertain the other Revision Application had suspended the operation of the impugned judgment of the Additional District Judge dated 24-4-1975 referred to above. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at great length and with their assistance have also gone through various documents including the judgments sought to have been impugned. To begin with reference may first be made to the application under Order VII, rule 11, C.P.C, filed by defendants Nos. to 3 who are applicants in Revision Application No.108 of 1975. In this application rejection of the plaint filed in Suit No. 1951 of 1974 was sought on the following grounds: — (1) That the suit was barred under sections 4(3), 22, 25 and WW. 26 of Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the 1958 Act). (ii) That the status of the property in dispute having been determined by the competent authority, the plaintifff7Admmiustrator, Evacuee Trust had no right to challenge it in suit, particularly when on the plaintiffs own motion, the question of re- determination of, the property’s status was still pending before the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property. (1) That the plait does not disclose cause of action. (iv) That the suit has not been instituted in the name of proper authority. (v) That the suit is hopelessly time-barred. (vi) That the plaint has been grossly undervalued. (Oil) That the trial Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. For appreciating the above grounds, it may be advantageous to reproduce various sections of 1958-Act mentioned in the said grounds: $.4(3)— "IFA question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or institution or not, it shall be referred to Chief Settlement Commissioner whose decision thereon shall be final and shall not, except as provided in subsection(4), be called in question m any Court; provided that no order under this subsection shall be passed without giving the persons interested a reasonable opportunity of BMG heard,” S.22: "Finality of orders— Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made by any officer appointed under this Act, shall not be questioned in any Court. 11 S.25: "Bar of jurisdiction: — Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Central Government or an Officer appointed under this Act is empowered under this Act to determine, and no junction, process or order shall be granted by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act." S.26: —"Protection of action taken in good faith No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any person apported under this Act in respect of anything which in good faith is done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder.” As provided in subsection (3) of section referred to above, the Chief Settlement Commissioner alone has jurisdiction to decide if a particular evacuee property is or is not a trust property and his decision in this regard is final and cannot be called in question NM any Court except in appeal to the High Court under subsection (4) of the said section. It is also clear from sections 22 and 25 hereinabove that every order made by any officer appointed under the 1958-Act is immune from scrutiny of any Court. Furthermore no civil Court has jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Central Government or an officer appointed under the 1958-Act has power to determine and no injunction, process or order shall be granted by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken, or to be taken in exercise of power conferred by or under the said Act. Similarly section 26 hereinabove provides that no person apported under the 1958-Act will be dragged in any suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding MN respect of any thing done by him in good faith made thereunder. Thus, the above sections have left’ me in no doubt that civil Court has absolutely no jurisdiction in respect of orders passed by an officer under 1958-Act. / The question arises if in view above legal position the two orders: one dated 26-8-1968 whereby the Deputy Settlement Commissioner transferred the disputed premises to the deceased Moose Thai and another dated 12-12-1968 by which the Settlement Commissioner declared the said property as non-trust property, can be assailed in the suit filed in the civil Court. It seems that both these orders have been impugned on the ground that Moose Thai on whose initiative the said orders were passed was dead at the time of passing thereof. The learned counsel for the Administrator, Evacuee Trust almost repeated his arguments he had advanced in the two Courts below. His argument was that the civil Court possessed the jurisdiction to go into whether by withholding the death of Moose Thai from Settlement Authorities the said orders had been obtained through fraud and misrepresentation. In support of his arguments the learned counsel had cited two authorities 1974.S C M R 356 and PLD 1970 S C 180, which as held by the trial Court were in applicable in the start case. The said Court, therefore, held that the suit was barred not only by section 4(3) but also by sections 22 and 25 of the 1958-Act. However the learned Additional District Judge while dealing with the appeal filed against the judgment of trial Court placed reliance on the Supreme Court authority (apparently referring to 1974 SCMR 356) wherein it was held; "It is a well-established principle that even where the jurisdiction of Civil Courts is barred and conferred upon special tribunals, WW. civil Courts being courts of ultimate jurisdiction will have the jurisdiction to examine the acts of such forums to see whether their acts are NM accordance with law or are illegal or even male FIDE." Keeping the dictum laid down mm the above authority, the learned Additional District Judge observed: "So if the jurisdiction assumed by the authority apported under the statute is the exercise of legal jurisdiction within the limits of the statute, the civil Court has no jurisdiction but if -the authority has acted in excess of jurisdiction, which otherwise statute does not confer upon him, or it does not follow the fundamental judicial procedure of acts done in disregard of the provisions of the statute from which any male FIDE is to be inferred, the civil Court BMG the Court of ultimate jurisdiction has jurisdiction to examine the acts of that forum." On the basis of the above reasoning the learned Appellate Judge found that no case was made out to show that finality attached to the acts of the Settlement Authorities could be interfered with by the civil Court. He therefore came to the conclusion: "So if the proceedings took place before the Chief Settlement Commissioner and the Settlement Commissioner who gave finality to the order in the presence of the counsel of the Trust itself then to draw such conclusion of male FIDE will also be unnecessary conjecture and also no evidence of male FIDE is specifically alleged against the Settlement Authorities, obviously, therefore, on that exercise of jurisdiction, the civil Court has no jurisdiction. Proceeding further the learned appellate Judge held: "So if the allegations made by the Evacuee Trust Committee are supposed to be true in the plant, which as the ratio of decisions has shown that the plaint prima facie is to be taken as true for the purpose of cause of action, then the next question of Limitation comes which governs the suit." Thus in the opinion of the learned appellate Judge since the Settlement authorities have neither acted without jurisdiction nor in excess of jurisdiction nor male FIDE the civil Court had no jurisdiction to interfere with their orders. However according to him as the factual allegations of fraud and misrepresentation made in the plaint are taken to be true for the purpose of disclosing cause of action, the civil Court can go into that factual aspect of the case. While agreeing with the conclusions reached by the lower appellate Court inasmuch as that civil Court can exercise its jurisdiction to investigate the allegations of fraud and misrepresentation, I would put the scope of civil Court’s interference in such a case in different way. If the plaintiff succeeded in establishing that the Settlement Authorities had passed the impugned orders under the influence of fraud and misrepresentation, TT would follow that the said authorities would not have otherwise exercised their jurisdiction and therefore the orders that was induced by fraud and misrepresentation could be struck down by civil Court as being without jurisdiction and hence void. The next question that arises is whether filing of the suit was at all called for and if not whether the civil Court would be justified to interfere. As provided in subsection (4) of section of the 1958-Act, the decision of the Chief Settlement Commissioner as to determination of the status of Evacuee property BMG trust property or not could be challenged in appeal before High Court. In fact the appeal had been filed against the impugned order of the Settlement Commissioner declaring the disputed property as non-trust property, and it was during the pendency of the appeal that it came to the notice of the Administrator, Evacuee Trust that Moose Thai was dead at the time of passing of the Settlement Commissioners order. This BMG so, the appeal could have been pursued on an additional ground of Moose Thai's death. It could have been argued that the order of the Settlement Commissioner was void as it was made in favor of the dead person. Instead of doing so, the appeal was withdrawn which was accordingly dismissed as such. Furthermore it appears that on enactment of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Control) Act, 1975, the power to decide the status of evacuee property being trust property or not is vested in Chairman, Evacuee Trust Properties vide section 8(1) of the said! Act. It is an admitted position that the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Properties had been moved for redetermining the status of the disputed property, and he was still seized of the matter when the suit had been filed. Therefore it was argued on behalf of the applicants that during pendency of the matter before the Chairman resort could not be made to filing of the suit. The argument was obviously not without force. Thus neither the appeal which had been preferred from the impugned order and was pending before High Court was pursued on additional ground of Moose Thai's death nor the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Properties before whom the matter was pending for redetermination of the status of the disputed property was allowed to pronounce his verdict. In these circumstances the filing of the suit was uncalled-for. Apart from above, it seems the Chief Settlement Commissioner was moved for the necessary declaration as to the status of the disputed property not only in the name of deceased Moose Thai alone, but others too had joined hands for obtaining the said declaration. This is clear from the order dated 12-12-1968 of the Settlement Commissioner. The title of the order clearly shows that Moose Thai and others were appellants (applicants) before the Settlement Commissioner. The order further shows that among those present at the time of the hearing was "Mr.S. Saeed. A. Rizvi, Advocate Karachi for the petitioners Moose Thai others. 11. If Moose Thai alone had made WW. the application, the word others would not have followed his name. The argument of the learned counsel for the Administrator, Evacuee Trust is not tenable so far as that in absence of the detailed description of "others" it was not possible to hold that deceased Moose Thai and others had jointly approached the Chief Settlement Commissioner. Since the above order is indicative of the fact that joint application was made to the Chief Settlement Commissioner in the name of Moose Thai and others, TT made no material difference if Moose Thai was not alive at the time of passing of the above order. Even otherwise the death of Moose Thai did not affect the validity of the declaration made by the Settlement Commissioner. Assuming for the sake of argument that the Chief Settlement Commissioner was moved only in the name of Moose Thai who was then not alive, that by itself would not be enough to hold that the order of the Settlement Commissioner was obtained through fraud and misrepresentation. The important question to be considered in this connection is what material was placed before the Settlement Commissioner for the purpose of deciding the status of the disputed property and on what basis he had passed the impugned order. It is not the case of the Administrator, Evacuee Trust that the Settlement Commissioner was influenced by any fraudulent material nor is it alleged on his behalf that the Settlement Commissioner passed an erroneous order on the basis of any such material. It is clear from the order that the Trust Committee had filed its reply to the application and had full opportunity to represent its side before the Settlement Commissioner. In fact no allegation has been made by the Administrator, Evacuee Trust on that score. The perusal of the order shows that after due consideration of the material produced by both sides, the Settlement Commissioner declared the disputed property as non-trust property. All documents referred to and relied upon by the plaintiff/Administrator, Evacuee Trust in the suit have laid emphasis only on the allegation that the death of Moose Thai was suppressed and the above order of the Settlement Commissioner was obtained in the name of the dead person. As has been posted out above the death of Moose Thai did not in any manner affect the merits of the case put forth before the Settlement Commissioner nor did it render the latter’s order valid. The learned counsel for the Administrator submitted that SME the Settlement Commissioner took cognizance of the case and declared the property in question as non trust property on the motion of the dead person, the order produced in result was patently without jurisdiction and hence void. In this connection the learned counsel relied upon the case of Hakim Abdul Rahim Khan and 3 others v. Isa PLD 1973 LAH. 652 and argued that since the death of Moose Thai was suppressed and the litigation was pursued in his name, the orders passed on such misrepresentation of the fact were vitiated and nullity. Suffice it to say that the orders passed in the mutant case were not by Court and as such above authority is not applicable. Even otherwise as has been stated above the litigation in this case was pursued not in the name of Moose Thai alone but in the name of Moose Thai and others. I am also not impressed by the above argument of the learned counsel. It is obvious that the Settlement Commissioner had exercised his jurisdiction under subsection (3) of section of the 1958-Act. The said subsection provides that IFA question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to charitable, religious or educational trust or institutions or not" it shall be referred to Chief Settlement Commissioner whose decision thereon shall be final". The learned counsel for the Administrator, Evacuee Trust attempted to construe the words mentioned within inverted commas to mean that unless the question about any evacuee property being trust property or not is referred to the Chief Settlement Commissioner by some person, he cannot entertain the case on his own and take decision with regard to the property's status. According to him in the mutant case since the requisite reference was made to the Chief Settlement Commissioner by the dead person, the exercise of his power was without jurisdiction and hence the order passed in result was a nullity. The learned counsel was unable to point out any law or rule requiring any specified person or Agency to refer the question of declaring any evacuee property as trust property for decision of the Chief Settlement Commissioner. In absence of such provision the reference may be received by the Chief Settlement Commissioner from any source which may even be anonymous. All that the words "shall be referred" used in subsection (3) of section hereinabove emphasize is that the Chief Settlement Commissioner has exclusive power to decide the questions of above nature once they have come to his notice. There appears no law or rule indicating that any such reference is required to be made in formal manner by any specified person or Agency. I am, therefore, of the view, that as soon as it comes to the notice of the Chief Settlement Commissioner that there exists controversy or confusion with regard to the status of any evacuee property being trust property or not, he may and can even act on his own and resolve such controversy or confusion. For taking such decision, no formal reference or application would be necessary. Viewing the case from that angle, the order of the Settlement Commissioner in question would remain unaffected even if the information with regard to death of Moose Thai in whose name the application was made to the Chief Settlement Commissioner was withheld from the latter. Consequently — the plaintiff/Administrator, Evacuee Trust had no cause of action for film the suit under consideration. Even if the suit was competent, the plaintiff/Administrator, Evacuee Trust owed an explanation why it took him for more than 5J years to file the same. According to his own showing the knowledge about the death of Moose Thai came to his notice in April 1969 when he withdrew his appeal pending before the High Court. However he filed the suit in December 1974. Apart from the fact that there is absolutely no explanation for this delay in fine the suit, the suit is hopelessly time-barred. To decide the question of Limitation reference may be made to Article 14 and Article 95 of the Limitation Act. According to Article 14, for setting aside any act or order of an officer of Government in his official capacity limitation prescribed is one year from the date of the act or order. The orders sought to be invalidated in the suit, were passed on 12-12-1968 and 26-8-1968 and as such the suit should have been filed latest by 25-8-1969. However it was argued that since the aforesaid orders were obtained through fraud and misrepresentation the Article 14 was not applicable. In case a decree obtained by fraud is sought to be seaside or any other relief is to be obtained on the ground of fraud appropriate Article applicable in such a case is Article 95. As provided in this Art three years period from the date when the fraud becomes known to the party wronged is allowed for obtain the desired relief Even if the period of limitation is computed under the latter Art, still the suit would be barred by more than two years. It was next urged on behalf of the plaintiff/Administrator, Evacuee Trust that for setting aside a void order period of Limitation is of no consequence. According to. him the suit can be filed for setting aside the void order at any time without restriction of Imitation. He submitted that the orders sought to be set aside were without jurisdiction and hence null and void. No period of limitation was therefore applicable. Of course there is no dispute with the proposition that for setting aside a void order period of limitation is not to be observed. But the question is if the orders referred to above were really void orders. The order passed in utter lack of jurisdiction or m excess of jurisdiction is called a void order. On the other hand if the authority possesses the necessary jurisdiction but MN exercise of such jurisdiction passes AI wrong order, the said wrong order can not be regarded as void order. WW. J ] I In the case reported as Nawab Fauna Ali etc. v. Chief Settlement Commissioner and others PLD 1973 S C 236, it was held: — "To amount to nullity, an act must be non- existent in the eye of law, that is to say, it must be wholly without jurisdiction or performed in such a way that the law regards it as mere colorable exercise of jurisdiction or unlawful usurpation of jurisdiction." In the same context the learned counsel for the applicants has also placed reliance on several authorities to show that there is a marked difference between void order and voidable order. The learned counsel submitted that although no time limit is prescribed for undoing of the void order, the voidable order has to be invalidated with the prescribed period of limitation. The first case relied upon by the learned counsel is of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, Lahore v. Raja Muhammad Fail Khan and others PLD 1975 S C 331. In this case Supreme Court has distinguished the ‘void! order from the 'voidable1 order in the following words: — "The first question which arises in this connection is whether an order obtained by practicing fraud on the Court, tribunal or authority concerned is a void order or only voidable. We are in respectful agreement with the view expressed by Waheeduddin Ahmad, J. in the case of Ah Tidal Shah Dara, that an order obtain mg by fraud is not void, but only voidable. It remains operative as long as it is not set aside, rescinded, or recalled, by a competent authority in proper proceedings. An order is to be treated as void only when it is made by a Court, tribunal, or other authority, which had no jurisdiction either as regards the subject, the pecuniary value or the territorial limits where the dispute arose. Such an order would amount to "a usurpation of power unwarranted by law" and accordingly it would be a nullity. If, on the other hand, an order is made by a Court or authority having the necessary jurisdiction it is not an order void ab initio, but an order which may be set aside on sufficient cause being shown in this behalf" On the same post another case on which reliance/ has been placed is of the Chairman, District Screening Committee, Lahore and another v. Sharif Ahmed Hashmi PLD 1976 S C 258, wherein it was held: — "There is great looseness in the use of tie words "void" and "voidable" and very often they are "used interchangeably. Nevertheless there is a clear distinction between things "void" and "voidable" though the two terms are not infrequently used without special regard for the difference or distinction particularly where such distinction is of no consequence or where the attention of the Court is not particularly directed to this distinction. The expression "void" in the strict or accurate sense means" absolutely null” that -is to say incapable of ratification or confirmation and of no effect whatever. The word "voidable" on the other hand is something which could be avoided or confirmed and which is not absolutely void. In other words what is voidable has some force or effect, but which may be set aside or annulled for some error or meant vice or defect." The third case in the series is of Messes Conforce Ltd v. Syed Ali Shah etc. PLD 1977 S C 599 wherein the Supreme Court was pleased to observe: — "However, in view of the frequency with which gross negligence is sought to be condoned on the plea that the impugned order was void or without jurisdiction, we would observe that a void order or an order without jurisdiction is only a type of illegal order passed by a Court and the fact that it has been passed and that it may, therefore, create rights cannot be altered by describing it as void or without jurisdiction," The view expressed in the above case of Conforce Ltd. was followed in the case of S. Sharif Ahmed Hashem v. Chairman, Screening Committee, Lahore and another. In this case the Supreme Court (1978 SC MR 367) has expressed its view as follows:- "The petitioner is aggrieved by these observations. According to* him, the impugned order. Was void because it was ultra vir.es of the Public Conduct (Scrutiny) Rules, 1959. But he did not deny that the second appellant, who had passed the impugned order, was the authority competent to retire him under the rules. And GUL, J. was of the view that an order, howsoever illegal, was not void if it was passed by a Tribunal which had the power to enter tam the type of claim which it had decided. Now the expressions "void order" and "orders without jurisdiction" are overworked expressions and have been subject to divergent judicial interpretations. This has hardly furthered the development of the law, and in Conforce Ltd. v. Syed Ali etc. PLD 1977 S C 599 this Court approved of an observation by Lord Reid in Antisemitic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission and others (1969)2 A C 147 that it would be better to use these expressions "in the narrow and original sense of the Tribunal being entitled to enter on the inquiry in question" and on the whole the construction placed upon the expression "void order" by GUL, J. is in consonance with the view taken in Conforce’s case." If the two orders sought to be set aside MN the suit are exam med in the light of the rules laid down in above authorities, there will be no difficulty to hold that they are not void orders. They can at worst be termed as voidable orders. H. It is not denied that exclusive jurisdiction vested in the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 4(3) of 1958-Act to decide the character of any evacuee property to be trust property or not. The impugned order dated 12-12-1968 was passed by the Settlement Commissioner in exercise of such jurisdiction. As has been pointed out above the mere fact WW. that the jurisdiction of the Chief Settlement Commissioner was invoked in the name of dead person, would not render the said order as invalid as on merits it is not shown that the authority passing the said order was misled by fraud or misrepresentation. Even if it is assumed that the jurisdiction of the Settlement Commissioner was invoked in the name of a dead person, still the decision of the said authority as the status of the evacuee property being non-trust property for which he possessed the requisite. Jurisdiction and which he took after due consideration of the material placed before him by both sides could not be regarded as wrong muchness void. In the case of Brig. (RTD.) F.B. Al and another v. The State PLD 1975 S C 506 it was held: — "There can be no doubt that if a Tribunal or a Court acts wholly without jurisdiction, its actions would be a nullity, but it does not necessarily follow from this that even what it does with jurisdiction will also be rendered void, because the Tribunal or Court has at the same time done something which was without jurisdiction. If it is possible to separate what has been done with jurisdiction from that'which has been done without jurisdiction without any prejudice to anyone, then what is done with jurisdiction can not be invalidated or declared as null and void." In view of above authority since decision of the Settlement Commissioner as regards the status of the evacuee property was the result of his exercise of exclusive jurisdiction he possessed the said decision could not be declared as null and void. Even if the order of the Settlement Commissioner was in the nature of voidable order it was to be set aside within the limitation period of three years. Since the suit was filed after more than 51 years from passing of the said order, the suit was time-barred. J As for the other order dated 26*8-1968 passed by the. Deputy Settlement Commissioner, transferring the disputed premises to the dead person, suffice it to say that P.T.D. in respect of the said property was issued in the name of Jamal Thai and others and not in the name of the deceased Moose Thai. There is nothing to show that the suit property was transferred to Jamal Thai and others not in their own right but as successors- in-interest of the deceased Moose Thai. In absence of such evidence, even if the impugned order was issued in favor of the dead person, it was of no legal effect. The objection to such order is therefore misplaced. K For the reasons given in the foregoing paragraphs the Revision Applications No.108 of 1975 and 118 of 1975 must succeed. WW. Therefore I need not go into the objections of the applicants that the suit was undervalued or that it was not brought in the name of proper authority. Accordingly I allow these revisions applications. In consequence the Revision Application No. 231 of 1975 is dismissed. The parties will bear their own costs. Petition allowed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): By this judgment I propose to dispose three Revision Applications bearing Nos. and which are interlinked, and relate to the same controversy. Brief facts giving rise to the controversy between the parties are these. The immovable property bearing Custodian No. G-2, which is comprised in the northern part of the Plot No. NP/15(257 sq. yards) in Jodi Bazaar, Karachi, is a godown. It TS said to belong to the Public Charitable Trust called Dedharbai Prague Sanitorium Trust Mali and have remained under control and management of Administrator Evacuee Trust Property Southern Zone, Karachi (hereinafter referred to as the Administrator, Evacuee Trust), since 1960. Moose Thai who had been tenant in respect of the above godown and had been paying rent to the Administrator Evacuee Trust applied for its transfer in 1959 but without any success. It is alleged that after Moose Thai's death which occurred on 5-4-1967, the applicant Jamal Thai, his son and other two applicants Heidi Tanya and Heidi Shaffer, his partners in business, conspired to secure the transfer of the godown in dispute by fraudulent means. Towards this end they were AUEGED to have forged various documents and made some misrepresentations. Although Moose Thai was dead, the Chief Settlement Commissioner was moved in his name to declare the disputed godown as non-trust property. By his order dated 12-12- 1968, the Settlement Commissioner made the requisite declaration. This order was assailed in appeal before the High Court, but on coming to know that Moose Thai had expired much before the application purported to have been made by him to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, the Administrator, Evacuee Trust withdrew the IP peal, which was accordingly dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 23-4-1969. Meanwhile the godown in dispute had been transferred to Moose Thai under order dated 26-8-1968 of the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Karachi. Some how the permanent Transfer Deed No. WW. 2114 14101 r dated 5-6-1970 in respect of the said godown was issued in the name of applicants Jamal Thai and others. Since the applicants in Revision Application No. had entered into agreement with respondents Nos. to 7 in the said Revision Application for sale of the disputed premises and published a public notice in the Daily Gang, the Administrator Evacuee Trust opposed the proposed sale of property sending his objections against the contemplated transaction of sale. The Administrator, Evacuee Trust also filed a suit No. 1951 of 1974 on 12-12- 1974 praying therein that the order of the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, dated 26-8- 1968 by which the -disputed godown was transferred to the dead man namely Moose Thai and so also the order of the Settlement Commissioner, dated 12-121968 whereby he had declared the said godown as non-trust property, be declared as null and void, having been obtained through Freida and misrepresentation. Instead of filing their reply to the suit the defendants moved an application under Order VII, rule 11, C.P.C, seeking rejection of the plant. The application was allowed, vide order of the ETH Senior Civil

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): non-trust property, be declared as null and void, having been obtained through Freida and misrepresentation. Instead of filing their reply to the suit the defendants moved an application under Order VII, rule 11, C.P.C, seeking rejection of the plant. The application was allowed, vide order of the ETH Senior Civil Judge, Karachi dated 13-1-1975. The Administrator Evacuee, Must preferred appeal No. 19 of 1975 from the said order which was allowed by the ETH Additional District Judge, Karachi by his judgment dated 24-4-1975. It is the last mentioned judgment which has been called in question in the Revision Applications Nos. 108 of 1975 and 118 of 1973. So far Revision Application No.231 of 1975 is concerned, it is filed by the Administrator Evacuee Trust, and is directed against the order of the Additional District Judge, Karachi, dated 15-7-1975 whereby he vacated his earlier order dated 7-6-1975 granting stay in favor of the Administrator, Evacuee Trust, as the High Court on entertain the other Revision Application had suspended the operation of the impugned judgment of the Additional District Judge dated 24-4-1975 referred to above. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at great length and with their assistance have also gone through various documents including the judgments sought to have been impugned. To begin with reference may first be made to the application under Order VII, rule 11, C.P.C, filed by defendants Nos. to 3 who are applicants in Revision Application No.108 of 1975. In this application rejection of the plaint filed in Suit No. 1951 of 1974 was sought on the following grounds: — (1) That the suit was barred under sections 4(3), 22, 25 and WW. 26 of Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the 1958 Act). (ii) That the status of the property in dispute having been determined by the competent authority, the plaintifff7Admmiustrator, Evacuee Trust had no right to challenge it in suit, particularly when on the plaintiffs own motion, the question of re- determination of, the property’s status was still pending before the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property. (1) That the plait does not disclose cause of action. (iv) That the suit has not been instituted in the name of proper authority. (v) That the suit is hopelessly time-barred. (vi) That the plaint has been grossly undervalued. (Oil) That the trial Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. For appreciating the above grounds, it may be advantageous to reproduce various sections of 1958-Act mentioned in the said grounds: $.4(3)— "IFA question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or institution or not, it shall be referred to Chief Settlement Commissioner whose decision thereon shall be final and shall not, except as provided in subsection(4), be called in question m any Court; provided that no order under this subsection shall be passed without giving the persons interested a reasonable opportunity of BMG heard,” S.22: "Finality of orders— Save as otherwise expressly provided in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): thereon shall be final and shall not, except as provided in subsection(4), be called in question m any Court; provided that no order under this subsection shall be passed without giving the persons interested a reasonable opportunity of BMG heard,” S.22: "Finality of orders— Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made by any officer appointed under this Act, shall not be questioned in any Court. 11 S.25: "Bar of jurisdiction: — Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Central Government or an Officer appointed under this Act is empowered under this Act to determine, and no junction, process or order shall be granted by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act." S.26: —"Protection of action taken in good faith No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any person apported under this Act in respect of anything which in good faith is done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder.” As provided in subsection (3) of section referred to above, the Chief Settlement Commissioner alone has jurisdiction to decide if a particular evacuee property is or is not a trust property and his decision in this regard is final and cannot be called in question NM any Court except in appeal to the High Court under subsection (4) of the said section. It is also clear from sections 22 and 25 hereinabove that every order made by any officer appointed under the 1958-Act is immune from scrutiny of any Court. Furthermore no civil Court has jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Central Government or an officer appointed under the 1958-Act has power to determine and no injunction, process or order shall be granted by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken, or to be taken in exercise of power conferred by or under the said Act. Similarly section 26 hereinabove provides that no person apported under the 1958-Act will be dragged in any suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding MN respect of any thing done by him in good faith made thereunder. Thus, the above sections have left’ me in no doubt that civil Court has absolutely no jurisdiction in respect of orders passed by an officer under 1958-Act. / The question arises if in view above legal position the two orders: one dated 26-8-1968 whereby the Deputy Settlement Commissioner transferred the disputed premises to the deceased Moose Thai and another dated 12-12-1968 by which the Settlement Commissioner declared the said property as non-trust property, can be assailed in the suit filed in the civil Court. It seems that both these orders have been impugned on the ground that Moose Thai on whose initiative the said orders were passed was dead

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): dated 12-12-1968 by which the Settlement Commissioner declared the said property as non-trust property, can be assailed in the suit filed in the civil Court. It seems that both these orders have been impugned on the ground that Moose Thai on whose initiative the said orders were passed was dead at the time of passing thereof. The learned counsel for the Administrator, Evacuee Trust almost repeated his arguments he had advanced in the two Courts below. His argument was that the civil Court possessed the jurisdiction to go into whether by withholding the death of Moose Thai from Settlement Authorities the said orders had been obtained through fraud and misrepresentation. In support of his arguments the learned counsel had cited two authorities 1974.S C M R 356 and PLD 1970 S C 180, which as held by the trial Court were in applicable in the start case. The said Court, therefore, held that the suit was barred not only by section 4(3) but also by sections 22 and 25 of the 1958-Act. However the learned Additional District Judge while dealing with the appeal filed against the judgment of trial Court placed reliance on the Supreme Court authority (apparently referring to 1974 SCMR 356) wherein it was held; "It is a well-established principle that even where the jurisdiction of Civil Courts is barred and conferred upon special tribunals, WW. civil Courts being courts of ultimate jurisdiction will have the jurisdiction to examine the acts of such forums to see whether their acts are NM accordance with law or are illegal or even male FIDE." Keeping the dictum laid down mm the above authority, the learned Additional District Judge observed: "So if the jurisdiction assumed by the authority apported under the statute is the exercise of legal jurisdiction within the limits of the statute, the civil Court has no jurisdiction but if -the authority has acted in excess of jurisdiction, which otherwise statute does not confer upon him, or it does not follow the fundamental judicial procedure of acts done in disregard of the provisions of the statute from which any male FIDE is to be inferred, the civil Court BMG the Court of ultimate jurisdiction has jurisdiction to examine the acts of that forum." On the basis of the above reasoning the learned Appellate Judge found that no case was made out to show that finality attached to the acts of the Settlement Authorities could be interfered with by the civil Court. He therefore came to the conclusion: "So if the proceedings took place before the Chief Settlement Commissioner and the Settlement Commissioner who gave finality to the order in the presence of the counsel of the Trust itself then to draw such conclusion of male FIDE will also be unnecessary conjecture and also no evidence of male FIDE is specifically alleged against the Settlement Authorities, obviously, therefore, on that exercise of jurisdiction, the civil Court has no jurisdiction. Proceeding further the learned appellate Judge held: "So if the allegations made

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): draw such conclusion of male FIDE will also be unnecessary conjecture and also no evidence of male FIDE is specifically alleged against the Settlement Authorities, obviously, therefore, on that exercise of jurisdiction, the civil Court has no jurisdiction. Proceeding further the learned appellate Judge held: "So if the allegations made by the Evacuee Trust Committee are supposed to be true in the plant, which as the ratio of decisions has shown that the plaint prima facie is to be taken as true for the purpose of cause of action, then the next question of Limitation comes which governs the suit." Thus in the opinion of the learned appellate Judge since the Settlement authorities have neither acted without jurisdiction nor in excess of jurisdiction nor male FIDE the civil Court had no jurisdiction to interfere with their orders. However according to him as the factual allegations of fraud and misrepresentation made in the plaint are taken to be true for the purpose of disclosing cause of action, the civil Court can go into that factual aspect of the case. While agreeing with the conclusions reached by the lower appellate Court inasmuch as that civil Court can exercise its jurisdiction to investigate the allegations of fraud and misrepresentation, I would put the scope of civil Court’s interference in such a case in different way. If the plaintiff succeeded in establishing that the Settlement Authorities had passed the impugned orders under the influence of fraud and misrepresentation, TT would follow that the said authorities would not have otherwise exercised their jurisdiction and therefore the orders that was induced by fraud and misrepresentation could be struck down by civil Court as being without jurisdiction and hence void. The next question that arises is whether filing of the suit was at all called for and if not whether the civil Court would be justified to interfere. As provided in subsection (4) of section of the 1958-Act, the decision of the Chief Settlement Commissioner as to determination of the status of Evacuee property BMG trust property or not could be challenged in appeal before High Court. In fact the appeal had been filed against the impugned order of the Settlement Commissioner declaring the disputed property as non-trust property, and it was during the pendency of the appeal that it came to the notice of the Administrator, Evacuee Trust that Moose Thai was dead at the time of passing of the Settlement Commissioners order. This BMG so, the appeal could have been pursued on an additional ground of Moose Thai's death. It could have been argued that the order of the Settlement Commissioner was void as it was made in favor of the dead person. Instead of doing so, the appeal was withdrawn which was accordingly dismissed as such. Furthermore it appears that on enactment of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Control) Act, 1975, the power to decide the status of evacuee property being trust property or not is vested in Chairman, Evacuee Trust Properties vide section

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): doing so, the appeal was withdrawn which was accordingly dismissed as such. Furthermore it appears that on enactment of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Control) Act, 1975, the power to decide the status of evacuee property being trust property or not is vested in Chairman, Evacuee Trust Properties vide section 8(1) of the said! Act. It is an admitted position that the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Properties had been moved for redetermining the status of the disputed property, and he was still seized of the matter when the suit had been filed. Therefore it was argued on behalf of the applicants that during pendency of the matter before the Chairman resort could not be made to filing of the suit. The argument was obviously not without force. Thus neither the appeal which had been preferred from the impugned order and was pending before High Court was pursued on additional ground of Moose Thai's death nor the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Properties before whom the matter was pending for redetermination of the status of the disputed property was allowed to pronounce his verdict. In these circumstances the filing of the suit was uncalled-for. Apart from above, it seems the Chief Settlement Commissioner was moved for the necessary declaration as to the status of the disputed property not only in the name of deceased Moose Thai alone, but others too had joined hands for obtaining the said declaration. This is clear from the order dated 12-12-1968 of the Settlement Commissioner. The title of the order clearly shows that Moose Thai and others were appellants (applicants) before the Settlement Commissioner. The order further shows that among those present at the time of the hearing was "Mr.S. Saeed. A. Rizvi, Advocate Karachi for the petitioners Moose Thai others. 11. If Moose Thai alone had made WW. the application, the word others would not have followed his name. The argument of the learned counsel for the Administrator, Evacuee Trust is not tenable so far as that in absence of the detailed description of "others" it was not possible to hold that deceased Moose Thai and others had jointly approached the Chief Settlement Commissioner. Since the above order is indicative of the fact that joint application was made to the Chief Settlement Commissioner in the name of Moose Thai and others, TT made no material difference if Moose Thai was not alive at the time of passing of the above order. Even otherwise the death of Moose Thai did not affect the validity of the declaration made by the Settlement Commissioner. Assuming for the sake of argument that the Chief Settlement Commissioner was moved only in the name of Moose Thai who was then not alive, that by itself would not be enough to hold that the order of the Settlement Commissioner was obtained through fraud and misrepresentation. The important question to be considered in this connection is what material was placed before the Settlement Commissioner for the purpose of deciding the status of the disputed property and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): itself would not be enough to hold that the order of the Settlement Commissioner was obtained through fraud and misrepresentation. The important question to be considered in this connection is what material was placed before the Settlement Commissioner for the purpose of deciding the status of the disputed property and on what basis he had passed the impugned order. It is not the case of the Administrator, Evacuee Trust that the Settlement Commissioner was influenced by any fraudulent material nor is it alleged on his behalf that the Settlement Commissioner passed an erroneous order on the basis of any such material. It is clear from the order that the Trust Committee had filed its reply to the application and had full opportunity to represent its side before the Settlement Commissioner. In fact no allegation has been made by the Administrator, Evacuee Trust on that score. The perusal of the order shows that after due consideration of the material produced by both sides, the Settlement Commissioner declared the disputed property as non-trust property. All documents referred to and relied upon by the plaintiff/Administrator, Evacuee Trust in the suit have laid emphasis only on the allegation that the death of Moose Thai was suppressed and the above order of the Settlement Commissioner was obtained in the name of the dead person. As has been posted out above the death of Moose Thai did not in any manner affect the merits of the case put forth before the Settlement Commissioner nor did it render the latter’s order valid. The learned counsel for the Administrator submitted that SME the Settlement Commissioner took cognizance of the case and declared the property in question as non trust property on the motion of the dead person, the order produced in result was patently without jurisdiction and hence void. In this connection the learned counsel relied upon the case of Hakim Abdul Rahim Khan and 3 others v. Isa PLD 1973 LAH. 652 and argued that since the death of Moose Thai was suppressed and the litigation was pursued in his name, the orders passed on such misrepresentation of the fact were vitiated and nullity. Suffice it to say that the orders passed in the mutant case were not by Court and as such above authority is not applicable. Even otherwise as has been stated above the litigation in this case was pursued not in the name of Moose Thai alone but in the name of Moose Thai and others. I am also not impressed by the above argument of the learned counsel. It is obvious that the Settlement Commissioner had exercised his jurisdiction under subsection (3) of section of the 1958-Act. The said subsection provides that IFA question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to charitable, religious or educational trust or institutions or not" it shall be referred to Chief Settlement Commissioner whose decision thereon shall be final". The learned counsel for the Administrator, Evacuee Trust attempted to construe the words mentioned within inverted commas to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to charitable, religious or educational trust or institutions or not" it shall be referred to Chief Settlement Commissioner whose decision thereon shall be final". The learned counsel for the Administrator, Evacuee Trust attempted to construe the words mentioned within inverted commas to mean that unless the question about any evacuee property being trust property or not is referred to the Chief Settlement Commissioner by some person, he cannot entertain the case on his own and take decision with regard to the property's status. According to him in the mutant case since the requisite reference was made to the Chief Settlement Commissioner by the dead person, the exercise of his power was without jurisdiction and hence the order passed in result was a nullity. The learned counsel was unable to point out any law or rule requiring any specified person or Agency to refer the question of declaring any evacuee property as trust property for decision of the Chief Settlement Commissioner. In absence of such provision the reference may be received by the Chief Settlement Commissioner from any source which may even be anonymous. All that the words "shall be referred" used in subsection (3) of section hereinabove emphasize is that the Chief Settlement Commissioner has exclusive power to decide the questions of above nature once they have come to his notice. There appears no law or rule indicating that any such reference is required to be made in formal manner by any specified person or Agency. I am, therefore, of the view, that as soon as it comes to the notice of the Chief Settlement Commissioner that there exists controversy or confusion with regard to the status of any evacuee property being trust property or not, he may and can even act on his own and resolve such controversy or confusion. For taking such decision, no formal reference or application would be necessary. Viewing the case from that angle, the order of the Settlement Commissioner in question would remain unaffected even if the information with regard to death of Moose Thai in whose name the application was made to the Chief Settlement Commissioner was withheld from the latter. Consequently — the plaintiff/Administrator, Evacuee Trust had no cause of action for film the suit under consideration. Even if the suit was competent, the plaintiff/Administrator, Evacuee Trust owed an explanation why it took him for more than 5J years to file the same. According to his own showing the knowledge about the death of Moose Thai came to his notice in April 1969 when he withdrew his appeal pending before the High Court. However he filed the suit in December 1974. Apart from the fact that there is absolutely no explanation for this delay in fine the suit, the suit is hopelessly time-barred. To decide the question of Limitation reference may be made to Article 14 and Article 95 of the Limitation Act. According to Article 14, for setting aside any act or order

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): fact that there is absolutely no explanation for this delay in fine the suit, the suit is hopelessly time-barred. To decide the question of Limitation reference may be made to Article 14 and Article 95 of the Limitation Act. According to Article 14, for setting aside any act or order of an officer of Government in his official capacity limitation prescribed is one year from the date of the act or order. The orders sought to be invalidated in the suit, were passed on 12-12-1968 and 26-8-1968 and as such the suit should have been filed latest by 25-8-1969. However it was argued that since the aforesaid orders were obtained through fraud and misrepresentation the Article 14 was not applicable. In case a decree obtained by fraud is sought to be seaside or any other relief is to be obtained on the ground of fraud appropriate Article applicable in such a case is Article 95. As provided in this Art three years period from the date when the fraud becomes known to the party wronged is allowed for obtain the desired relief Even if the period of limitation is computed under the latter Art, still the suit would be barred by more than two years. It was next urged on behalf of the plaintiff/Administrator, Evacuee Trust that for setting aside a void order period of Limitation is of no consequence. According to. him the suit can be filed for setting aside the void order at any time without restriction of Imitation. He submitted that the orders sought to be set aside were without jurisdiction and hence null and void. No period of limitation was therefore applicable. Of course there is no dispute with the proposition that for setting aside a void order period of limitation is not to be observed. But the question is if the orders referred to above were really void orders. The order passed in utter lack of jurisdiction or m excess of jurisdiction is called a void order. On the other hand if the authority possesses the necessary jurisdiction but MN exercise of such jurisdiction passes AI wrong order, the said wrong order can not be regarded as void order. WW. J ] I In the case reported as Nawab Fauna Ali etc. v. Chief Settlement Commissioner and others PLD 1973 S C 236, it was held: — "To amount to nullity, an act must be non- existent in the eye of law, that is to say, it must be wholly without jurisdiction or performed in such a way that the law regards it as mere colorable exercise of jurisdiction or unlawful usurpation of jurisdiction." In the same context the learned counsel for the applicants has also placed reliance on several authorities to show that there is a marked difference between void order and voidable order. The learned counsel submitted that although no time limit is prescribed for undoing of the void order, the voidable order has to be invalidated with the prescribed period of limitation.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): also placed reliance on several authorities to show that there is a marked difference between void order and voidable order. The learned counsel submitted that although no time limit is prescribed for undoing of the void order, the voidable order has to be invalidated with the prescribed period of limitation. The first case relied upon by the learned counsel is of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, Lahore v. Raja Muhammad Fail Khan and others PLD 1975 S C 331. In this case Supreme Court has distinguished the ‘void! order from the 'voidable1 order in the following words: — "The first question which arises in this connection is whether an order obtained by practicing fraud on the Court, tribunal or authority concerned is a void order or only voidable. We are in respectful agreement with the view expressed by Waheeduddin Ahmad, J. in the case of Ah Tidal Shah Dara, that an order obtain mg by fraud is not void, but only voidable. It remains operative as long as it is not set aside, rescinded, or recalled, by a competent authority in proper proceedings. An order is to be treated as void only when it is made by a Court, tribunal, or other authority, which had no jurisdiction either as regards the subject, the pecuniary value or the territorial limits where the dispute arose. Such an order would amount to "a usurpation of power unwarranted by law" and accordingly it would be a nullity. If, on the other hand, an order is made by a Court or authority having the necessary jurisdiction it is not an order void ab initio, but an order which may be set aside on sufficient cause being shown in this behalf" On the same post another case on which reliance/ has been placed is of the Chairman, District Screening Committee, Lahore and another v. Sharif Ahmed Hashmi PLD 1976 S C 258, wherein it was held: — "There is great looseness in the use of tie words "void" and "voidable" and very often they are "used interchangeably. Nevertheless there is a clear distinction between things "void" and "voidable" though the two terms are not infrequently used without special regard for the difference or distinction particularly where such distinction is of no consequence or where the attention of the Court is not particularly directed to this distinction. The expression "void" in the strict or accurate sense means" absolutely null” that -is to say incapable of ratification or confirmation and of no effect whatever. The word "voidable" on the other hand is something which could be avoided or confirmed and which is not absolutely void. In other words what is voidable has some force or effect, but which may be set aside or annulled for some error or meant vice or defect." The third case in the series is of Messes Conforce Ltd v. Syed Ali Shah etc. PLD 1977 S C 599 wherein the Supreme Court was pleased to observe: — "However, in view of the frequency with

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): be set aside or annulled for some error or meant vice or defect." The third case in the series is of Messes Conforce Ltd v. Syed Ali Shah etc. PLD 1977 S C 599 wherein the Supreme Court was pleased to observe: — "However, in view of the frequency with which gross negligence is sought to be condoned on the plea that the impugned order was void or without jurisdiction, we would observe that a void order or an order without jurisdiction is only a type of illegal order passed by a Court and the fact that it has been passed and that it may, therefore, create rights cannot be altered by describing it as void or without jurisdiction," The view expressed in the above case of Conforce Ltd. was followed in the case of S. Sharif Ahmed Hashem v. Chairman, Screening Committee, Lahore and another. In this case the Supreme Court (1978 SC MR 367) has expressed its view as follows:- "The petitioner is aggrieved by these observations. According to* him, the impugned order. Was void because it was ultra vir.es of the Public Conduct (Scrutiny) Rules, 1959. But he did not deny that the second appellant, who had passed the impugned order, was the authority competent to retire him under the rules. And GUL, J. was of the view that an order, howsoever illegal, was not void if it was passed by a Tribunal which had the power to enter tam the type of claim which it had decided. Now the expressions "void order" and "orders without jurisdiction" are overworked expressions and have been subject to divergent judicial interpretations. This has hardly furthered the development of the law, and in Conforce Ltd. v. Syed Ali etc. PLD 1977 S C 599 this Court approved of an observation by Lord Reid in Antisemitic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission and others (1969)2 A C 147 that it would be better to use these expressions "in the narrow and original sense of the Tribunal being entitled to enter on the inquiry in question" and on the whole the construction placed upon the expression "void order" by GUL, J. is in consonance with the view taken in Conforce’s case." If the two orders sought to be set aside MN the suit are exam med in the light of the rules laid down in above authorities, there will be no difficulty to hold that they are not void orders. They can at worst be termed as voidable orders. H. It is not denied that exclusive jurisdiction vested in the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 4(3) of 1958-Act to decide the character of any evacuee property to be trust property or not. The impugned order dated 12-12-1968 was passed by the Settlement Commissioner in exercise of such jurisdiction. As has been pointed out above the mere fact WW. that the jurisdiction of the Chief Settlement Commissioner was invoked in the name of dead person, would not render the said order as invalid as on

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): order dated 12-12-1968 was passed by the Settlement Commissioner in exercise of such jurisdiction. As has been pointed out above the mere fact WW. that the jurisdiction of the Chief Settlement Commissioner was invoked in the name of dead person, would not render the said order as invalid as on merits it is not shown that the authority passing the said order was misled by fraud or misrepresentation. Even if it is assumed that the jurisdiction of the Settlement Commissioner was invoked in the name of a dead person, still the decision of the said authority as the status of the evacuee property being non-trust property for which he possessed the requisite. Jurisdiction and which he took after due consideration of the material placed before him by both sides could not be regarded as wrong muchness void. In the case of Brig. (RTD.) F.B. Al and another v. The State PLD 1975 S C 506 it was held: — "There can be no doubt that if a Tribunal or a Court acts wholly without jurisdiction, its actions would be a nullity, but it does not necessarily follow from this that even what it does with jurisdiction will also be rendered void, because the Tribunal or Court has at the same time done something which was without jurisdiction. If it is possible to separate what has been done with jurisdiction from that'which has been done without jurisdiction without any prejudice to anyone, then what is done with jurisdiction can not be invalidated or declared as null and void." In view of above authority since decision of the Settlement Commissioner as regards the status of the evacuee property was the result of his exercise of exclusive jurisdiction he possessed the said decision could not be declared as null and void. Even if the order of the Settlement Commissioner was in the nature of voidable order it was to be set aside within the limitation period of three years. Since the suit was filed after more than 51 years from passing of the said order, the suit was time-barred. J As for the other order dated 26*8-1968 passed by the. Deputy Settlement Commissioner, transferring the disputed premises to the dead person, suffice it to say that P.T.D. in respect of the said property was issued in the name of Jamal Thai and others and not in the name of the deceased Moose Thai. There is nothing to show that the suit property was transferred to Jamal Thai and others not in their own right but as successors- in-interest of the deceased Moose Thai. In absence of such evidence, even if the impugned order was issued in favor of the dead person, it was of no legal effect. The objection to such order is therefore misplaced. K For the reasons given in the foregoing paragraphs the Revision Applications No.108 of 1975 and 118 of 1975 must succeed. WW. Therefore I need not go into the objections of the applicants that the suit was undervalued

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1411?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1411 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-11): of no legal effect. The objection to such order is therefore misplaced. K For the reasons given in the foregoing paragraphs the Revision Applications No.108 of 1975 and 118 of 1975 must succeed. WW. Therefore I need not go into the objections of the applicants that the suit was undervalued or that it was not brought in the name of proper authority. Accordingly I allow these revisions applications. In consequence the Revision Application No. 231 of 1975 is dismissed. The parties will bear their own costs. Petition allowed

Question: What is case 1985 CLC 3005 about?
Answer: Case 1985 CLC 3005 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1984-11-05. The case involved MUHAMMAD SHAFI AND OTHERS—PETITIONERSVERSUS |CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE P* ROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 18 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 EVIDENCE ACT (1 OF 1872) - S. 145 PUNJAB TENANCY ACT (XVI OF 1887) - S. (I)(A)(B). The case was heard by MUHAMMAD AFZAL LONE AND C.A. REHMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 CLC 3005?
Answer: In case 1985 CLC 3005, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE P* ROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 18 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 EVIDENCE ACT (1 OF 1872) - S. 145 PUNJAB TENANCY ACT (XVI OF 1887) - S. (I)(A)(B). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-11-05.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 CLC 3005?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 CLC 3005 were: CH. SAEEDUZ ZAFAR FOR PETITIONER.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD AFZAL LONE AND C.A. REHMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 CLC 3005?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 CLC 3005 were: MUHAMMAD SHAFI AND OTHERS—PETITIONERSVERSUS |CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 CLC 3005.
Answer: MUHAMMAD AFZAL LONE, J.— The petitioners brought a suit before the Assistant Collector Grade-I, Sialkot for declaration, against the respondents to whom the land in dispute had been. Allotted by the Settlement Authorities, that they held occupancy tenancy rights there. Since the suit evolved determination of the rights of the evacuees the Assistant Collector remitted the case to the learned Deputy Custodian for its adjudication. The latter by means of his detailed order, dated 25-4-1974, after appraisal of the evidence on the record, did not accept the petitioners] claim and answered the reference accordingly. The petitioners challenged this order, through a revision which was dismissed by the learned Custodian on 21-2-1984. The validity of this order, is under challenged in this writ petition. 2. The learned Custodian held that the petitioners] status was that of tenants-at-will and no occupancy rights vested in them. In this connection he found that one Said Allah Khan was in cultivating possession of the land until the year 1964-65. Thereafter, Abdul Ghana petitioner No. and Abdul Hamid petitioner No. cultivated the same under the respondents, on payment of half share of the produce as 'Ba tail. The learned Custodian also made reference to lease-deed, dated 30-6-1971 (Ex. R. 2) executed by Abdul Hamid petitioner in favor of the respondents. He further observed that Lai Din, was tenanted "Taber Mari". It is to be noticed that the said Lai Din is the predecessor- interest of petitioners Nos. 6, 7, 10 and 11. 3. The fact that the petitioners neither produced the pedigree-table to connect them with the persons in occupation of the land at the time of the Settlement of the village, nor they brought on the file, "W Ajax Asia" to show the history of the village and* to establish the terms and conditions on which such occupants were inducted into the land by the anginal settlers of the village, also weighed with the learned Custodian. In his opinion the entry figuring in the revenue record to the effect that the petitioners paid rent at the rate of 121% of each crop, was, demonstrative of the fact that it was not a case, in which payment of rent was fixed, but it varied with the variation in the price of each crop. This opinion was expressed by the learned Custodian, presumably to negate the petitioners claim that payment made by them or for that matter their predecessor-in-interest to the landlords was, fixed in character and signified the occupancy tenancy nights, allegedly enjoyed by them. WW. 4. The learned Custodian also maintained that the petitioners were aware of the allotment of the land in the name of the respondents predecessor-m-interest, but they never moved the Custodian for declaration of their rights. The petitioners* contention that the property was not treated as evacuee property, was also turned down by the learned Custodian. During the hearing of the revision they relied upon an unreported decision of this Court in W.P. No. 730 of 1960, but the learned Custodian was not persuaded thereby as in his view ITT was qualified by the facts of that case. 5. W e have heard the learned counsel at some length and examined the available record. He submitted that the land in dispute is Sham lat Del and further argued that the petitioners and prior to them, their predecessor-in-interest occupied it for the last about 100 years and throughout this period, in the revenue record, in the Logan column an entry existed to the effect "Bashar ah Balkan Betwazana" at 121%. In his submission this payment was in the nature of CESS and not a rent and it BMG fixed and only normal was suggestive of their right m the land in dispute as occupancy tenancy rights. He contended that the rights held by the petitioners fully satisfied the requirements of section 5 (1)(a)(b) of the Punjab Tenancy Act and that such rights could well be categorized as occupancy tenancy rights. As regards the petitioners' failure in approaching the learned Custodian, under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, for redress of their grievances, the learned counsel referred to the order, dated 14-9-1973 (Annexure passed by the Additional Commissioner (Cons.) and urged that the respondents during consolidation proceedings illegally managed to get the entry aforesaid deleted in the revenue record, and it was under this order, passed on their appeal that the original entry was restored. According to the learned counsel, the cause of action arose, to the petitioners when the entry was altered and soon thereafter they initiated the proceedings under section 77 of the Tenancy Act, culminating in the impugned order of the Custodian. 6. W e have not been persuaded by these submissions. The entry in the "Logan column" 1s to be read along with the entry MN the column relating to ownership and possession. The description of the land in the revenue record as "Sham lat Del" would not make any difference, for, the material on the filed amply shows that the entire estate in question belonged to the non-Muslims and the Muslims did not own any holding. Obviously, the land wholly vested in the non-Muslim proprietors of the village. It is noteworthy that in the column relating to possession, the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest have been WW. recorded as tenants-at-will. It is, therefore, difficult to accept that the entry in the Logan column is evidence of conferment of occupancy tenancy rights on the petitioners. CESS is a levy payable by the landowners and, therefore, payment made by the petitioners to the landowners can by no means be labelled as CESS. 7. W e are also unable to treat the payment figuring in the Logan column as nominal or as fixed one. In this behalf we entirely agree with the learned Custodian that such payment was regulated by the variety of the crops carrying different sale price. 8. It has sufficiently been proved that the petitioners Nos. and 6 occupied the land as tenants-at-will under the respondents on payment of Bahai at the rate of 50-50, and attorned to them. Petitioner No. also executed a lease-deed MN favor of the petitioners. W hen confronted with this situation, the learned counsel endeavored to take shelter’ under the technicalities of law and submitted that petitioner No. was never, confronted with' this document in accordance with the provision of section 145 of the Evidence Act, TT, therefore could not be read in evidence and used against him. But this argument has hardly any merit. The reason being that the admissibility in evidence of an inadmissible piece of evidence, is not a jurisdictional defect, to justify judicial review of the orders passed by the Tribunal below. Reference in this connection may be made to Radar-ul-Hagq v. The Election Tribunal PLD 1963 S C 704 and the judgment by Only, C.J. in Tex v. Murphy (1921) 2 LR. 190. Furthermore, no such objection was raised by the petitioners before the learned Custodian or the Deputy Custodian. In any case the petitioners conduct would disentitled them to the relief under the writ jurisdiction, which is essentially discretionary. 9. Reverting now to section 5 of the Tenancy Act, we may observe that the findings recorded by the Custodian are sufficient to dislodge the petitioners claim founded on this provision of law. They did not produce the pedigree-table and W aka Tampa to establish that they are the descendants of the original tiller of the land and occupied it for more than two generations without paying any rent and that their predecessor-in-interest was settled on the land along with or by the founder of the village as a cultivator on 21st October, 1868. Indeed1 the mention of their status, in the revenue record as tenant- at-will completely demolishes the whole edifice of the learned counsel's this argument. 10. The land belonged to the evacuees. The petitioners, therefore, should have moved the learned Custodian for declaration of their rights under section 18 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance, 1949 or for that matter under section 22 of Act XII of 1957. m 11. Before the Deputy Custodian the petitioners] stand was that they challenged the allotment of the respondents predecessor-in-interest, namely,Muhammad Khan but their appeal was dismissed. Even if it is so, they did not agitate their claim before the higher forum and rather attorned to the respondents. The view taken by the learned Tribunals below that the action commenced by the petitioners had become barred by time TS not open to any exception. There is no merit in the submissions that the alteration of the entry in the Logan column lent a cause of action to the petitioners. They cannot be permitted to circumvent the law of limitation by filing a suit under section 77 of the Tenancy Act at a belated stage. 12. W ¢ have no reason to differ with the learned Custodian and finding no merit in this writ petition, proceed to dismiss it in Liming.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 3005?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 3005 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1984-11-05): MUHAMMAD AFZAL LONE, J.— The petitioners brought a suit before the Assistant Collector Grade-I, Sialkot for declaration, against the respondents to whom the land in dispute had been. Allotted by the Settlement Authorities, that they held occupancy tenancy rights there. Since the suit evolved determination of the rights of the evacuees the Assistant Collector remitted the case to the learned Deputy Custodian for its adjudication. The latter by means of his detailed order, dated 25-4-1974, after appraisal of the evidence on the record, did not accept the petitioners] claim and answered the reference accordingly. The petitioners challenged this order, through a revision which was dismissed by the learned Custodian on 21-2-1984. The validity of this order, is under challenged in this writ petition. 2. The learned Custodian held that the petitioners] status was that of tenants-at-will and no occupancy rights vested in them. In this connection he found that one Said Allah Khan was in cultivating possession of the land until the year 1964-65. Thereafter, Abdul Ghana petitioner No. and Abdul Hamid petitioner No. cultivated the same under the respondents, on payment of half share of the produce as 'Ba tail. The learned Custodian also made reference to lease-deed, dated 30-6-1971 (Ex. R. 2) executed by Abdul Hamid petitioner in favor of the respondents. He further observed that Lai Din, was tenanted "Taber Mari". It is to be noticed that the said Lai Din is the predecessor- interest of petitioners Nos. 6, 7, 10 and 11. 3. The fact that the petitioners neither produced the pedigree-table to connect them with the persons in occupation of the land at the time of the Settlement of the village, nor they brought on the file, "W Ajax Asia" to show the history of the village and* to establish the terms and conditions on which such occupants were inducted into the land by the anginal settlers of the village, also weighed with the learned Custodian. In his opinion the entry figuring in the revenue record to the effect that the petitioners paid rent at the rate of 121% of each crop, was, demonstrative of the fact that it was not a case, in which payment of rent was fixed, but it varied with the variation in the price of each crop. This opinion was expressed by the learned Custodian, presumably to negate the petitioners claim that payment made by them or for that matter their predecessor-in-interest to the landlords was, fixed in character and signified the occupancy tenancy nights, allegedly enjoyed by them. WW. 4. The learned Custodian also maintained that the petitioners were aware of the allotment of the land in the name of the respondents predecessor-m-interest, but they never moved the Custodian for declaration of their rights. The petitioners* contention that the property was not treated as evacuee property, was also turned down by the learned Custodian. During the hearing of the revision they relied upon an unreported decision of this Court in W.P. No. 730 of 1960, but the learned Custodian

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 3005?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 3005 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1984-11-05): for declaration of their rights. The petitioners* contention that the property was not treated as evacuee property, was also turned down by the learned Custodian. During the hearing of the revision they relied upon an unreported decision of this Court in W.P. No. 730 of 1960, but the learned Custodian was not persuaded thereby as in his view ITT was qualified by the facts of that case. 5. W e have heard the learned counsel at some length and examined the available record. He submitted that the land in dispute is Sham lat Del and further argued that the petitioners and prior to them, their predecessor-in-interest occupied it for the last about 100 years and throughout this period, in the revenue record, in the Logan column an entry existed to the effect "Bashar ah Balkan Betwazana" at 121%. In his submission this payment was in the nature of CESS and not a rent and it BMG fixed and only normal was suggestive of their right m the land in dispute as occupancy tenancy rights. He contended that the rights held by the petitioners fully satisfied the requirements of section 5 (1)(a)(b) of the Punjab Tenancy Act and that such rights could well be categorized as occupancy tenancy rights. As regards the petitioners' failure in approaching the learned Custodian, under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, for redress of their grievances, the learned counsel referred to the order, dated 14-9-1973 (Annexure passed by the Additional Commissioner (Cons.) and urged that the respondents during consolidation proceedings illegally managed to get the entry aforesaid deleted in the revenue record, and it was under this order, passed on their appeal that the original entry was restored. According to the learned counsel, the cause of action arose, to the petitioners when the entry was altered and soon thereafter they initiated the proceedings under section 77 of the Tenancy Act, culminating in the impugned order of the Custodian. 6. W e have not been persuaded by these submissions. The entry in the "Logan column" 1s to be read along with the entry MN the column relating to ownership and possession. The description of the land in the revenue record as "Sham lat Del" would not make any difference, for, the material on the filed amply shows that the entire estate in question belonged to the non-Muslims and the Muslims did not own any holding. Obviously, the land wholly vested in the non-Muslim proprietors of the village. It is noteworthy that in the column relating to possession, the petitioners and their predecessor-in-interest have been WW. recorded as tenants-at-will. It is, therefore, difficult to accept that the entry in the Logan column is evidence of conferment of occupancy tenancy rights on the petitioners. CESS is a levy payable by the landowners and, therefore, payment made by the petitioners to the landowners can by no means be labelled as CESS. 7. W e are also unable to treat the payment figuring in the Logan column as nominal or as

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 3005?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 3005 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1984-11-05): tenancy rights on the petitioners. CESS is a levy payable by the landowners and, therefore, payment made by the petitioners to the landowners can by no means be labelled as CESS. 7. W e are also unable to treat the payment figuring in the Logan column as nominal or as fixed one. In this behalf we entirely agree with the learned Custodian that such payment was regulated by the variety of the crops carrying different sale price. 8. It has sufficiently been proved that the petitioners Nos. and 6 occupied the land as tenants-at-will under the respondents on payment of Bahai at the rate of 50-50, and attorned to them. Petitioner No. also executed a lease-deed MN favor of the petitioners. W hen confronted with this situation, the learned counsel endeavored to take shelter’ under the technicalities of law and submitted that petitioner No. was never, confronted with' this document in accordance with the provision of section 145 of the Evidence Act, TT, therefore could not be read in evidence and used against him. But this argument has hardly any merit. The reason being that the admissibility in evidence of an inadmissible piece of evidence, is not a jurisdictional defect, to justify judicial review of the orders passed by the Tribunal below. Reference in this connection may be made to Radar-ul-Hagq v. The Election Tribunal PLD 1963 S C 704 and the judgment by Only, C.J. in Tex v. Murphy (1921) 2 LR. 190. Furthermore, no such objection was raised by the petitioners before the learned Custodian or the Deputy Custodian. In any case the petitioners conduct would disentitled them to the relief under the writ jurisdiction, which is essentially discretionary. 9. Reverting now to section 5 of the Tenancy Act, we may observe that the findings recorded by the Custodian are sufficient to dislodge the petitioners claim founded on this provision of law. They did not produce the pedigree-table and W aka Tampa to establish that they are the descendants of the original tiller of the land and occupied it for more than two generations without paying any rent and that their predecessor-in-interest was settled on the land along with or by the founder of the village as a cultivator on 21st October, 1868. Indeed1 the mention of their status, in the revenue record as tenant- at-will completely demolishes the whole edifice of the learned counsel's this argument. 10. The land belonged to the evacuees. The petitioners, therefore, should have moved the learned Custodian for declaration of their rights under section 18 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance, 1949 or for that matter under section 22 of Act XII of 1957. m 11. Before the Deputy Custodian the petitioners] stand was that they challenged the allotment of the respondents predecessor-in-interest, namely,Muhammad Khan but their appeal was dismissed. Even if it is so, they did not agitate their claim before the higher forum and rather attorned to the respondents. The view taken by the learned Tribunals below that the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 3005?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 3005 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1984-11-05): petitioners] stand was that they challenged the allotment of the respondents predecessor-in-interest, namely,Muhammad Khan but their appeal was dismissed. Even if it is so, they did not agitate their claim before the higher forum and rather attorned to the respondents. The view taken by the learned Tribunals below that the action commenced by the petitioners had become barred by time TS not open to any exception. There is no merit in the submissions that the alteration of the entry in the Logan column lent a cause of action to the petitioners. They cannot be permitted to circumvent the law of limitation by filing a suit under section 77 of the Tenancy Act at a belated stage. 12. W ¢ have no reason to differ with the learned Custodian and finding no merit in this writ petition, proceed to dismiss it in Liming.

Question: What is case 1985 CLC 905 about?
Answer: Case 1985 CLC 905 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-08-05. The case involved EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD APPLICANT VERSUS MOHAMMAD KHAN AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - 8.115 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - S.53-A. The case was heard by BTIFOVE HAIDER ALI PIRZADA.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: In case 1985 CLC 905, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - 8.115 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - S.53-A. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-08-05.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 CLC 905 were: S.H.MUJTABA FOR APPLICANT. KANWAR MUKHTAR AHMAD FOR RESPONDENT NO.L.. The judges presiding were: BTIFOVE HAIDER ALI PIRZADA.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 CLC 905 were: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD APPLICANT VERSUS MOHAMMAD KHAN AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 CLC 905.
Answer: This application under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure is directed against judgment and decree of the Find Additional District Judge dated 24-5-1979 passed in Civil Appeal No.66 of 1976 confirming the judgment and decree dated 2-1-1978, whereby he had decreed the suit. In order to appreciate the point involved in this application for consideration by this Court it will be necessary to state briefly the facts. The Punjrapore Trust is a religious and charitable Trust which was established in or about 1866 with its main objects to maintain cows and give protection to them. The said trust was managed by a sole trustee who was called trustee Panjrapur Trust. It was on 24-5-1938 Karachi Panjrapur was registered under section 26 of the Companies Act, 1913 as "Karachi Paramore Association". In the year 1949 an application was made for declaration of the property belonging to Karachi Paramore Association as "Evacuee Property". The Additional Custodian (Judicial), Evacuee Property, Sind declared as such on 28-1-1950, The Karachi Paramore Association went up in revision to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Sind. The then Custodian by order dated 18-7-1950, accepted the revision and declared the Association non-evacuee and its properties as non-evacuee properties. After the relevant portion of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, was amended in the year 1951, the Rehabilitation Department took action for having the property of the Association declared as evacuee property. The Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, after making an inquiry into the matter, by an order dated the 18th August, 1953, came to the conclusion that the Association had ceased to function and therefore, its case was covered by clause (d) of subsection (2) of section 2 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949. As a result of this finding the Association was declared to be an evacuee and its property as evacuee property. The Association challenged this order by means of revision, but that was dismissed on 19-4-1966. The Association filed a writ petition under Article 170 of the late Constitution which was also dismissed. A Petition for special leave to appeal was then moved before the Supreme Court as well as a WNT petition by some of the Hindu residents of Karachi. The Supreme Court granted special leave to appeal and, ultimately came to the conclusion that as the Association had ceased to function and was also being run by persons whose authority has not been approved or accepted by the Custodian, its case fell within the purview of clause (d) of subsection (2) of section 2 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 and therefore, it had become as evacuee and its property as evacuee. The Hon'BLE Supreme Court observed that subsection (3) of section 6 of Tie Ordinance cast a certain duty for finding out what property was held in trust. As a result of those findings, the High Court was directed to issue a writ of Mandamus to the Custodian to take action as was provided by subsection (2) of section 6 of the Ordinance. The Custodian Evacuee Property by order dated 26-3- 1960 held that the case was clearly covered by subsection (3) of section 7 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 which corresponds to subsection (2) of section 6 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, and declared that the properties numbered 1n the list annexed to the petition for special leave to appeal had been proved to be the property of Paramore Association, and it was being used for religious and charitable purposes and recommended to the Central Government for the appointment of fresh trustees. Ultimately the Secretary, Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee took over charge of Paramore Trust vide Order No.IX(D/62, dated 21-1- 1963. The respondents claimed themselves as lessens of survey numbers 34 and 25 of Del Fabiano, Taupo Mayfair by virtue of an agreement of lease dated 9-7-1961 executed by one Baba Viipuri as sole trustee of Paramore Trust. That agreement purported to be for 99 years and had paid a sum of Rs.80,000 to the said Baba Viipuri as lease money. The land was acquired by K.D.A. and since the land was not utilized by K.D.A. the respondent applied for release but K.D.A. directed the respondents5 to seek declaration and injunction. The applicant filed written-statement wherein they denied claim of the respondents. It was averred that the suit property is an evacuee trust property and as such it is under their control and management. The applicant denied the existence of lease and the payment of lease money and the respondents’ possession. It was further submitted that the said land had been acquired by K.D.A. fort her Scheme. It is, however, claimed by the applicant that the property belonging to Paramore Association including the suit property has been declared as an Evacuee Property and as such it is under the control and management of the applicant. On the pleadings of the parties the learned trial Court framed the following issues "Issue No.l. Whether the plaintiffs have cause of action to file this suit? Issue No.2. Whether the suit is barred by GS.22,25 an(j 26 of Displaced Persons (Land Settlement Act)? Whether the property in suit is an evacuee trust property under the control and management of the defendants? Issue No.4. Whether Shari Mahan Baba was the sole trustee and administrator of the property in dispute, and he had granted lease of the same to the plaintiffs for 99 years receiving Rs.90,000 and if so its effect? Issue No.5. entire evidence brought on record. He has also argued that the learned trial Judge, while deciding issues 1, 2 and 3 has neither discussed the evidence brought by the applicant on the record nor considered the Exes. 23 and 24. As regards the judgment passed by the learned Additional District Judge, learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the perusal of the judgment would show that the learned Additional District Judge has not only failed to discuss the evidence brought on the record by both the parties on material points relating to these issues, but has also rejected application under Order XLI, rule 27, C.P.C. without any cogent reason. The learned counsel for the applicant has also contended that the two Courts below have totally misread the evidence in arriving at the conclusion that the property in question belonged to Paramore Trust and there is no evidence to show that this property was ever declared as an evacuee property. On the basis of the aforesaid contentions, the learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that this Court has jurisdiction to upset the concurrent finding of fact arrived by two Courts below. The learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the two Courts below, while discussing issues 1,2 and 3, have properly considered the evidence brought on the record and have reached the conclusion, which, being concurrent and relating to facts, cannot be upset in revision by this Court. He has also contended that the applicant, on whom the burden of proof lay in respect of issue No.3, has failed to bring cogent evidence on the record to show that Paramore Trust and Paramore Association are one and the same and that the properties which are shown in the name of trustee Paramore, are in fact the properties belonging to Karachi Paramore Association. On the basis of the evidence brought on the record, he has urged that the learned Courts below were right in arriving at the conclusion that the property in suit belongs to Paramore Trust. For claiming that the Trustee Paramore and Paramore Association are one and the same and the properties Association are one and the same and the properties which are shown in the name of Trustee Paramore are in fact the properties belonging to Paramore Association the applicant, who has set up the plea, was required to prove that the properties which are shown in the name of Trustee Paramore are in fact the properties belonging to the Paramore Association and are under the management of the Divisional Evacuee Trust Property Board. It is therefore, to be seen whether on the basis of the evidence brought on the record the applicant has been able to prove that all the properties of Trustee Paramore belongs to the Paramore Association. The two Courts below no doubt, have referred to the evidence brought by the parties on record. The learned trial Court, while dealing with these issues in its judgment has referred to the statement of legal assistant of the applicant Iraq Ahmad. The learned trial Court has also referred to the statement made by Abdullah Khan, Abdul Rashid in this connection. The learned trial Court, in the light of the evidence referred to above, came to the conclusion that the evidence both oral and documentary so produced show that the suit property belongs to Trustee Paramore and not to Paramore Association. Exes. 23 and 24 which are copy of Petition No. and Schedule of property attached with it was filed by CERTAM Hindus m order to seek declaration in respect of the properties of Paramore Association which were declared evacuee property in which SSRI Mahan at Baba Viipuri is not a party, also included in the land of Paramore Trust in the Schedule Property Ex. 24 but not all the properties mentioned in the Schedule may be treated as the properties of the Association without any documentary or other proof It appears that MN order to improve their properties they have included these properties also. They could claim that whole of the Karachi belonged to them, but it could be accepted only when they proved it. It was held by the learned trial Court that the agreement of lease Ex.7 by which the property in suit has been transferred to the respondents”. The learned lower appellate Court, while dealing with these issues, on page 13 of the judgment observed as under:- "It may be stated that the case of the respondents is that, the property in question belongs to Paramore Trust which was never declared as Evacuee Property and SHN Mahan Baba was its sole trustee and administrator appointed by a registered Deed the copy of which is on record who had leased out the said property to the respondent for 99 years in consideration of Rs.90,000 and the possession of the same was delivered to them as stated hereinabove. That this property was also declared as non-evacuee property by the Custodian of Evacuee Property vide orders dated 187-1950, 9- 6-1959 and 4-7-1964 as Exes. 8, 9 and 10 respectively. The relevant entry in the copy of record of rights Ex. 13 further clearly shows the said property was in the name of trustee of Paramore Trust." "It may further be pointed out that the appellants have not set up and/or made out any reasonable grounds in their scanty Written Statement which was filed by. them except denying the claim of the respondents by merely stating that the suit property is an evacuee property under their control and management. During the trial of the case, the appellants produced CERTAM documents per taming to disputes concerning Karachi Paramore Association and the learned counsel for the respondents throughout maintained that these documents are irrelevant in the present case as the property in suit belongs to Paramore Trust and not to Karachi Pmnjrapur Association. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has not been able to point out any relevant evidence from the record in support of the claim of the appellants that the property in question is an evacuee property." From the aforesaid paragraphs of the judgment of the learned lower appellate Court it is clear that the said Court has totally failed to take into consideration documents produced by the applicant. In view of this failure of the learned lower appellate Court to notice the important piece of evidence on the record, it is necessary that the entire evidence produced by the parties in respect of these issues be reappraised. A The schedule to petition is for special leave petition is at page H-O-B-Del Fabiano, Taupo Sanford Talk Karachi. Total area of Del Fabiano is 618.39 Acres. Permanent tenure yearly land Rent Rs.337-8-0. 226–26 Acres were donated by'various parties from 1864 to 1924. 101.13 Acres granted by Government in 1929. Ex. EU is me order of the Custodian dated 26-3-1960 in which operative part of order, dated 29-3-1958 of the then Custodian which reads as under- "The properties of the Paramore Association are fully set out in Schedule C1 appearing on page 56 of the printed paper book of the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The properties consist of open plots, sheds, staff quarters, residential building, shops and agricultural land. As the list is a long one it is unnecessary to reproduce it here, but the printed paper book referred to above is attached to this order. This property has been proved fully to be the property of Paramore Association, and it is being used for religious and charitable purposes of the Karachi Paramore Association. The memorandum of the Association appears at page 122 of the paper book." The Custodian passed the following order: "These managers shall act under the directions of the Custodian. They shall take charge of the properties of the Association immediately and order to the Custodian on the 15th of each month complete and accurate accounts of the income and expenditure." Ex. 21 is the letter dated 15-11-1962 addressed to the Custodian, Evacuee Properties, West Pakistan, Karachi by the Secretary, Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee which appears at page 187 of the paper book. By this letter hem formed the Custodian that Ministry of Rehabilitation approved a Scheme framed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 16-A (1) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 by virtue of which supervision, control and administration of the entire evacuee trust property within the Karachi Division vests in the Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee. Mr. Mujtaba has also invited my attention to unreported order dated 26-12-1975 of Division Bench of erstwhile High Court of Sind and Baluchistan in Constitution Petition No.788 of 1975 SSRI Mahan Baba Mangalore successor of SHN Mahan Baba Bhagalpur v. Government of Pakistan and 2 others. The brief facts of the case are that Paramore Trust was managed by a sole trustee who is called Trustee Paramore Trust. There is also a Karachi Paramore Association which is different from Paramore Trust. The respondent No.] under section 16(1) A of Displaced Persons Act and section 14(2) of Displaced Persons (Compensation and Settlement) Act framed a scheme for the management of Hindu religion and charitable trust properties in 1960. It was averred in the petition that the properties comprised in the said trust are not evacuee property and were never declared evacuee property. By an order dated 20-8-1975 called parawise comments from respondent No.2 namely Evacuee Trust Board. The Evacuee Trust Board submitted parawise comments on 25-9-1975. The contents of para.S of the petition vehemently denied. It was averred that the properties are attached to the Paramore Trust which was placed under the management and disposal of Evacuee Trust Property Board in the year 1963 vide Order No.EX (, dated 21-1-1963 of the Secretary, Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee, Karachi. The relevant portion of the order reads as follows: - The learned counsel relied on Article 20(b) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and contended that the article guaranteed every religious denomination and ever set thereof the right to establish, maintain and manage its religious institutions. The article will have no application for the reason that it BMG evacuee trust properties vested in the Custodian to be managed by the Evacuee Property Trust Board. It may further be noted that it is not the petitioner's case that the said properties are not being managed for fulfilling the purposes of the Trust. Such an allegation even if made cannot be properly adjudicated in a petition under Article 199, The result is that this petition is dismissed in liming.'J Mr. Mujtaba has also invited my attention to a case of SSRI Mahan Baja Manobhagir Manager v. Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee and 2 others 1982 CLC 1175. The facts are that the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board and the Jolt Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities treated agricultural lands bearing Surveys Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 Del Son gal and Surveys Nos. 361 to 367 and 176 to 178 of Del Guiro, Tape Son gal as Evacuee Trust properties belonging to Karachi Paramore Association. The Division Bench while dismissing the petition in mini observed as follows "It is admitted before us that right from the very beginning the status of the Association as an evacuee was under dispute and the controversy was set at rest finally by the order of the Supreme Court, dated 31-1-1957 in the case of Maharaja Dharsibhai v. K.P.A.where the association was held to be an evacuee. The result of the above order of Supreme Court clearly was that all the properties held by the association were treated as evacuee properties. Apart from it, the Custodian of Evacuee Properties, by his order, dated 26-3-1960, held that all the properties belonging to association were evacuee trust properties. This order, it is admitted before us, was not challenged by the present petitioner at any time. The present petitioner, who alleges to have the control and management of the agricultural land, made an application on 25-4-1977, to the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board, comp laming of alleged interference with his right of management and praying for deletion of these properties from the list of evacuee trust properties. The Chairman, Divisional Trust Committee took up the matter and after holding inquiry came to the conclusion that Paramore Association and Trustees, Paramore, are one and the same and that the properties which are shown in the name of Trustees Paramore, are in fact the properties belonging to Karachi Paramore Association." The Secretary, Evacuee Trust Property Board by his order No.IX(1)/62, dated 21-1-1963, took over the charge of Paramore Trust. These orders were not challenged by SHN Mahan at any time. SSRI Mahan Baba Mangalore challenged that Evacuee Trust Property Ordinance, 1974 and the Evacuee Trust 'Properties Management and Disposal Act, 1975 through Constitution Petition No.788 of 1975 which was dismissed TN limit. SSRI Mahan Baja Manobhagir Mangalore challenged two orders dated 22-1-1978 of the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board and the Jolt Secretary was also dismissed summarily by Division Bench of this Court. The two Courts below by misreading the evidence brought on the record have arrived at incorrect conclusion which has resulted in grave injustice. Having come to the conclusion that the two Courts below have misread the evidence brought on record, the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents that the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the Courts below cannot be disturbed in revision are without substance. In the mutant,case, I have come to the conclusion that (the evidence on the record has been misread by the Courts below. Where the misreading of evidence is established, this Court is not only competent, but it is duty bound to interfere with the finding of the Courts below, no matter the finding may relate to the questions of fact. In this view I am fortified by the authorities reported in P LD 1974 SC 22, 1980 SCMR 760, PLD 1980 B.J. 29, P LD 1980 LAH. 484, PLD 1954 Keir. 549 and PLD 1980 Push. 40. Mr. Mujtaba the learned counsel for the applicant has contended that agreement of lease Ex.7 was inadmissible in evidence under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act as well as for proving the nature and character of the respondents’ possession over the disputed property. It has not been and cannot be disputed that Ex.7 being a lease agreement is not admissible in evidence to prove the title of the respondents over the disputed land. The respondents being the plaintiffs are also not entitled to use it under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act. It is well-settled that section 53-A is available only as a defense and cannot be invoked for enforcing right under an unregistered lease. In a case before me the respondents/plaintiffs cannot be said to be in a position of a defendant. According to their own case the Karachi Development Authority acquired the disputed property along with others in 1962. Since these survey numbers were not utilised by the Karachi Development Authority, the respondents/plaintiffs requested to release those survey numbers on the basis of lease but the Karachi Development Authority vide letter No.LAcq/PII/NK/, dated 4-12-1972 informed them to establish its title over the disputed land. The respondents filed a suit for seeking declaration of title to the property in dispute. In my opinion, therefore the respondents/plaintiffs cannot use the unregistered lease Ex.7 under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act in support of the title. J An argument was put forward on behalf of respondent that though this contract to lease had not been registered, the respondents can clam relief under it in view of the provisions of section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act. In my opinion, this argument proceeds on an incorrect interpretation of section 53-A, because that section is only meant to bring about a bar against enforcement of rights by a lessor in respect of property which the lessee had already taken possession, but does not give any right to the lessee to claim any right on the basis of unregistered lease. Section 53-A is only available as a defense to a lessee and not as conferring a right on the basis of which the lessee can claim rights. In the result, accepting this revision, I hereby set aside the judgments and decrees of the two Courts below and dismiss the plaintiffs' suit. In view of the nature of the case and the point involved, however, I make no order as to costs. t' Petition.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): This application under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure is directed against judgment and decree of the Find Additional District Judge dated 24-5-1979 passed in Civil Appeal No.66 of 1976 confirming the judgment and decree dated 2-1-1978, whereby he had decreed the suit. In order to appreciate the point involved in this application for consideration by this Court it will be necessary to state briefly the facts. The Punjrapore Trust is a religious and charitable Trust which was established in or about 1866 with its main objects to maintain cows and give protection to them. The said trust was managed by a sole trustee who was called trustee Panjrapur Trust. It was on 24-5-1938 Karachi Panjrapur was registered under section 26 of the Companies Act, 1913 as "Karachi Paramore Association". In the year 1949 an application was made for declaration of the property belonging to Karachi Paramore Association as "Evacuee Property". The Additional Custodian (Judicial), Evacuee Property, Sind declared as such on 28-1-1950, The Karachi Paramore Association went up in revision to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Sind. The then Custodian by order dated 18-7-1950, accepted the revision and declared the Association non-evacuee and its properties as non-evacuee properties. After the relevant portion of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, was amended in the year 1951, the Rehabilitation Department took action for having the property of the Association declared as evacuee property. The Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, after making an inquiry into the matter, by an order dated the 18th August, 1953, came to the conclusion that the Association had ceased to function and therefore, its case was covered by clause (d) of subsection (2) of section 2 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949. As a result of this finding the Association was declared to be an evacuee and its property as evacuee property. The Association challenged this order by means of revision, but that was dismissed on 19-4-1966. The Association filed a writ petition under Article 170 of the late Constitution which was also dismissed. A Petition for special leave to appeal was then moved before the Supreme Court as well as a WNT petition by some of the Hindu residents of Karachi. The Supreme Court granted special leave to appeal and, ultimately came to the conclusion that as the Association had ceased to function and was also being run by persons whose authority has not been approved or accepted by the Custodian, its case fell within the purview of clause (d) of subsection (2) of section 2 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 and therefore, it had become as evacuee and its property as evacuee. The Hon'BLE Supreme Court observed that subsection (3) of section 6 of Tie Ordinance cast a certain duty for finding out what property was held in trust. As a result of those findings, the High Court was directed to issue a writ of Mandamus to the Custodian to take action as

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): Hon'BLE Supreme Court observed that subsection (3) of section 6 of Tie Ordinance cast a certain duty for finding out what property was held in trust. As a result of those findings, the High Court was directed to issue a writ of Mandamus to the Custodian to take action as was provided by subsection (2) of section 6 of the Ordinance. The Custodian Evacuee Property by order dated 26-3- 1960 held that the case was clearly covered by subsection (3) of section 7 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 which corresponds to subsection (2) of section 6 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, and declared that the properties numbered 1n the list annexed to the petition for special leave to appeal had been proved to be the property of Paramore Association, and it was being used for religious and charitable purposes and recommended to the Central Government for the appointment of fresh trustees. Ultimately the Secretary, Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee took over charge of Paramore Trust vide Order No.IX(D/62, dated 21-1- 1963. The respondents claimed themselves as lessens of survey numbers 34 and 25 of Del Fabiano, Taupo Mayfair by virtue of an agreement of lease dated 9-7-1961 executed by one Baba Viipuri as sole trustee of Paramore Trust. That agreement purported to be for 99 years and had paid a sum of Rs.80,000 to the said Baba Viipuri as lease money. The land was acquired by K.D.A. and since the land was not utilized by K.D.A. the respondent applied for release but K.D.A. directed the respondents5 to seek declaration and injunction. The applicant filed written-statement wherein they denied claim of the respondents. It was averred that the suit property is an evacuee trust property and as such it is under their control and management. The applicant denied the existence of lease and the payment of lease money and the respondents’ possession. It was further submitted that the said land had been acquired by K.D.A. fort her Scheme. It is, however, claimed by the applicant that the property belonging to Paramore Association including the suit property has been declared as an Evacuee Property and as such it is under the control and management of the applicant. On the pleadings of the parties the learned trial Court framed the following issues "Issue No.l. Whether the plaintiffs have cause of action to file this suit? Issue No.2. Whether the suit is barred by GS.22,25 an(j 26 of Displaced Persons (Land Settlement Act)? Whether the property in suit is an evacuee trust property under the control and management of the defendants? Issue No.4. Whether Shari Mahan Baba was the sole trustee and administrator of the property in dispute, and he had granted lease of the same to the plaintiffs for 99 years receiving Rs.90,000 and if so its effect? Issue No.5. entire evidence brought on record. He has also argued that the learned trial Judge, while deciding issues 1, 2 and 3 has neither discussed the evidence brought

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): and he had granted lease of the same to the plaintiffs for 99 years receiving Rs.90,000 and if so its effect? Issue No.5. entire evidence brought on record. He has also argued that the learned trial Judge, while deciding issues 1, 2 and 3 has neither discussed the evidence brought by the applicant on the record nor considered the Exes. 23 and 24. As regards the judgment passed by the learned Additional District Judge, learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the perusal of the judgment would show that the learned Additional District Judge has not only failed to discuss the evidence brought on the record by both the parties on material points relating to these issues, but has also rejected application under Order XLI, rule 27, C.P.C. without any cogent reason. The learned counsel for the applicant has also contended that the two Courts below have totally misread the evidence in arriving at the conclusion that the property in question belonged to Paramore Trust and there is no evidence to show that this property was ever declared as an evacuee property. On the basis of the aforesaid contentions, the learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that this Court has jurisdiction to upset the concurrent finding of fact arrived by two Courts below. The learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the two Courts below, while discussing issues 1,2 and 3, have properly considered the evidence brought on the record and have reached the conclusion, which, being concurrent and relating to facts, cannot be upset in revision by this Court. He has also contended that the applicant, on whom the burden of proof lay in respect of issue No.3, has failed to bring cogent evidence on the record to show that Paramore Trust and Paramore Association are one and the same and that the properties which are shown in the name of trustee Paramore, are in fact the properties belonging to Karachi Paramore Association. On the basis of the evidence brought on the record, he has urged that the learned Courts below were right in arriving at the conclusion that the property in suit belongs to Paramore Trust. For claiming that the Trustee Paramore and Paramore Association are one and the same and the properties Association are one and the same and the properties which are shown in the name of Trustee Paramore are in fact the properties belonging to Paramore Association the applicant, who has set up the plea, was required to prove that the properties which are shown in the name of Trustee Paramore are in fact the properties belonging to the Paramore Association and are under the management of the Divisional Evacuee Trust Property Board. It is therefore, to be seen whether on the basis of the evidence brought on the record the applicant has been able to prove that all the properties of Trustee Paramore belongs to the Paramore Association. The two Courts below no doubt, have referred to the evidence brought by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): Board. It is therefore, to be seen whether on the basis of the evidence brought on the record the applicant has been able to prove that all the properties of Trustee Paramore belongs to the Paramore Association. The two Courts below no doubt, have referred to the evidence brought by the parties on record. The learned trial Court, while dealing with these issues in its judgment has referred to the statement of legal assistant of the applicant Iraq Ahmad. The learned trial Court has also referred to the statement made by Abdullah Khan, Abdul Rashid in this connection. The learned trial Court, in the light of the evidence referred to above, came to the conclusion that the evidence both oral and documentary so produced show that the suit property belongs to Trustee Paramore and not to Paramore Association. Exes. 23 and 24 which are copy of Petition No. and Schedule of property attached with it was filed by CERTAM Hindus m order to seek declaration in respect of the properties of Paramore Association which were declared evacuee property in which SSRI Mahan at Baba Viipuri is not a party, also included in the land of Paramore Trust in the Schedule Property Ex. 24 but not all the properties mentioned in the Schedule may be treated as the properties of the Association without any documentary or other proof It appears that MN order to improve their properties they have included these properties also. They could claim that whole of the Karachi belonged to them, but it could be accepted only when they proved it. It was held by the learned trial Court that the agreement of lease Ex.7 by which the property in suit has been transferred to the respondents”. The learned lower appellate Court, while dealing with these issues, on page 13 of the judgment observed as under:- "It may be stated that the case of the respondents is that, the property in question belongs to Paramore Trust which was never declared as Evacuee Property and SHN Mahan Baba was its sole trustee and administrator appointed by a registered Deed the copy of which is on record who had leased out the said property to the respondent for 99 years in consideration of Rs.90,000 and the possession of the same was delivered to them as stated hereinabove. That this property was also declared as non-evacuee property by the Custodian of Evacuee Property vide orders dated 187-1950, 9- 6-1959 and 4-7-1964 as Exes. 8, 9 and 10 respectively. The relevant entry in the copy of record of rights Ex. 13 further clearly shows the said property was in the name of trustee of Paramore Trust." "It may further be pointed out that the appellants have not set up and/or made out any reasonable grounds in their scanty Written Statement which was filed by. them except denying the claim of the respondents by merely stating that the suit property is an evacuee property under their control and management. During the trial of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): that the appellants have not set up and/or made out any reasonable grounds in their scanty Written Statement which was filed by. them except denying the claim of the respondents by merely stating that the suit property is an evacuee property under their control and management. During the trial of the case, the appellants produced CERTAM documents per taming to disputes concerning Karachi Paramore Association and the learned counsel for the respondents throughout maintained that these documents are irrelevant in the present case as the property in suit belongs to Paramore Trust and not to Karachi Pmnjrapur Association. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has not been able to point out any relevant evidence from the record in support of the claim of the appellants that the property in question is an evacuee property." From the aforesaid paragraphs of the judgment of the learned lower appellate Court it is clear that the said Court has totally failed to take into consideration documents produced by the applicant. In view of this failure of the learned lower appellate Court to notice the important piece of evidence on the record, it is necessary that the entire evidence produced by the parties in respect of these issues be reappraised. A The schedule to petition is for special leave petition is at page H-O-B-Del Fabiano, Taupo Sanford Talk Karachi. Total area of Del Fabiano is 618.39 Acres. Permanent tenure yearly land Rent Rs.337-8-0. 226–26 Acres were donated by'various parties from 1864 to 1924. 101.13 Acres granted by Government in 1929. Ex. EU is me order of the Custodian dated 26-3-1960 in which operative part of order, dated 29-3-1958 of the then Custodian which reads as under- "The properties of the Paramore Association are fully set out in Schedule C1 appearing on page 56 of the printed paper book of the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The properties consist of open plots, sheds, staff quarters, residential building, shops and agricultural land. As the list is a long one it is unnecessary to reproduce it here, but the printed paper book referred to above is attached to this order. This property has been proved fully to be the property of Paramore Association, and it is being used for religious and charitable purposes of the Karachi Paramore Association. The memorandum of the Association appears at page 122 of the paper book." The Custodian passed the following order: "These managers shall act under the directions of the Custodian. They shall take charge of the properties of the Association immediately and order to the Custodian on the 15th of each month complete and accurate accounts of the income and expenditure." Ex. 21 is the letter dated 15-11-1962 addressed to the Custodian, Evacuee Properties, West Pakistan, Karachi by the Secretary, Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee which appears at page 187 of the paper book. By this letter hem formed the Custodian that Ministry of Rehabilitation approved a Scheme framed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 16-A (1) of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): to the Custodian, Evacuee Properties, West Pakistan, Karachi by the Secretary, Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee which appears at page 187 of the paper book. By this letter hem formed the Custodian that Ministry of Rehabilitation approved a Scheme framed by the Chief Settlement Commissioner under section 16-A (1) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 by virtue of which supervision, control and administration of the entire evacuee trust property within the Karachi Division vests in the Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee. Mr. Mujtaba has also invited my attention to unreported order dated 26-12-1975 of Division Bench of erstwhile High Court of Sind and Baluchistan in Constitution Petition No.788 of 1975 SSRI Mahan Baba Mangalore successor of SHN Mahan Baba Bhagalpur v. Government of Pakistan and 2 others. The brief facts of the case are that Paramore Trust was managed by a sole trustee who is called Trustee Paramore Trust. There is also a Karachi Paramore Association which is different from Paramore Trust. The respondent No.] under section 16(1) A of Displaced Persons Act and section 14(2) of Displaced Persons (Compensation and Settlement) Act framed a scheme for the management of Hindu religion and charitable trust properties in 1960. It was averred in the petition that the properties comprised in the said trust are not evacuee property and were never declared evacuee property. By an order dated 20-8-1975 called parawise comments from respondent No.2 namely Evacuee Trust Board. The Evacuee Trust Board submitted parawise comments on 25-9-1975. The contents of para.S of the petition vehemently denied. It was averred that the properties are attached to the Paramore Trust which was placed under the management and disposal of Evacuee Trust Property Board in the year 1963 vide Order No.EX (, dated 21-1-1963 of the Secretary, Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee, Karachi. The relevant portion of the order reads as follows: - The learned counsel relied on Article 20(b) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and contended that the article guaranteed every religious denomination and ever set thereof the right to establish, maintain and manage its religious institutions. The article will have no application for the reason that it BMG evacuee trust properties vested in the Custodian to be managed by the Evacuee Property Trust Board. It may further be noted that it is not the petitioner's case that the said properties are not being managed for fulfilling the purposes of the Trust. Such an allegation even if made cannot be properly adjudicated in a petition under Article 199, The result is that this petition is dismissed in liming.'J Mr. Mujtaba has also invited my attention to a case of SSRI Mahan Baja Manobhagir Manager v. Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee and 2 others 1982 CLC 1175. The facts are that the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board and the Jolt Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities treated agricultural lands bearing Surveys Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 Del Son gal and Surveys Nos. 361 to 367 and 176 to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): and 2 others 1982 CLC 1175. The facts are that the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board and the Jolt Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities treated agricultural lands bearing Surveys Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 Del Son gal and Surveys Nos. 361 to 367 and 176 to 178 of Del Guiro, Tape Son gal as Evacuee Trust properties belonging to Karachi Paramore Association. The Division Bench while dismissing the petition in mini observed as follows "It is admitted before us that right from the very beginning the status of the Association as an evacuee was under dispute and the controversy was set at rest finally by the order of the Supreme Court, dated 31-1-1957 in the case of Maharaja Dharsibhai v. K.P.A.where the association was held to be an evacuee. The result of the above order of Supreme Court clearly was that all the properties held by the association were treated as evacuee properties. Apart from it, the Custodian of Evacuee Properties, by his order, dated 26-3-1960, held that all the properties belonging to association were evacuee trust properties. This order, it is admitted before us, was not challenged by the present petitioner at any time. The present petitioner, who alleges to have the control and management of the agricultural land, made an application on 25-4-1977, to the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board, comp laming of alleged interference with his right of management and praying for deletion of these properties from the list of evacuee trust properties. The Chairman, Divisional Trust Committee took up the matter and after holding inquiry came to the conclusion that Paramore Association and Trustees, Paramore, are one and the same and that the properties which are shown in the name of Trustees Paramore, are in fact the properties belonging to Karachi Paramore Association." The Secretary, Evacuee Trust Property Board by his order No.IX(1)/62, dated 21-1-1963, took over the charge of Paramore Trust. These orders were not challenged by SHN Mahan at any time. SSRI Mahan Baba Mangalore challenged that Evacuee Trust Property Ordinance, 1974 and the Evacuee Trust 'Properties Management and Disposal Act, 1975 through Constitution Petition No.788 of 1975 which was dismissed TN limit. SSRI Mahan Baja Manobhagir Mangalore challenged two orders dated 22-1-1978 of the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board and the Jolt Secretary was also dismissed summarily by Division Bench of this Court. The two Courts below by misreading the evidence brought on the record have arrived at incorrect conclusion which has resulted in grave injustice. Having come to the conclusion that the two Courts below have misread the evidence brought on record, the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents that the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the Courts below cannot be disturbed in revision are without substance. In the mutant,case, I have come to the conclusion that (the evidence on the record has been misread by the Courts below. Where the misreading of evidence is established, this Court is not only competent, but it is

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): by the Courts below cannot be disturbed in revision are without substance. In the mutant,case, I have come to the conclusion that (the evidence on the record has been misread by the Courts below. Where the misreading of evidence is established, this Court is not only competent, but it is duty bound to interfere with the finding of the Courts below, no matter the finding may relate to the questions of fact. In this view I am fortified by the authorities reported in P LD 1974 SC 22, 1980 SCMR 760, PLD 1980 B.J. 29, P LD 1980 LAH. 484, PLD 1954 Keir. 549 and PLD 1980 Push. 40. Mr. Mujtaba the learned counsel for the applicant has contended that agreement of lease Ex.7 was inadmissible in evidence under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act as well as for proving the nature and character of the respondents’ possession over the disputed property. It has not been and cannot be disputed that Ex.7 being a lease agreement is not admissible in evidence to prove the title of the respondents over the disputed land. The respondents being the plaintiffs are also not entitled to use it under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act. It is well-settled that section 53-A is available only as a defense and cannot be invoked for enforcing right under an unregistered lease. In a case before me the respondents/plaintiffs cannot be said to be in a position of a defendant. According to their own case the Karachi Development Authority acquired the disputed property along with others in 1962. Since these survey numbers were not utilised by the Karachi Development Authority, the respondents/plaintiffs requested to release those survey numbers on the basis of lease but the Karachi Development Authority vide letter No.LAcq/PII/NK/, dated 4-12-1972 informed them to establish its title over the disputed land. The respondents filed a suit for seeking declaration of title to the property in dispute. In my opinion, therefore the respondents/plaintiffs cannot use the unregistered lease Ex.7 under section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act in support of the title. J An argument was put forward on behalf of respondent that though this contract to lease had not been registered, the respondents can clam relief under it in view of the provisions of section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act. In my opinion, this argument proceeds on an incorrect interpretation of section 53-A, because that section is only meant to bring about a bar against enforcement of rights by a lessor in respect of property which the lessee had already taken possession, but does not give any right to the lessee to claim any right on the basis of unregistered lease. Section 53-A is only available as a defense to a lessee and not as conferring a right on the basis of which the lessee can claim rights. In the result, accepting this revision, I hereby set aside the judgments and decrees of the two Courts below and dismiss

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 905?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 905 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-08-05): unregistered lease. Section 53-A is only available as a defense to a lessee and not as conferring a right on the basis of which the lessee can claim rights. In the result, accepting this revision, I hereby set aside the judgments and decrees of the two Courts below and dismiss the plaintiffs' suit. In view of the nature of the case and the point involved, however, I make no order as to costs. t' Petition.com

Question: What is case 1985 CLC 1422 about?
Answer: Case 1985 CLC 1422 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-12-12. The case involved MUHAMMAD ALI—PETITIONERRVERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF BVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS.22 K 3-A. The case was heard by MUNAWAR ALI KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 CLC 1422?
Answer: In case 1985 CLC 1422, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF BVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS.22 K 3-A. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-12-12.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 CLC 1422?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 CLC 1422 were: AHMED SAEED QURESHI FOR PETITIONER. RAMEHAND RANGWANI FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: MUNAWAR ALI KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 CLC 1422?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 CLC 1422 were: MUHAMMAD ALI—PETITIONERRVERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 CLC 1422.
Answer: This constitution petition has arisen from the facts and circumstances which are briefly stated as follows. The controversy between the parties is over a residential house bearing No.LA/11 situating in Moro, District Nawabshah. The disputed house originally belonged w. to Lethal, who sold the same to his brother Neural under a registered sale-deed dated 26-1-1931. On death of Neural the said house devolved on MST. Romani Bai his widow and Requital, his son. Follow mg the establishment of Pakistan the disputed house was treated as evacuee property and was ultimately acquired by the Central Government along with other evacuee properties under section 3, Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. On such acquisition the evacuee interest in the said property was extinguished and vested TN the Government free from all charges and encumbrances. On application of the petitioner the said house was transferred to him and P.T.D, dated 12- 3-1970 was issued in his favor. Meanwhile on 6-1-1965 Requital who had inherited the house in dispute from his father and who is since deceased, made an application to the Deputy Settlement Commissioner Nawab Shah for deletion of the House No.-A/69 situating at Moro from the auction LST, thinking the said house to be the same he had inherited from his father. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner by his order dated 17-5-1967 deleted the house from the auction list as being non-evacuee property. Subsequently it transpired that the correct number of the disputed house was 1-A/IL and not LA/69. Accordingly deceased Requital once again approached the Deputy Settlement Commissioner for the necessary rectification. This time the Deputy Settlement Commissioner refused to oblige him. He, therefore, took the matter in appeal to the Additional Settlement Commissioner who while dismissing the appeal directed that the Custodian authorities be moved for the desired relief’ Thereafter application was made by Requital and his mother to the Deputy Custodian Khairpur Division at Sukkur for declaration that the house bear mg No. 1-A/IL be declared as non evacuee property. By his order dated 8-2-1977 the Deputy Custodian allowed the application, declaring that the property No. A/11 was non evacuee property belonging to the applicants aforesaid. This order was confirmed by the Custodian vide his order dated 29-11-1973. As the case file was not traceable the petitioner, despite his best efforts could not get a copy of the impugned orders until he was informed by letter dated 28-11-1974 that the file relating to the case was in the Office of the Custodian Evacuee Property. On receipt of such intimation he could obtain the certified copy only in November 1974. Thereafter he fell ill and was w. 1422. HTML confined to bed for about 2 months. On his recovery he lost no time to file the present petition No. with prayer that the order of the Deputy Custodian dated 8-2-1974 and that of Custodian dated 28-11-1973, declaring the disputed house as non-evacuee property be set aside as being without lawful authority and of no legal effect. After hearing the learned counsel for the parties the petition was allowed with no order as to costs by short order dated 10-12- 1984 for reasons to be recorded separately. Following are the reasons in support of the short order. The learned counsel for the petitioner has assailed the impugned orders on the following grounds:—. (1) That the said orders were passed without giving notice to the petitioner. (2) That said orders are based on wrong assumption of facts that the disputed house has not been transferred to any ones. (3) That the disputed house was treated as evacuee property prior to 23rd September 1958 and as such in view of S.3-A, Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act 1957 it could not be declared as non-evacuee property. (4) That while passing the impugned orders, neither Deputy Custodian nor Custodian has taken into consideration the impact of section 3-A referred to above on the merits of the cases. Taking up the first objection of the learned counsel for the petitioner that no notice was given to the petitioner before passing of the impugned orders, it may be pointed out that according to principle of natural justice no one can be condemned unheard. Therefore no order adverse to person or property of anybody can be passed without giving him an opportunity of hearing. In the mutant case the petitioner has produced two documents, namely, a true copy of Inquiry Form (Annexure-1 A!) from the Custodian's record showing that he has been in occupation of the disputed house since August 1948 and P.T.D. (Annexure-1 B!) disclosed that the house in dispute has been permanently settled on him, and he has become owner of the same. Thus, the petitioner is not only shown to be occupying the house in dispute, but he has also acquired proprietary rights in the said house. 1422 HTML Therefore before passing of the impugned orders which obviously affected his rights in the said house, the petitioner was entitled to notice. 1] The learned counsel for the private respondents argued that since the petitioner is shown to be a party MN the impugned orders it is presumed that notice must have been issued to him. He further submitted that the objection with regard to notice is belated, and it cannot be permitted to be raised at this stage. No doubt the petitioner is cited as a party in both the impugned orders. However there is absolutely no indication in either of the orders that notice was issued to the petitioner or in response to any such notice he or his counsel had appeared. Accordingly it would not be safe to draw presumption from bare mention of the petitioner's name in the title of the orders that notice must have been issued to him. It is true that want of notice has not been taken as a ground in the memo, of the petition. In my opinion mere omission to mention he notices in the petition does not justify prohibiting the learned counsel for the petitioner from raising the objection with regard to notice in course of his arguments. Whether the petitioner was given notice or not before passing of the impugned order is an important issue having great bearing on decision of the case. If it were proved that the impugned orders were passed without giving notice to the petitioner, the said orders could be struck down as being without lawful authority even on the solitary ground of want of notice. Therefore it would neither be just nor proper to place a bar on raising of that question in course of his arguments. As stated above there is absolutely no evidence to rebut the argument raised on behalf of the petitioner that no notice was given to him before passing of the impugned orders. As for the next argument that the impugned orders are based on wrong premise of facts, TT Is pertinent to refer to the relevant portion of the Deputy Custodian's order, dated 8-2- 1973. It reads as under— ' "It TS also proved from the record received from the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Nawabshah that the property No.|-A/II is not in dispute as the same has not been transferred to anyone.” Obviously the factual position stated above in the Deputy Custodian's order is not is conformity with actual facts. The fact of the matter is that the house in dispute had been transferred to the petitioner long ago under the P. T. D. dated 12-3-1970. w. Thus, the learned Deputy Custodian while passing the impugned order seems to have been influenced by wrong statement of facts that the house in dispute has not been transferred to anyone. Therefore, his order is defective also on the above ground. The last point that needs to be considered is whether the disputed house was treated as evacuee property before 23-9-1958 and if so what is the effect of S.3-A of Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act 1957 on such treatment of the property. It appears that section 3-A was introduced by an Amending Act promulgated on 23-9-1958. It reads as under:- Notwithstanding anything contamed in this Act, no person or property treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the commencement of the' Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) (Amendment) Act, 1958, shall be declared to be non-evacuee or, as the case may be non-evacuee property, on or after such commencement. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply to any evacuee in respect of whom or to any evacuee property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before such commencement as aforesaid for treating such evacuee as non-evacuee or such evacuee property as non-evacuee property”. As required by subsection (1) of above section the property which has been treated as evacuee property immediately before 23- 9-1958 on which the above section was introduced by an amendment, cannot be declared as non-evacuee after the said amendment. Since the power to declare any property as evacuee or non-evacuee vests in Custodian under section 22 of the 1957 Act, it is for the Custodian to consider whether the property in question has been treated as evacuee property prior to the date of the amendment of 1957 Act referred to above and whether such property could be declared as non-evacuee after coming into force of the said amendment. On perusal of the impugned orders, it appears that neither the Deputy Custodian nor Custodian has discussed the case from that angle. Not even a casual reference has been made by them m their orders to the treatment of the disputed property as evacuee property and the effect of section.3-A referred to above on such treatment of the property. For that purpose the aforesaid authorities have also not considered the two important documents produced by the petitioner in this case, one showing the petitioner's possession of the disputed house since August 1948 and the other disclosing the transfer! of the said house to him on permanent basis. - For above reasons the impugned orders passed by the Deputy Custodian and 1422 HTML Custodian are without lawful authority and of no legal effect and as such both the orders are hereby set aside. The case is however remanded to the custodian, Evacuee Properties Sind, Karachi for fresh decision, after giving reasonable opportunity of harem to the parties including the petitioner and keeping in view the exceptions taken to the impugned orders as discussed MN the forego mg paragraphs. Case remanded

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1422?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1422 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-12): This constitution petition has arisen from the facts and circumstances which are briefly stated as follows. The controversy between the parties is over a residential house bearing No.LA/11 situating in Moro, District Nawabshah. The disputed house originally belonged w. to Lethal, who sold the same to his brother Neural under a registered sale-deed dated 26-1-1931. On death of Neural the said house devolved on MST. Romani Bai his widow and Requital, his son. Follow mg the establishment of Pakistan the disputed house was treated as evacuee property and was ultimately acquired by the Central Government along with other evacuee properties under section 3, Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. On such acquisition the evacuee interest in the said property was extinguished and vested TN the Government free from all charges and encumbrances. On application of the petitioner the said house was transferred to him and P.T.D, dated 12- 3-1970 was issued in his favor. Meanwhile on 6-1-1965 Requital who had inherited the house in dispute from his father and who is since deceased, made an application to the Deputy Settlement Commissioner Nawab Shah for deletion of the House No.-A/69 situating at Moro from the auction LST, thinking the said house to be the same he had inherited from his father. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner by his order dated 17-5-1967 deleted the house from the auction list as being non-evacuee property. Subsequently it transpired that the correct number of the disputed house was 1-A/IL and not LA/69. Accordingly deceased Requital once again approached the Deputy Settlement Commissioner for the necessary rectification. This time the Deputy Settlement Commissioner refused to oblige him. He, therefore, took the matter in appeal to the Additional Settlement Commissioner who while dismissing the appeal directed that the Custodian authorities be moved for the desired relief’ Thereafter application was made by Requital and his mother to the Deputy Custodian Khairpur Division at Sukkur for declaration that the house bear mg No. 1-A/IL be declared as non evacuee property. By his order dated 8-2-1977 the Deputy Custodian allowed the application, declaring that the property No. A/11 was non evacuee property belonging to the applicants aforesaid. This order was confirmed by the Custodian vide his order dated 29-11-1973. As the case file was not traceable the petitioner, despite his best efforts could not get a copy of the impugned orders until he was informed by letter dated 28-11-1974 that the file relating to the case was in the Office of the Custodian Evacuee Property. On receipt of such intimation he could obtain the certified copy only in November 1974. Thereafter he fell ill and was w. 1422. HTML confined to bed for about 2 months. On his recovery he lost no time to file the present petition No. with prayer that the order of the Deputy Custodian dated 8-2-1974 and that of Custodian dated 28-11-1973, declaring the disputed house as non-evacuee property be set aside as being without lawful authority and of no legal effect. After hearing the learned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1422?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1422 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-12): lost no time to file the present petition No. with prayer that the order of the Deputy Custodian dated 8-2-1974 and that of Custodian dated 28-11-1973, declaring the disputed house as non-evacuee property be set aside as being without lawful authority and of no legal effect. After hearing the learned counsel for the parties the petition was allowed with no order as to costs by short order dated 10-12- 1984 for reasons to be recorded separately. Following are the reasons in support of the short order. The learned counsel for the petitioner has assailed the impugned orders on the following grounds:—. (1) That the said orders were passed without giving notice to the petitioner. (2) That said orders are based on wrong assumption of facts that the disputed house has not been transferred to any ones. (3) That the disputed house was treated as evacuee property prior to 23rd September 1958 and as such in view of S.3-A, Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act 1957 it could not be declared as non-evacuee property. (4) That while passing the impugned orders, neither Deputy Custodian nor Custodian has taken into consideration the impact of section 3-A referred to above on the merits of the cases. Taking up the first objection of the learned counsel for the petitioner that no notice was given to the petitioner before passing of the impugned orders, it may be pointed out that according to principle of natural justice no one can be condemned unheard. Therefore no order adverse to person or property of anybody can be passed without giving him an opportunity of hearing. In the mutant case the petitioner has produced two documents, namely, a true copy of Inquiry Form (Annexure-1 A!) from the Custodian's record showing that he has been in occupation of the disputed house since August 1948 and P.T.D. (Annexure-1 B!) disclosed that the house in dispute has been permanently settled on him, and he has become owner of the same. Thus, the petitioner is not only shown to be occupying the house in dispute, but he has also acquired proprietary rights in the said house. 1422 HTML Therefore before passing of the impugned orders which obviously affected his rights in the said house, the petitioner was entitled to notice. 1] The learned counsel for the private respondents argued that since the petitioner is shown to be a party MN the impugned orders it is presumed that notice must have been issued to him. He further submitted that the objection with regard to notice is belated, and it cannot be permitted to be raised at this stage. No doubt the petitioner is cited as a party in both the impugned orders. However there is absolutely no indication in either of the orders that notice was issued to the petitioner or in response to any such notice he or his counsel had appeared. Accordingly it would not be safe to draw presumption from bare mention of the petitioner's name in the title of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1422?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1422 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-12): is absolutely no indication in either of the orders that notice was issued to the petitioner or in response to any such notice he or his counsel had appeared. Accordingly it would not be safe to draw presumption from bare mention of the petitioner's name in the title of the orders that notice must have been issued to him. It is true that want of notice has not been taken as a ground in the memo, of the petition. In my opinion mere omission to mention he notices in the petition does not justify prohibiting the learned counsel for the petitioner from raising the objection with regard to notice in course of his arguments. Whether the petitioner was given notice or not before passing of the impugned order is an important issue having great bearing on decision of the case. If it were proved that the impugned orders were passed without giving notice to the petitioner, the said orders could be struck down as being without lawful authority even on the solitary ground of want of notice. Therefore it would neither be just nor proper to place a bar on raising of that question in course of his arguments. As stated above there is absolutely no evidence to rebut the argument raised on behalf of the petitioner that no notice was given to him before passing of the impugned orders. As for the next argument that the impugned orders are based on wrong premise of facts, TT Is pertinent to refer to the relevant portion of the Deputy Custodian's order, dated 8-2- 1973. It reads as under— ' "It TS also proved from the record received from the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Nawabshah that the property No.|-A/II is not in dispute as the same has not been transferred to anyone.” Obviously the factual position stated above in the Deputy Custodian's order is not is conformity with actual facts. The fact of the matter is that the house in dispute had been transferred to the petitioner long ago under the P. T. D. dated 12-3-1970. w. Thus, the learned Deputy Custodian while passing the impugned order seems to have been influenced by wrong statement of facts that the house in dispute has not been transferred to anyone. Therefore, his order is defective also on the above ground. The last point that needs to be considered is whether the disputed house was treated as evacuee property before 23-9-1958 and if so what is the effect of S.3-A of Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act 1957 on such treatment of the property. It appears that section 3-A was introduced by an Amending Act promulgated on 23-9-1958. It reads as under:- Notwithstanding anything contamed in this Act, no person or property treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the commencement of the' Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) (Amendment) Act, 1958, shall be declared to be non-evacuee or, as the case may be non-evacuee property, on or after such commencement. (2) Nothing in subsection

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 1422?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 1422 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-12-12): this Act, no person or property treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the commencement of the' Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) (Amendment) Act, 1958, shall be declared to be non-evacuee or, as the case may be non-evacuee property, on or after such commencement. (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall apply to any evacuee in respect of whom or to any evacuee property in respect of which any action has commenced or any proceedings are pending immediately before such commencement as aforesaid for treating such evacuee as non-evacuee or such evacuee property as non-evacuee property”. As required by subsection (1) of above section the property which has been treated as evacuee property immediately before 23- 9-1958 on which the above section was introduced by an amendment, cannot be declared as non-evacuee after the said amendment. Since the power to declare any property as evacuee or non-evacuee vests in Custodian under section 22 of the 1957 Act, it is for the Custodian to consider whether the property in question has been treated as evacuee property prior to the date of the amendment of 1957 Act referred to above and whether such property could be declared as non-evacuee after coming into force of the said amendment. On perusal of the impugned orders, it appears that neither the Deputy Custodian nor Custodian has discussed the case from that angle. Not even a casual reference has been made by them m their orders to the treatment of the disputed property as evacuee property and the effect of section.3-A referred to above on such treatment of the property. For that purpose the aforesaid authorities have also not considered the two important documents produced by the petitioner in this case, one showing the petitioner's possession of the disputed house since August 1948 and the other disclosing the transfer! of the said house to him on permanent basis. - For above reasons the impugned orders passed by the Deputy Custodian and 1422 HTML Custodian are without lawful authority and of no legal effect and as such both the orders are hereby set aside. The case is however remanded to the custodian, Evacuee Properties Sind, Karachi for fresh decision, after giving reasonable opportunity of harem to the parties including the petitioner and keeping in view the exceptions taken to the impugned orders as discussed MN the forego mg paragraphs. Case remanded

Question: What is case 1985 CLC 689 about?
Answer: Case 1985 CLC 689 was decided by AZAD J K] on 1984-05-17. The case involved BASHIR AHMAD FAROOQI AND OTHERS—PETITIONERSVERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY. MUZAFFARABADAND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.18-A (3) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) RULES, 1950 - R.31 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.18-A(2) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT. (VIII OF 1974) - 8.42 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE (XXXVIII OF 1980) - S.4(6) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_689.html 1/8 28/10/2025, 01:42 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_689.htm!. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD ASHRAF KHANY.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: In case 1985 CLC 689, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.18-A (3) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) RULES, 1950 - R.31 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.18-A(2) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT. (VIII OF 1974) - 8.42 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE (XXXVIII OF 1980) - S.4(6) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_689.html 1/8 28/10/2025, 01:42 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1985_689.htm!. This case was heard in AZAD J K] and decided on 1984-05-17.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 CLC 689 were: PETITIONER IN PERSON. MANZOOR-UL-HASSAN FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD ASHRAF KHANY.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 CLC 689 were: BASHIR AHMAD FAROOQI AND OTHERS—PETITIONERSVERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY. MUZAFFARABADAND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in AZAD J K].

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 CLC 689.
Answer: In this constitutional writ petition, the petitioners have called in question the validity of the orders of the Custodian Evacuee Property respondent No.|, dated 14-12-1980, 17-2- 1981 and 30-11-1981. The brief facts as alleged by the petitioners forming background to the filing of the present writ petition are that the evacuee land measuring 12 Canals and 2 Marla's out of Survey No.21 min. and 3 Canals out of survey No.20 min. situate in village Khamdhrang, Thesis and District Muzaffarabad which stood allotted in the names of the petitioners was acquired by the Government for the Army through an award No. made by the Collector Land Acquisition Muzaffarabad on 14-5-1980. Rs.2,50,470 and Rs.62,100 were respectively awarded as compensation of the aforesaid land whereupon the petitioners made an application to the Collector Land Acquisition for the payment of whole of the said amount of compensation on the ground that on the promulgation of Ordinance No.XXXVIII of 1980, known as Evacuee Property Ordinance, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as Ordinance of 1980) and on the insertion of Rule 31 in the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950 (hereinafter called as evacuee property rules) by Notification No.454/ Red./80, dated 13-3-1980, they had become full-fledged owners of the said land and had ceased to be its allottees. The Collector Land Acquisition sent the above application of the petitioners to the Custodian for his perusal and asked for his guidance through a letter dated 30-9-1980. The Custodian in reply to the aforesaid letter, directed the Collector Land Acquisition to remit the amount of compensation to him for distribution to the allottees of their shares. The Collector complied with the order of the Custodian who on receiving the amount of compensation, paid 2/3rd of the same to the petitioners vide his order dated 14-12-1980. The petitioners submitted declaration in the prescribed form for the grant of the proprietary rights of the evacuee land allotted to them including the land acquired by the Government to the concerned authority whereupon the Rehabilitation Commissioner issued the entitlement certificate of the said property in their favor on 22-9-1980 in terms of subsection (3) of section 18A of the Administration of the Evacuee Property Act which had been served through an Ordinance of 1980. The learned Custodian refused to grant proprietary rights to the petitioners in respect of the land acquired by the Government, vide his order dated 17- 2-1981. The petitioners filed a revision petition before the Division Bench of the High Court against the aforesaid order of the Custodian but the same was vacated by the Custodian during the pendency of the said revision petition vide his order, dated 13-11-1982 and directed the Rehabilitation Commissioner to make further inquiry in the matter. w Feeling aggrieved by the above orders of the Custodian, the petitioners have filed the present writ wherein their validity has been challenged, and it is prayed that they may be declared to have been made without lawful authority and are of no legal effect and to direct the Custodian to pay full amount of compensation awarded for the land acquired by the Government to the petitioners and to grant its proprietary rights to him. I have heard the arguments addressed by Mr. B. A. Farooqi, Advocate in his capacity as one of the petitioners as well as the counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Manzoor-ul-Hassan Gillan, standing counsel for the Custodian and have also gone through the relevant record. Mr. B.A. Farooq}, has, first, assailed two orders of the learned Custodian dated 14- 12-1980, copies of which are Annexures !D! and FE! with the petition, whereby 2/3rd share of the compensation money awarded for the land allotted to the petitioners but acquired by the Government, was paid to the petitioners and the renaming V/3rd was retained in the Custodian fund. The above orders have been challenged on the ground that Custodian had no power to deduct I/3rd compensation amount of the aforesaid land as on the promulgation of Ordinance XXXVIII of 1980 and insertion of Rule 31 m the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950, by a Notification No.454/Reh./8G, dated 13-3-1980, have become full-fledged owners of the said land. To elaborate his above contention, it was argued that section 18-A(1) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Ordinance, 1980 inserted in the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 by the aforesaid Ordinance envisages that the allottees holding allotments of evacuee property in Azad, Jammu and Kashmir shall enjoy the proprietary rights in respect of such property and that under Rule 31 added in the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950, the grant of proprietary rights is to take effect from the date of enforcement of Ordinance XXXVIII of 1980, in case of allotment made before the aforesaid Ordinance and in case of allotment made after the aforesaid Ordinance shall take effect from the date of the allotment. It was further argued that new Rule 31 which replaced old Rule 31 referred to above, is not attracted in the case of the petitioners as the same was not published in the official Gazette on the. 24th of August, 1980 but after about more than one year from the said date during the pendency of the writ petition of the petitioner. It was further argued that under section 16 of the Land Acquisition Act* the title in the land acquired by the Government, out of the land allotted to the petitioner, shall vest in the Government from the date the Government takes its possession and since the possession of the aforesaid land is still with the petitioners, the same has not vested in the Government as yet, with the result that the petitioners are entitled to receive the whole amount of compensation awarded for it by the Collector. To support his above view, he has referred to PLD 1972 LAH. 458. The learned counsel for the respondents has, on the other hand, contended that the petitioners had not become the owners of the land acquired by the Government either on the promulgation of the Ordinance or on the insertion of the aforesaid Rule 31 and were only the allottees of the said land as yet because the proprietary rights of the said land have not been granted to them by the Custodian so far and, therefore, the Custodian was, perfectly justified in giving them only 2/3rd share out of compensation amount of the land acquired by the Government. It was also contended by him that old Rule 31 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules of 1950 has been replaced by new Rule 31 under which the grant of proprietary rights shall take effect from the date of issuance of the proprietary rights. It was also contended by him that old Rule 31 was void, being in conflict with section 18-A of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act under which the ownership in the evacuee land vested in its allottee on the date of grant of proprietary rights transfer order m respect of it by the Custodian. After giving my due consideration to the arguments addressed at the bar by the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case as well as the relevant provisions of law. I am of the opinion that contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners were entitled to be paid the whole amount of compensation money awarded by the Collector for the land acquired by the Government, has no substance in it. It is not correct to contend that on the mere promulgation of Ordinance of 1980, an allottee of the evacuee property becomes its owner and ceases to be its allottee. The relevant provisions of section 18-A(1) on the basis of which, it has been contended by Mr.B.A. Farooqi, that the petitioners had become the owners of the property allotted to them read as follows: I "Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force and subject to the provision of the next following subsection the allottees holding allotment of evacuee property m Azad Jammu and Kashmir shall enjoy the proprietary rights in respect of such property so, however, that such allottee, and every other person to whom any such property is transferred by the allottee whether by way of sale, gift, mortgage or otherwise, shall hold the property subject to the condition that, if the owner of such property shall return to Azad Jammu and Kashmir at the time when a plebiscite is about to be, Boris. being, held m the State of Jammu and Kashmir in accord CE with the U.N.C.LP. Resolution of the fifth day of January, 1949, and shall claim the property, the allottee or other person holding that property, shall surrender, the property in favor of the person who is declared to be the rightful owner by the Custodian paying to the allottee or transferee the cost of any improvement made in the property." The bare reading of the provisions of the section reproduced above would show that the allottees holding allotments of evacuee property m Azad Jammu and Kashmir shall enjoy the proprietary rights in respect of such property subject to the next following subsections of the said section. Subsection(2) of the said section reads as under:- "The proprietary rights in pursuance. Of subsection (1) shall be granted by the Custodian to every allottee after realizing from such allottee the cost and other dues prescribed by the rules, in the form of 'Proprietary Rights Transferred Order' on the certificate of entitlement from the Rehabilitation Commissioner." V- The provisions of law reproduced above when read together, amount to this that allottee of the evacuee property shall enjoy its proprietary rights when proprietary rights transfer order in respect of it is issued by the Custodian and not before that. In view of this legal position, the proprietary rights of the evacuee land allotted to the petitioners but acquired by the Government are not as yet vested in the petitioners because it is undisputed that the Custodian had not so far granted such rights to the petitioners by issuing proprietary rights transfer order MN respect of it. Similarly, old Rule 31 is of no avail to the petitioners in contending that by virtue of it they had become the owners of the evacuee property which stood allotted o them. This rule only contemplates that the grant of proprietary rights shall take effect from the date of enforcement of Ordinance XXXVIII of 1980 in case of allotment made before the aforesaid Ordinance and does not become its owner. This Rule shall come into play after the proprietary rights are granted by the Custodian to an allottee of the evacuee property under subsection (2) of section 18-A of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee)! Property Act and, therefore, the question-of its application does not arise before such grant of. proprietary nights transfer order. The proprietary nights grant order in respect of the evacuee property allotted to the petitioner has not been issued by the Custodian so far, and as such I am unable to appreciate the contention of Mr.B.A. Farooq* that after the addition of Rule 31 of Rules, 1950, the petitioners were no longer allottees of the land but were its owners, entitled to receive the whole amount of compensation money awarded by the Collector on its acquisition by the Government. By no stretch of imagination, it can be held that the section of Rule 31 impliedly repealed sections 3 of Evacuee Property Allottees (Compensation) Order of 1967, under which an allottee of an evacuee property is entitled to be paid only 2/3rd share out of the compensation money awarded to the Custodian by the Collector on acquisition of the same by the Government in execution of the development schemes. I The repeal of the said section of the Order, shall be considered to have taken place by implication only if the aforesaid Rule TS found to be inconsistent with and repugnant to it but to me, there appears no inconsistency or repugnance between the two mas much as the Rule comes into play only on the issuance of proprietary rights transfer order of the evacuee land in favor of its allottee by the Custodian and not before that. It needs hardly any mention that the question of giving affect to the proprietary rights from certain date, either under old Rule 31 or under new Rule 31 arises only if such proprietary rights have been given by the Custodian but a thing which is non-existent, cannot be given any effect from any particular date. In this view of the matter the arguments of Mr. B.A. Farooq that on the promulgation of Ordinance and by section of Rule 31 in the Rule of 1950, the petitioners have become the owners of the land in question and as such, entitled to the whole amount of its compensation or that the aforesaid order of 1967 stood impliedly repealed, do not hold good. J Next Mr. B. A. Farooqji, has assailed the impugned orders of the Custodian dated 17th of February, 1981, whereby he had refused to grant proprietary rights to the petitioners in respect of the land acquired by the Government and referred to above. In this connection TT is contended that under subsection (2) of section 18-A of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, the Custodian was bound to grant the proprietary rights of the land including the land acquired by the Government and allotted to the petitioners as the certificate of entitlement had been issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner, in other words his contention is that the Custodian had no alternative but to issue the proprietary rights transfer order in respect of the land allotted to the petitioners after the certificate of entitlement had been issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner without commenting upon the merits of the above contention, it would suffice to say that declaration sought for, on the basis of the above contention cannot be granted for the simple reason that the aforesaid order of the Custodian stood vacated by the Custodian by way of review of his order, vide order dated 30th of November, 1981. The order which has been vacated cannot be made the subject of challenge in the writ petition nor any other relief in respect of RT can be granted to the petitioner. Even otherwise, such an order, by the Custodian, refusing to grant proprietary rights to an allottee of the evacuee property, has been made revisable by the Division Bench of this Court under subsection (5) of section of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Ordinance of 1980 with the result that in presence of above remedy available to the person aggrieved of by such an order, no writ is maintainable against it before first availing of that remedy. In the last Mr. B. A. Farooqi, has challenged the legality of the order of the Custodian made on 13th of November, 1980, whereby he, vacating his previous order dated 7th of February, 1981, sent back the case to the Rehabilitation Commissioner for necessary action. The above order has been assailed by Mr.B.A. Farooq on two-fold grounds, namely, that the learned Custodian had no power to pass the same as he did not possess the power of review under law and secondly, that he was not competent to remand the case to the Rehabilitation Commissioner for further inquiry because he was under legal obligation under section 18-A(2) to grant the proprietary rights transfer order of the land in respect of which, certificate of entitlement had been issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. I also do not find any force in this argument of Mr. B. A. Farooqi and in my view, the above order of the Custodian does not provide any cause for grievance to the petitioners. In the first place, it is not correct to contend that the learned Custodian does not enjoy the power to review his own order because he is empowered to Io so by virtue of subsection (6) of section of the Ordinance of 1980 and the only condition to be fulfilled before he reviews his order is that he is required to give notice to the parties likely to be affected by TT. In this case, no notice was required to be given to the petitioners as the order under question did not adversely affect them which, rather favored them mas much as the order refusing to grant proprietary rights to the petitioners of the land acquired by the Government was vacated. Even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments that this order amounts to refusal to grant the proprietary rights of the land allotted to the petitioners, then the remedy of the petitioners against it, does not LE in challenging it in write petition but in presenting revision petition against it before the Division Bench of this Court, as provided for in subsection (5) of section of the Ordinance of 1980. For the forego mg reasons, I find no substance in this writ petition which appears to be premature in respect of some reliefs sought for in it and accordingly, the same is dismissed with no order as to, the costs. Petition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 689 (AZAD J K], 1984-05-17): In this constitutional writ petition, the petitioners have called in question the validity of the orders of the Custodian Evacuee Property respondent No.|, dated 14-12-1980, 17-2- 1981 and 30-11-1981. The brief facts as alleged by the petitioners forming background to the filing of the present writ petition are that the evacuee land measuring 12 Canals and 2 Marla's out of Survey No.21 min. and 3 Canals out of survey No.20 min. situate in village Khamdhrang, Thesis and District Muzaffarabad which stood allotted in the names of the petitioners was acquired by the Government for the Army through an award No. made by the Collector Land Acquisition Muzaffarabad on 14-5-1980. Rs.2,50,470 and Rs.62,100 were respectively awarded as compensation of the aforesaid land whereupon the petitioners made an application to the Collector Land Acquisition for the payment of whole of the said amount of compensation on the ground that on the promulgation of Ordinance No.XXXVIII of 1980, known as Evacuee Property Ordinance, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as Ordinance of 1980) and on the insertion of Rule 31 in the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950 (hereinafter called as evacuee property rules) by Notification No.454/ Red./80, dated 13-3-1980, they had become full-fledged owners of the said land and had ceased to be its allottees. The Collector Land Acquisition sent the above application of the petitioners to the Custodian for his perusal and asked for his guidance through a letter dated 30-9-1980. The Custodian in reply to the aforesaid letter, directed the Collector Land Acquisition to remit the amount of compensation to him for distribution to the allottees of their shares. The Collector complied with the order of the Custodian who on receiving the amount of compensation, paid 2/3rd of the same to the petitioners vide his order dated 14-12-1980. The petitioners submitted declaration in the prescribed form for the grant of the proprietary rights of the evacuee land allotted to them including the land acquired by the Government to the concerned authority whereupon the Rehabilitation Commissioner issued the entitlement certificate of the said property in their favor on 22-9-1980 in terms of subsection (3) of section 18A of the Administration of the Evacuee Property Act which had been served through an Ordinance of 1980. The learned Custodian refused to grant proprietary rights to the petitioners in respect of the land acquired by the Government, vide his order dated 17- 2-1981. The petitioners filed a revision petition before the Division Bench of the High Court against the aforesaid order of the Custodian but the same was vacated by the Custodian during the pendency of the said revision petition vide his order, dated 13-11-1982 and directed the Rehabilitation Commissioner to make further inquiry in the matter. w Feeling aggrieved by the above orders of the Custodian, the petitioners have filed the present writ wherein their validity has been challenged, and it is prayed that they may be declared to have been made without lawful authority and are of no legal effect and to direct the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 689 (AZAD J K], 1984-05-17): matter. w Feeling aggrieved by the above orders of the Custodian, the petitioners have filed the present writ wherein their validity has been challenged, and it is prayed that they may be declared to have been made without lawful authority and are of no legal effect and to direct the Custodian to pay full amount of compensation awarded for the land acquired by the Government to the petitioners and to grant its proprietary rights to him. I have heard the arguments addressed by Mr. B. A. Farooqi, Advocate in his capacity as one of the petitioners as well as the counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Manzoor-ul-Hassan Gillan, standing counsel for the Custodian and have also gone through the relevant record. Mr. B.A. Farooq}, has, first, assailed two orders of the learned Custodian dated 14- 12-1980, copies of which are Annexures !D! and FE! with the petition, whereby 2/3rd share of the compensation money awarded for the land allotted to the petitioners but acquired by the Government, was paid to the petitioners and the renaming V/3rd was retained in the Custodian fund. The above orders have been challenged on the ground that Custodian had no power to deduct I/3rd compensation amount of the aforesaid land as on the promulgation of Ordinance XXXVIII of 1980 and insertion of Rule 31 m the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950, by a Notification No.454/Reh./8G, dated 13-3-1980, have become full-fledged owners of the said land. To elaborate his above contention, it was argued that section 18-A(1) of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Ordinance, 1980 inserted in the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 by the aforesaid Ordinance envisages that the allottees holding allotments of evacuee property in Azad, Jammu and Kashmir shall enjoy the proprietary rights in respect of such property and that under Rule 31 added in the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950, the grant of proprietary rights is to take effect from the date of enforcement of Ordinance XXXVIII of 1980, in case of allotment made before the aforesaid Ordinance and in case of allotment made after the aforesaid Ordinance shall take effect from the date of the allotment. It was further argued that new Rule 31 which replaced old Rule 31 referred to above, is not attracted in the case of the petitioners as the same was not published in the official Gazette on the. 24th of August, 1980 but after about more than one year from the said date during the pendency of the writ petition of the petitioner. It was further argued that under section 16 of the Land Acquisition Act* the title in the land acquired by the Government, out of the land allotted to the petitioner, shall vest in the Government from the date the Government takes its possession and since the possession of the aforesaid land is still with the petitioners, the same has not vested in the Government as yet, with the result that the petitioners are entitled to receive

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 689 (AZAD J K], 1984-05-17): allotted to the petitioner, shall vest in the Government from the date the Government takes its possession and since the possession of the aforesaid land is still with the petitioners, the same has not vested in the Government as yet, with the result that the petitioners are entitled to receive the whole amount of compensation awarded for it by the Collector. To support his above view, he has referred to PLD 1972 LAH. 458. The learned counsel for the respondents has, on the other hand, contended that the petitioners had not become the owners of the land acquired by the Government either on the promulgation of the Ordinance or on the insertion of the aforesaid Rule 31 and were only the allottees of the said land as yet because the proprietary rights of the said land have not been granted to them by the Custodian so far and, therefore, the Custodian was, perfectly justified in giving them only 2/3rd share out of compensation amount of the land acquired by the Government. It was also contended by him that old Rule 31 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules of 1950 has been replaced by new Rule 31 under which the grant of proprietary rights shall take effect from the date of issuance of the proprietary rights. It was also contended by him that old Rule 31 was void, being in conflict with section 18-A of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act under which the ownership in the evacuee land vested in its allottee on the date of grant of proprietary rights transfer order m respect of it by the Custodian. After giving my due consideration to the arguments addressed at the bar by the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case as well as the relevant provisions of law. I am of the opinion that contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners were entitled to be paid the whole amount of compensation money awarded by the Collector for the land acquired by the Government, has no substance in it. It is not correct to contend that on the mere promulgation of Ordinance of 1980, an allottee of the evacuee property becomes its owner and ceases to be its allottee. The relevant provisions of section 18-A(1) on the basis of which, it has been contended by Mr.B.A. Farooqi, that the petitioners had become the owners of the property allotted to them read as follows: I "Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force and subject to the provision of the next following subsection the allottees holding allotment of evacuee property m Azad Jammu and Kashmir shall enjoy the proprietary rights in respect of such property so, however, that such allottee, and every other person to whom any such property is transferred by the allottee whether by way of sale, gift, mortgage or otherwise, shall hold the property subject to the condition that, if the owner of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 689 (AZAD J K], 1984-05-17): enjoy the proprietary rights in respect of such property so, however, that such allottee, and every other person to whom any such property is transferred by the allottee whether by way of sale, gift, mortgage or otherwise, shall hold the property subject to the condition that, if the owner of such property shall return to Azad Jammu and Kashmir at the time when a plebiscite is about to be, Boris. being, held m the State of Jammu and Kashmir in accord CE with the U.N.C.LP. Resolution of the fifth day of January, 1949, and shall claim the property, the allottee or other person holding that property, shall surrender, the property in favor of the person who is declared to be the rightful owner by the Custodian paying to the allottee or transferee the cost of any improvement made in the property." The bare reading of the provisions of the section reproduced above would show that the allottees holding allotments of evacuee property m Azad Jammu and Kashmir shall enjoy the proprietary rights in respect of such property subject to the next following subsections of the said section. Subsection(2) of the said section reads as under:- "The proprietary rights in pursuance. Of subsection (1) shall be granted by the Custodian to every allottee after realizing from such allottee the cost and other dues prescribed by the rules, in the form of 'Proprietary Rights Transferred Order' on the certificate of entitlement from the Rehabilitation Commissioner." V- The provisions of law reproduced above when read together, amount to this that allottee of the evacuee property shall enjoy its proprietary rights when proprietary rights transfer order in respect of it is issued by the Custodian and not before that. In view of this legal position, the proprietary rights of the evacuee land allotted to the petitioners but acquired by the Government are not as yet vested in the petitioners because it is undisputed that the Custodian had not so far granted such rights to the petitioners by issuing proprietary rights transfer order MN respect of it. Similarly, old Rule 31 is of no avail to the petitioners in contending that by virtue of it they had become the owners of the evacuee property which stood allotted o them. This rule only contemplates that the grant of proprietary rights shall take effect from the date of enforcement of Ordinance XXXVIII of 1980 in case of allotment made before the aforesaid Ordinance and does not become its owner. This Rule shall come into play after the proprietary rights are granted by the Custodian to an allottee of the evacuee property under subsection (2) of section 18-A of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee)! Property Act and, therefore, the question-of its application does not arise before such grant of. proprietary nights transfer order. The proprietary nights grant order in respect of the evacuee property allotted to the petitioner has not been issued by the Custodian so far, and as such I am unable to appreciate the contention of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 689 (AZAD J K], 1984-05-17): the question-of its application does not arise before such grant of. proprietary nights transfer order. The proprietary nights grant order in respect of the evacuee property allotted to the petitioner has not been issued by the Custodian so far, and as such I am unable to appreciate the contention of Mr.B.A. Farooq* that after the addition of Rule 31 of Rules, 1950, the petitioners were no longer allottees of the land but were its owners, entitled to receive the whole amount of compensation money awarded by the Collector on its acquisition by the Government. By no stretch of imagination, it can be held that the section of Rule 31 impliedly repealed sections 3 of Evacuee Property Allottees (Compensation) Order of 1967, under which an allottee of an evacuee property is entitled to be paid only 2/3rd share out of the compensation money awarded to the Custodian by the Collector on acquisition of the same by the Government in execution of the development schemes. I The repeal of the said section of the Order, shall be considered to have taken place by implication only if the aforesaid Rule TS found to be inconsistent with and repugnant to it but to me, there appears no inconsistency or repugnance between the two mas much as the Rule comes into play only on the issuance of proprietary rights transfer order of the evacuee land in favor of its allottee by the Custodian and not before that. It needs hardly any mention that the question of giving affect to the proprietary rights from certain date, either under old Rule 31 or under new Rule 31 arises only if such proprietary rights have been given by the Custodian but a thing which is non-existent, cannot be given any effect from any particular date. In this view of the matter the arguments of Mr. B.A. Farooq that on the promulgation of Ordinance and by section of Rule 31 in the Rule of 1950, the petitioners have become the owners of the land in question and as such, entitled to the whole amount of its compensation or that the aforesaid order of 1967 stood impliedly repealed, do not hold good. J Next Mr. B. A. Farooqji, has assailed the impugned orders of the Custodian dated 17th of February, 1981, whereby he had refused to grant proprietary rights to the petitioners in respect of the land acquired by the Government and referred to above. In this connection TT is contended that under subsection (2) of section 18-A of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, the Custodian was bound to grant the proprietary rights of the land including the land acquired by the Government and allotted to the petitioners as the certificate of entitlement had been issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner, in other words his contention is that the Custodian had no alternative but to issue the proprietary rights transfer order in respect of the land allotted to the petitioners after the certificate of entitlement had been issued by

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 689 (AZAD J K], 1984-05-17): as the certificate of entitlement had been issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner, in other words his contention is that the Custodian had no alternative but to issue the proprietary rights transfer order in respect of the land allotted to the petitioners after the certificate of entitlement had been issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner without commenting upon the merits of the above contention, it would suffice to say that declaration sought for, on the basis of the above contention cannot be granted for the simple reason that the aforesaid order of the Custodian stood vacated by the Custodian by way of review of his order, vide order dated 30th of November, 1981. The order which has been vacated cannot be made the subject of challenge in the writ petition nor any other relief in respect of RT can be granted to the petitioner. Even otherwise, such an order, by the Custodian, refusing to grant proprietary rights to an allottee of the evacuee property, has been made revisable by the Division Bench of this Court under subsection (5) of section of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Ordinance of 1980 with the result that in presence of above remedy available to the person aggrieved of by such an order, no writ is maintainable against it before first availing of that remedy. In the last Mr. B. A. Farooqi, has challenged the legality of the order of the Custodian made on 13th of November, 1980, whereby he, vacating his previous order dated 7th of February, 1981, sent back the case to the Rehabilitation Commissioner for necessary action. The above order has been assailed by Mr.B.A. Farooq on two-fold grounds, namely, that the learned Custodian had no power to pass the same as he did not possess the power of review under law and secondly, that he was not competent to remand the case to the Rehabilitation Commissioner for further inquiry because he was under legal obligation under section 18-A(2) to grant the proprietary rights transfer order of the land in respect of which, certificate of entitlement had been issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. I also do not find any force in this argument of Mr. B. A. Farooqi and in my view, the above order of the Custodian does not provide any cause for grievance to the petitioners. In the first place, it is not correct to contend that the learned Custodian does not enjoy the power to review his own order because he is empowered to Io so by virtue of subsection (6) of section of the Ordinance of 1980 and the only condition to be fulfilled before he reviews his order is that he is required to give notice to the parties likely to be affected by TT. In this case, no notice was required to be given to the petitioners as the order under question did not adversely affect them which, rather favored them mas much as the order refusing to grant proprietary rights to the petitioners of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 CLC 689?
Answer: From case 1985 CLC 689 (AZAD J K], 1984-05-17): the parties likely to be affected by TT. In this case, no notice was required to be given to the petitioners as the order under question did not adversely affect them which, rather favored them mas much as the order refusing to grant proprietary rights to the petitioners of the land acquired by the Government was vacated. Even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments that this order amounts to refusal to grant the proprietary rights of the land allotted to the petitioners, then the remedy of the petitioners against it, does not LE in challenging it in write petition but in presenting revision petition against it before the Division Bench of this Court, as provided for in subsection (5) of section of the Ordinance of 1980. For the forego mg reasons, I find no substance in this writ petition which appears to be premature in respect of some reliefs sought for in it and accordingly, the same is dismissed with no order as to, the costs. Petition dismissed

Question: What is case 1985 SCMR 89 about?
Answer: Case 1985 SCMR 89 was decided by Date on 1984-08-16. The case involved THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD,LAHORE (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER (LAND),SARGODHA AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.8. The case was heard by ; MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH AND M. S.B. QUVAISHI’.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 SCMR 89?
Answer: In case 1985 SCMR 89, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S.8. This case was heard in Date and decided on 1984-08-16.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 SCMR 89?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 SCMR 89 were: CH. FAZLE HUSSAIN, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER. RIAZ KIANI, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: ; MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH AND M. S.B. QUVAISHI’.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 SCMR 89?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 SCMR 89 were: THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD,LAHORE (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER (LAND),SARGODHA AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in Date.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 SCMR 89.
Answer: . ‘ M.S.H. QURAISHI, J.-The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board, seeks leave to appeal from the judgment of the Lahore High Court dated 29-3-1980. His case is that the property in question measuring 186i Anaïs situate in village Clithral. TESOL Sharper, District Sargodha, was evacuee trust property. Unfortunately, the question has not so far been specifically decided. L 2. The land had been initially, on 1*6-2-1962, allotted in favor of Abdul Razz respondent No. 2. In Main Ahmad Ali v. The Rehabilitation Authority PLD 1964 S C 229 this Court declared that the property of Gandi Koh Tirana was not an evacuee property. The Additional Deputy Commissioner, Sargodha, with powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, who scrutinized the allotment made in favor of Abdul Razz under section 11 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, held that the land in question was held by the Cheka of the Gandi Nashik of Gandi Koh Tirana and* as- such was not evacuee property allowable to a refugee. For this reason and also in view of the fact that the Chief Administrator of USAF had, in the meantime. "by. notification dated 28-1-1970, taken over the property as WAAF property attached to the said Gandi, the Additional Deputy Commissioner cancelled the allotment by order dated 11-10-1971. The allottee's revision application was, however, accepted on 19-12-1974 by the Additional Commissioner who held’ that the property was not WAAF property-of Gandi Koh Tirana but private property. The Chief Administrator of Sugar challenged the order in the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court but failed, thereafter, according to Mr. Diaz Juan, learned counsel of the USAF Department, the property was identified. The petitioner, had not been a party in the proceedings before the Department and had been imp leaded only as a respondent MN the writ petition and as such, it is explained, he had no opportunity to assert his case. ID, 3. The petitioner's submission is that the property had been originally purchased in 1889 by Bawa Ram Dass, Cheka of Baja Ganesh Was, and had devolved from Guru to Cheka till 1947, which fact was borne by the relevant Jacarandas, that the Last Cheka Baja Tulsa Days had migrated to India, that the property had, thus, vested in the Custodian and after 1960, when the Evacuee Trust Property Board had been. constituted in the Board. It is pointed out that any question arising in regard to the nature of the property as evacuee trust was to be decided by the Chairman of the Board, under section 8 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XII of 1975). In" this connection it is further urged that even if the area could be said to have been utilized bona fide under the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act in satisfaction of verified claims, the question of the Bona, FIDE or otherwise of the allotment was to be decided by the Chairman whose decision on that question would *be final. 4. Leave; to appeal is, therefore, granted to consider the submissions made. Status quo shall be maintained in regard to alienation of the property by respondent No. 2. M.Z.M. Leave granted

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 SCMR 89?
Answer: From case 1985 SCMR 89 (Date, 1984-08-16): . ‘ M.S.H. QURAISHI, J.-The Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board, seeks leave to appeal from the judgment of the Lahore High Court dated 29-3-1980. His case is that the property in question measuring 186i Anaïs situate in village Clithral. TESOL Sharper, District Sargodha, was evacuee trust property. Unfortunately, the question has not so far been specifically decided. L 2. The land had been initially, on 1*6-2-1962, allotted in favor of Abdul Razz respondent No. 2. In Main Ahmad Ali v. The Rehabilitation Authority PLD 1964 S C 229 this Court declared that the property of Gandi Koh Tirana was not an evacuee property. The Additional Deputy Commissioner, Sargodha, with powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, who scrutinized the allotment made in favor of Abdul Razz under section 11 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, held that the land in question was held by the Cheka of the Gandi Nashik of Gandi Koh Tirana and* as- such was not evacuee property allowable to a refugee. For this reason and also in view of the fact that the Chief Administrator of USAF had, in the meantime. "by. notification dated 28-1-1970, taken over the property as WAAF property attached to the said Gandi, the Additional Deputy Commissioner cancelled the allotment by order dated 11-10-1971. The allottee's revision application was, however, accepted on 19-12-1974 by the Additional Commissioner who held’ that the property was not WAAF property-of Gandi Koh Tirana but private property. The Chief Administrator of Sugar challenged the order in the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court but failed, thereafter, according to Mr. Diaz Juan, learned counsel of the USAF Department, the property was identified. The petitioner, had not been a party in the proceedings before the Department and had been imp leaded only as a respondent MN the writ petition and as such, it is explained, he had no opportunity to assert his case. ID, 3. The petitioner's submission is that the property had been originally purchased in 1889 by Bawa Ram Dass, Cheka of Baja Ganesh Was, and had devolved from Guru to Cheka till 1947, which fact was borne by the relevant Jacarandas, that the Last Cheka Baja Tulsa Days had migrated to India, that the property had, thus, vested in the Custodian and after 1960, when the Evacuee Trust Property Board had been. constituted in the Board. It is pointed out that any question arising in regard to the nature of the property as evacuee trust was to be decided by the Chairman of the Board, under section 8 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XII of 1975). In" this connection it is further urged that even if the area could be said to have been utilized bona fide under the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act in satisfaction of verified claims, the question of the Bona, FIDE or otherwise of the allotment was to be decided by the Chairman whose decision on that question would *be final. 4. Leave; to appeal is, therefore, granted

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 SCMR 89?
Answer: From case 1985 SCMR 89 (Date, 1984-08-16): have been utilized bona fide under the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act in satisfaction of verified claims, the question of the Bona, FIDE or otherwise of the allotment was to be decided by the Chairman whose decision on that question would *be final. 4. Leave; to appeal is, therefore, granted to consider the submissions made. Status quo shall be maintained in regard to alienation of the property by respondent No. 2. M.Z.M. Leave granted

Question: What is case 1985 SCMR 476 about?
Answer: Case 1985 SCMR 476 was decided by Date on 1994-08-22. The case involved EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD PETITIONER VERSUS MUHAMMAD SHARLF (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185@) DISPLACED,PERSONS (COM PENSATION.AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S.2(4) CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XLL R, 27. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH AND M.S.H. QURAISHI..

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 SCMR 476?
Answer: In case 1985 SCMR 476, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185@) DISPLACED,PERSONS (COM PENSATION.AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S.2(4) CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XLL R, 27. This case was heard in Date and decided on 1994-08-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 SCMR 476?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 SCMR 476 were: FAZAM-HUSSAIN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND CH. MUHAMMAD- (°1?,4JJ 11 T'T TASLAM, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER. NEMO FOR* RESPONDENT,. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH AND M.S.H. QURAISHI..

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 SCMR 476?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 SCMR 476 were: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD PETITIONER VERSUS MUHAMMAD SHARLF (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in Date.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 SCMR 476.
Answer: MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH, J.- Leave to appeal has been sought from judgment dated 6-2-1981 of the Lahore High Court; whereby Sugar Appeal No.25 of 1969, was dismissed. The petitioner (Evacuee Trust Board) had raised a question before a Settlement Commissioner through reference regarding the status of the proper*ty in dispute as an evacuee Trust Property because as asserted, it was a Jane Gear. The Settlement Commissioner after affording due opportunity to the petitioner held that the building in question which appeared to be a house, was not an evacuee Trust Property, On appeal a learned Judge in the High Court. affirmed the finding of fact reached by the Settlement Commissioner. Therefore, now the Evacuee Trust Board has sought lead« to appeal. Learned counsel has raised two-fold contention: One, relating to the merits of the concurrent findings of fact challenged in this petition; and secondly that the petitioner wanted to adduce additional evidence at the appellate stage which opportunity was denied to it. Learned counsel has brought to our notice the material on the basis of which according to his submission the property could have been treated as belonging to an Evacuee Trust, it Includes certain photographs of the front part of the house showing that it was used as a Jan) Gear. It has also been posted out by the learned counsel that one of the rooms in the building, was being used as the office of an Evacuee Trust, but it could be as a tenant of the owner. Be that as it may the concurrent findings of fact impugned before us do not suffer from any legal defect. The observation of the High Court that the mere use of the property as Jan) Gear would not transform it into a Trust property, in our view is unexceptionable. Learned counsel tried to rely on some judgments where the use of the word Dharma Sala led to the presumption that it was a Trust property, but he could not press the arguments any further, when it was posted out that the expression Dharma Sala in its connotation depending. Upon the circumstances of each case is totally different from the connotation of the expression Jane Gear. Regarding the additional evidence suffice it to observe that even if it had been admitted, it would not have made any difference with regard to the findings of fact. Secondly it cannot be said that the (petitioner had not sufficient opportunity to] adduce evidence which was sought to be led at the appellate stage. This petition accordingly fails and is dismissed. Petition dismissed WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 SCMR 476?
Answer: From case 1985 SCMR 476 (Date, 1994-08-22): MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH, J.- Leave to appeal has been sought from judgment dated 6-2-1981 of the Lahore High Court; whereby Sugar Appeal No.25 of 1969, was dismissed. The petitioner (Evacuee Trust Board) had raised a question before a Settlement Commissioner through reference regarding the status of the proper*ty in dispute as an evacuee Trust Property because as asserted, it was a Jane Gear. The Settlement Commissioner after affording due opportunity to the petitioner held that the building in question which appeared to be a house, was not an evacuee Trust Property, On appeal a learned Judge in the High Court. affirmed the finding of fact reached by the Settlement Commissioner. Therefore, now the Evacuee Trust Board has sought lead« to appeal. Learned counsel has raised two-fold contention: One, relating to the merits of the concurrent findings of fact challenged in this petition; and secondly that the petitioner wanted to adduce additional evidence at the appellate stage which opportunity was denied to it. Learned counsel has brought to our notice the material on the basis of which according to his submission the property could have been treated as belonging to an Evacuee Trust, it Includes certain photographs of the front part of the house showing that it was used as a Jan) Gear. It has also been posted out by the learned counsel that one of the rooms in the building, was being used as the office of an Evacuee Trust, but it could be as a tenant of the owner. Be that as it may the concurrent findings of fact impugned before us do not suffer from any legal defect. The observation of the High Court that the mere use of the property as Jan) Gear would not transform it into a Trust property, in our view is unexceptionable. Learned counsel tried to rely on some judgments where the use of the word Dharma Sala led to the presumption that it was a Trust property, but he could not press the arguments any further, when it was posted out that the expression Dharma Sala in its connotation depending. Upon the circumstances of each case is totally different from the connotation of the expression Jane Gear. Regarding the additional evidence suffice it to observe that even if it had been admitted, it would not have made any difference with regard to the findings of fact. Secondly it cannot be said that the (petitioner had not sufficient opportunity to] adduce evidence which was sought to be led at the appellate stage. This petition accordingly fails and is dismissed. Petition dismissed WW.

Question: What is case 1985 MLD 325 about?
Answer: Case 1985 MLD 325 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-11-27. The case involved MST. JANNAT THROUGH HER LEGAL REPRESEN TATIVES— PETITIONERS* VERSUS jCUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY SIND. AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVII OF 1958) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20. The case was heard by SALEEM AKHTARF.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 MLD 325?
Answer: In case 1985 MLD 325, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199 DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVII OF 1958) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 20. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-11-27.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 MLD 325?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 MLD 325 were: K.A, WAHAB FOR; PETITIONERS G.M. QURESHI FOR RESPONDENTS;'NOS. 3, AND 5.. The judges presiding were: SALEEM AKHTARF.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 MLD 325?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 MLD 325 were: MST. JANNAT THROUGH HER LEGAL REPRESEN TATIVES— PETITIONERS* VERSUS jCUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY SIND. AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 MLD 325.
Answer: JUDGMENT. /y-1";’ » vs. The. subject-matter of: this petition, is. agricultural Hand, bearing Survey-:No.150 (9 Acres andv7 Hunts) situated in Del That, Demon Talk, Neither Froze. In this land. 10 Anna's 8 Pies share belonged to the,following Hindu, evacuees: :art-.J,r* (1) Go bind Ram(2) Roopchand.(3) Local. j*,'M. Lt (4)/Marchand.(5) DARPA.(6) Lachmi Bai. 11.Jr- JR‘ T' (7) Motor am. T- V* If I Except Go bind, Ram and Lachmi Bai all were Moors. The property ‘was treated as an evacuee property and was acquired by Notification issued under section 4 of the Displaced Persons (Land) Settlement Act; and it wastransferredto Fir ; Dost- Al, (1,32;. Acres)?. (2)Ghulam Muhammad (4-15 Aj2res) and (3)all Khan,Had1;Hassan and Suleman- (3-OAcres), Ghulam Muhammad sold. his. share to/Sadiq;who in turn*sold to Dhabi Baths. Other transferees also, sold* the land to him. The petitioner by a registered sale-deed purchased the entire land from Dhabi; BUX and-her, name was mutated* in the records of fights. The proceeding was. First mitigated. on 19721st July, 1:1960-'.where respondents -Sohrab Long, Used Air and Nadir: Baths filed an application’ under’ section 20 of the/Act XII of 1957 for confirmation of sale of these lands in their! 1t I P" favor. It was stated in the application that they have purchased 10 Anna's 8 Pies share in Survey No. 150 through a registered sale-deed, dated 23-12-1947 for. Consideration which. They'have fully paid to the Hindu owners. It was alleged that they had fired an application in 1949 bearing No. but as their Advocate was/appointed a Judge the papers were not traceable. The respondents filed certified copy of the records of rights, list of witnesses, registered sale-deed and affidavit. This application was considered by;the Additional Custodian (II) Evacuee Property, Hyderabad who by His order dated 11-10-1960 observed that the respondents were not presenting necessary documents to show that Hindu-evacuee owners were entitled to sell the property. It is pertinent to note that out off 7 Hindu sellers* two were majors and 5 were Moors and these two majors acting on behalf'> of Moors owners had sold the property. The.!. Jearned Additional Custodian observed as follows: s'IT’’ ‘ m- p- « "The case 1s. incomplete, as it is essential to know that the respondent had right to sell the property. If the applicant produces a certified copy of Form No. 6‘ within 15 days, the case should be : re-opened and decided1 on its; merits, by the V ' Deputy Custodian Nawabshah / falling which the case should be. - considered as:dismissed. The case be consigned to record robm11 "t/if,h. ' In this order the learned Additional Custodian had also referred 1j r, *:j to the order dated 21-7-1960 passed, by the Deputy Custodian, who-mh41?JJ'SLR* had condoned the delay m tiling this application. It also/seems that at the time when the order was passed the Advocate for, the respondent r M applicant was present before the Additional Custodian. The respondent had the knowledge of this order, but the appeal was filed before the Additional Custodian somewhere in the year 1967, who by his order dated 11-5-1967 observed that the appeal was filed after nearly 61 years from the date of the order and the condonation was sought on the ground that village Form VI could not be obtained earlier but this. plea was not accepted. However* the learned Additional Custodian held that he cannot sit MN judgment over the order passed by an Additional Custodian, and dismissed the appeal. The respondents then filed a Revision application before the Custodian Evacuee Property Sind, who by the impugned order dated 3-12- 1973 ordered that ’the declaration as sought for is granted1. In the impugned order it has been mentioned that the registered sale-deed was sufficient to entitle the respondent for the declaration that the property is a non-evacuee property. Mr. Arif Hussain the learned counsel for the petitioner has amongst other contentions contended that after the issue of notification under section of the Land Settlement Act all the rights in the land vested in the Government and the Custodian had no jurisdiction to pass an order for confirmation of sale or for declaration of property as a non-evacuee property. Mr. Qureshi the learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand contended that as the application for confirmation had been filed as far back as MN 1949 which was pending the Custodian was bound to exercise jurisdiction over the matter. From the statement of fact, and. perusal of the record, it seems clear that the application for confirmation of sale was made on -7- 1960 In this application a reference has been made to Application No. but it seems that nobody knows about the fate of that application, whether it is pending or it has been disposed of The fact that the Deputy Custodian at one stage condoned the delay in filing the application under section 20 shows that this application was treated as a fresh application, and the entire proceedings culminated the impugned order was initiated on the basis of application filed on 19-7-1960. This being the facts on record, the question arises whether the respondent No. had the jurisdiction to pass the impugned order. Mr. Arif Hussain the learned counsel has referred to- P LD 1973 S C 451 which is completely applicable to the present case. There it was observed as follows:- "We must uphold the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondent and rule that after the acquisition of the lands under section of the Displaced Persons (Land and Settlement) Act, 1958 the learned Custodian of evacuee property had no jurisdiction to confirm the sales in favor of two appellants.11 This observation equally applies to the facts of present case where the respondent had assumed jurisdiction to declare the property as non-evacuee, although such a declaration was not sought by the respondents Nos. and 5 and in passing such an order he has manifestly acted without jurisdiction. A perusal of the impugned order will show ' that the respondent No. has not considered the facts on record as the appeal by the respondents Nos. to 5 was filed after 61 years and was patently time-barred. This fact ought to have been noticed by the respondent No. which he has completely ignored; I may post out that earlier this petition was disposed of by Fakhruddin G. Ibrahim J. (as he then was) on 2-5-1978, but as the learned counsel for the respondent was absent that judgment was set aside, and this matter has been fixed for rehearing. In that'judgment also my learned'brother had' observed as follows: T, f"I am constrained to post out that the. Order appears to have ! It AR been, passed in a hurry without applying mind by the learned Custodian, and so. Much so that \.he had; not. even referred to- 914 k*1,'’'"r the fact that the' appeal filed, by;; the. respondents Nos. to 6 was hopelessly barred by time.” J - * In the result the petition! Disavowed. The impugned order is declared to have been; passed without.lawful* authority and is of no legal effect. There will be no order as "to.cost. P J*' ff H.B.T; Petition. allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 MLD 325?
Answer: From case 1985 MLD 325 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-11-27): JUDGMENT. /y-1";’ » vs. The. subject-matter of: this petition, is. agricultural Hand, bearing Survey-:No.150 (9 Acres andv7 Hunts) situated in Del That, Demon Talk, Neither Froze. In this land. 10 Anna's 8 Pies share belonged to the,following Hindu, evacuees: :art-.J,r* (1) Go bind Ram(2) Roopchand.(3) Local. j*,'M. Lt (4)/Marchand.(5) DARPA.(6) Lachmi Bai. 11.Jr- JR‘ T' (7) Motor am. T- V* If I Except Go bind, Ram and Lachmi Bai all were Moors. The property ‘was treated as an evacuee property and was acquired by Notification issued under section 4 of the Displaced Persons (Land) Settlement Act; and it wastransferredto Fir ; Dost- Al, (1,32;. Acres)?. (2)Ghulam Muhammad (4-15 Aj2res) and (3)all Khan,Had1;Hassan and Suleman- (3-OAcres), Ghulam Muhammad sold. his. share to/Sadiq;who in turn*sold to Dhabi Baths. Other transferees also, sold* the land to him. The petitioner by a registered sale-deed purchased the entire land from Dhabi; BUX and-her, name was mutated* in the records of fights. The proceeding was. First mitigated. on 19721st July, 1:1960-'.where respondents -Sohrab Long, Used Air and Nadir: Baths filed an application’ under’ section 20 of the/Act XII of 1957 for confirmation of sale of these lands in their! 1t I P" favor. It was stated in the application that they have purchased 10 Anna's 8 Pies share in Survey No. 150 through a registered sale-deed, dated 23-12-1947 for. Consideration which. They'have fully paid to the Hindu owners. It was alleged that they had fired an application in 1949 bearing No. but as their Advocate was/appointed a Judge the papers were not traceable. The respondents filed certified copy of the records of rights, list of witnesses, registered sale-deed and affidavit. This application was considered by;the Additional Custodian (II) Evacuee Property, Hyderabad who by His order dated 11-10-1960 observed that the respondents were not presenting necessary documents to show that Hindu-evacuee owners were entitled to sell the property. It is pertinent to note that out off 7 Hindu sellers* two were majors and 5 were Moors and these two majors acting on behalf'> of Moors owners had sold the property. The.!. Jearned Additional Custodian observed as follows: s'IT’’ ‘ m- p- « "The case 1s. incomplete, as it is essential to know that the respondent had right to sell the property. If the applicant produces a certified copy of Form No. 6‘ within 15 days, the case should be : re-opened and decided1 on its; merits, by the V ' Deputy Custodian Nawabshah / falling which the case should be. - considered as:dismissed. The case be consigned to record robm11 "t/if,h. ' In this order the learned Additional Custodian had also referred 1j r, *:j to the order dated 21-7-1960 passed, by the Deputy Custodian, who-mh41?JJ'SLR* had condoned the delay m tiling this application. It also/seems that at the time when the order was passed the Advocate for, the respondent r M applicant was present before the Additional Custodian. The respondent had the knowledge of this order, but the appeal was filed before the Additional Custodian somewhere

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 MLD 325?
Answer: From case 1985 MLD 325 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-11-27): condoned the delay m tiling this application. It also/seems that at the time when the order was passed the Advocate for, the respondent r M applicant was present before the Additional Custodian. The respondent had the knowledge of this order, but the appeal was filed before the Additional Custodian somewhere in the year 1967, who by his order dated 11-5-1967 observed that the appeal was filed after nearly 61 years from the date of the order and the condonation was sought on the ground that village Form VI could not be obtained earlier but this. plea was not accepted. However* the learned Additional Custodian held that he cannot sit MN judgment over the order passed by an Additional Custodian, and dismissed the appeal. The respondents then filed a Revision application before the Custodian Evacuee Property Sind, who by the impugned order dated 3-12- 1973 ordered that ’the declaration as sought for is granted1. In the impugned order it has been mentioned that the registered sale-deed was sufficient to entitle the respondent for the declaration that the property is a non-evacuee property. Mr. Arif Hussain the learned counsel for the petitioner has amongst other contentions contended that after the issue of notification under section of the Land Settlement Act all the rights in the land vested in the Government and the Custodian had no jurisdiction to pass an order for confirmation of sale or for declaration of property as a non-evacuee property. Mr. Qureshi the learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand contended that as the application for confirmation had been filed as far back as MN 1949 which was pending the Custodian was bound to exercise jurisdiction over the matter. From the statement of fact, and. perusal of the record, it seems clear that the application for confirmation of sale was made on -7- 1960 In this application a reference has been made to Application No. but it seems that nobody knows about the fate of that application, whether it is pending or it has been disposed of The fact that the Deputy Custodian at one stage condoned the delay in filing the application under section 20 shows that this application was treated as a fresh application, and the entire proceedings culminated the impugned order was initiated on the basis of application filed on 19-7-1960. This being the facts on record, the question arises whether the respondent No. had the jurisdiction to pass the impugned order. Mr. Arif Hussain the learned counsel has referred to- P LD 1973 S C 451 which is completely applicable to the present case. There it was observed as follows:- "We must uphold the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondent and rule that after the acquisition of the lands under section of the Displaced Persons (Land and Settlement) Act, 1958 the learned Custodian of evacuee property had no jurisdiction to confirm the sales in favor of two appellants.11 This observation equally applies to the facts of present case where the respondent

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 MLD 325?
Answer: From case 1985 MLD 325 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-11-27): rule that after the acquisition of the lands under section of the Displaced Persons (Land and Settlement) Act, 1958 the learned Custodian of evacuee property had no jurisdiction to confirm the sales in favor of two appellants.11 This observation equally applies to the facts of present case where the respondent had assumed jurisdiction to declare the property as non-evacuee, although such a declaration was not sought by the respondents Nos. and 5 and in passing such an order he has manifestly acted without jurisdiction. A perusal of the impugned order will show ' that the respondent No. has not considered the facts on record as the appeal by the respondents Nos. to 5 was filed after 61 years and was patently time-barred. This fact ought to have been noticed by the respondent No. which he has completely ignored; I may post out that earlier this petition was disposed of by Fakhruddin G. Ibrahim J. (as he then was) on 2-5-1978, but as the learned counsel for the respondent was absent that judgment was set aside, and this matter has been fixed for rehearing. In that'judgment also my learned'brother had' observed as follows: T, f"I am constrained to post out that the. Order appears to have ! It AR been, passed in a hurry without applying mind by the learned Custodian, and so. Much so that \.he had; not. even referred to- 914 k*1,'’'"r the fact that the' appeal filed, by;; the. respondents Nos. to 6 was hopelessly barred by time.” J - * In the result the petition! Disavowed. The impugned order is declared to have been; passed without.lawful* authority and is of no legal effect. There will be no order as "to.cost. P J*' ff H.B.T; Petition. allowed.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by  on . The case involved . The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by .

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in  and decided on .

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: . The judges presiding were: .

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: . This case was heard in .

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: 38s JS ZN BQZBE g 5 ° 5 OR FE 7g SB for 6 BS for NOE : RT TS OD ct 9 6 s $6f 8 a o 68 FH =O in AO FF O O D AA JB 8 ON DH 8 of OG _ a FG E 5 2 S S a O © ( for) a ANE) S 9 WW) S 5 5 GE O : E & & RN ® IN HS 3 - 8S ° ° — ° ‘ — B 5 S = a LY 2 8g S Q. § ct 0) a 7a ?) : BJ 5. ® O >, Se OS 7” as a. a © is a OO EB. a2 g a: » B GF 2 8 2 5: S g Boe op Be eg a -_ i 2 ¢ 8 Fe ff § Bee Ss IG 0 a en: 5 © Q FY To |g re 2 a to 3p re S : OO § § & 8 F H 2 Be Z GS 6 » 3 : 6 a ® 3 No mat SY bo » B 8B a OS of ¢ & Es) S : : © @ © & 9 OS Ff IE o in 4.5 I'm S g § ° CO 2D. U1 QC LY o OO on OG CS 5 EP WY B 2 8 ff ¢ LB kg AA : EE 2 & of FS 8 EO © OO 4. co ct (@) IU, EB) on eye 3 a S ft o 5 5 o S Q @). EF EE 8 6 7 EB GF of : 8–7 pe) in TO. Q. HQ O a 5 IA 2 C. ¢ 8 5 = 7% =) 2 w+ So a RM SL 3 ct © 3 - : ; 5 5 3 a ° S NH 9 O ns : 5 B 2? BF TT go 9 7 8 of SF Q © $ @ Q 2G 6 GE eg — 8 a Zs 2223 8 Bo GS ZG 5 a SO ¢ § ® so § F&F @ GC OO 3B 7 fee OE 2 BR De 5 © 5 So § 8 5 BS a B SO a OE § g So BD OF FP OE Fe i 8 ° ¢ S () oO GC GE ss a Jamie © 5 at up Of. O or ct © O FC ff SD BD BF G&G 72 8 BER Be EEE FR BE FS — Ry FF 6 8B RS in? as’ same ° B 7 FG 8S B32 FF Be Fee BG 2 8 8 -) OO GG OO Fe) O : cf 3 AF Fe EC FS EBB BE EE of QC € © &§ § BG F ct o &§ 3% 8 © OG « 2 SF Be RB 8 FO 8 3 2 8 7 ¢ § 8s 8 ES 8 of EE FS KE Se O 5 £3 9 § 8 B B 5 Se we 3 8 8 8 3 8 A a 2 7 8 FER Se EEE EE § Fa Be 7 FY PSE. EE EER ES. e) 7G 8§ 8 a GF & EB ES GS 8 SF 6 6 8 B. SC in §& 7 8 pe Be Fee BEES EEE - cot “ pate 5 go 2 F Be GA OG § 3 FB 8 EE TO #-F @4 JE OO QC A Sop PS 8 B EY F & Po f 2 2 EE ere Few SE EO a FE Se eh Se FRE FR EE Se EE Pe 8B Fee he EE FF BF EE G vote 2 3 EE 8, FF BSR op BFE Km oh 5 © ES OO Ft c “ GF Pe eg KE Bee EE 2B RO ES Se gee 8 2 2 ere EEE ES € § € » F @ FP a8 9 7 2p 8 3 (BF 2 F 5 SO AO FF 5B DW CEP CS pegs FBS Re EO Ss ¢ &§ EB 8 ® 8 o BF BB c or EU 222 5 5 F FSB FS w S on ¢ (@) i. Boe B&B o F F Fe 8 F GE B 5 OE a 28 8@ ff a SOG ©) F&F OP BF » B&B 2 Boo 2 g t+ OO AO Se 8 SF F 2 3 FB B it OD OO o TC 5 6 go BG O SY G9 » $ OO BG SF 6 ® BOM 5 ¢§ §¢ #£ FD @ AO 6 E 2 8 5 ¢ &§§ § &€ F F o BF OF

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): 38s JS ZN BQZBE g 5 ° 5 OR FE 7g SB for 6 BS for NOE : RT TS OD ct 9 6 s $6f 8 a o 68 FH =O in AO FF O O D AA JB 8 ON DH 8 of OG _ a FG E 5 2 S S a O © ( for) a ANE) S 9 WW) S 5 5 GE O : E & & RN ® IN HS 3 - 8S ° ° — ° ‘ — B 5 S = a LY 2 8g S Q. § ct 0) a 7a ?) : BJ 5. ® O >, Se OS 7” as a. a © is a OO EB. a2 g a: » B GF 2 8 2 5: S g Boe op Be eg a -_ i 2 ¢ 8 Fe ff § Bee Ss IG 0 a en: 5 © Q FY To |g re 2 a to 3p re S : OO § § & 8 F H 2 Be Z GS 6 » 3 : 6 a ® 3 No mat SY bo » B 8B a OS of ¢ & Es) S : : © @ © & 9 OS Ff IE o in 4.5 I'm S g § ° CO 2D. U1 QC LY o OO on OG CS 5 EP WY B 2 8 ff ¢ LB kg AA : EE 2 & of FS 8 EO © OO 4. co ct (@) IU, EB) on eye 3 a S ft o 5 5 o S Q @). EF EE 8 6 7 EB GF of : 8–7 pe) in TO. Q. HQ O a 5 IA 2 C. ¢ 8 5 = 7% =) 2 w+ So a RM SL 3 ct © 3 - : ; 5 5 3 a ° S NH 9 O ns : 5 B 2? BF TT go 9 7 8 of SF Q © $ @ Q 2G 6 GE eg — 8 a Zs 2223 8 Bo GS ZG 5 a SO ¢ § ® so § F&F @ GC OO 3B 7 fee OE 2 BR De 5 © 5 So § 8 5 BS a B SO a OE § g So BD OF FP OE Fe i 8 ° ¢ S () oO GC GE ss a Jamie © 5 at up Of. O or ct © O FC ff SD BD BF G&G 72 8 BER Be EEE FR BE FS — Ry FF 6 8B RS in? as’ same ° B 7 FG 8S B32 FF Be Fee BG 2 8 8 -) OO GG OO Fe) O : cf 3 AF Fe EC FS EBB BE EE of QC € © &§ § BG F ct o &§ 3% 8 © OG « 2 SF Be RB 8 FO 8 3 2 8 7 ¢ § 8s 8 ES 8 of EE FS KE Se O 5 £3

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (, ): cf 3 AF Fe EC FS EBB BE EE of QC € © &§ § BG F ct o &§ 3% 8 © OG « 2 SF Be RB 8 FO 8 3 2 8 7 ¢ § 8s 8 ES 8 of EE FS KE Se O 5 £3 9 § 8 B B 5 Se we 3 8 8 8 3 8 A a 2 7 8 FER Se EEE EE § Fa Be 7 FY PSE. EE EER ES. e) 7G 8§ 8 a GF & EB ES GS 8 SF 6 6 8 B. SC in §& 7 8 pe Be Fee BEES EEE - cot “ pate 5 go 2 F Be GA OG § 3 FB 8 EE TO #-F @4 JE OO QC A Sop PS 8 B EY F & Po f 2 2 EE ere Few SE EO a FE Se eh Se FRE FR EE Se EE Pe 8B Fee he EE FF BF EE G vote 2 3 EE 8, FF BSR op BFE Km oh 5 © ES OO Ft c “ GF Pe eg KE Bee EE 2B RO ES Se gee 8 2 2 ere EEE ES € § € » F @ FP a8 9 7 2p 8 3 (BF 2 F 5 SO AO FF 5B DW CEP CS pegs FBS Re EO Ss ¢ &§ EB 8 ® 8 o BF BB c or EU 222 5 5 F FSB FS w S on ¢ (@) i. Boe B&B o F F Fe 8 F GE B 5 OE a 28 8@ ff a SOG ©) F&F OP BF » B&B 2 Boo 2 g t+ OO AO Se 8 SF F 2 3 FB B it OD OO o TC 5 6 go BG O SY G9 » $ OO BG SF 6 ® BOM 5 ¢§ §¢ #£ FD @ AO 6 E 2 8 5 ¢ &§§ § &€ F F o BF OF

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1985-01-26. The case involved MST. HAMTDA BEGUM VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE PROPERTY PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22 PUNJAB ALIT NATION OF LANDS ACT (X ILL OF 1903) -S. https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/PSC/html_txt/PSC_1985_485.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:50 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/PSC/html_txt/PSC_1985_485.htm!. The case was heard by ASLAM RIAZ HUSSAIN, MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH AND MIAN BURHANUDDIN KKAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE PROPERTY PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 22 PUNJAB ALIT NATION OF LANDS ACT (X ILL OF 1903) -S. https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/PSC/html_txt/PSC_1985_485.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:50 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1985/PSC/html_txt/PSC_1985_485.htm!. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1985-01-26.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANT : MUHAMMAD ACWSR BUTTER, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH CH. MUHAMMAD ASLARN, AOR,FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. : MUHAMMAD SARDAR KHAN, AOR.FOR THE RESPONDENTS: JARIUALLAH KHAN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH EAKIUD DIN PAUL, ADVOCATE. SUPREME COURT.. The judges presiding were: ASLAM RIAZ HUSSAIN, MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH AND MIAN BURHANUDDIN KKAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: MST. HAMTDA BEGUM VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: Islam Rim Hussain, J.-This Appeal by MST. Hamid Begum and another TS directed against the order of the former High Court of West Pakistan, dated 1-7-1964, dismissed their Writ Petition (No. ), as far as the legal heirs of Hakim, are concerned. It may be mentioned that MST. Hamid Begum and MST. Zubaydah Begum had filed the afore-mentioned writ petition against 11 persons, including Hakim son of Boor (who was respondent No. therein), the writ petition was dismissed In liming MST. Hamid and MST. Zubaydah Begum thereupon challenged the order of the High Court through a petition for leave to appeal against all the* respondents. Leave was granted to the petitioner on 26-11- 1964, whereupon notices were served on all the respondents except Hakim who could not be served. Ex parte proceedings were, therefore, ordered against him on 16-11- 1968 The appeal (No. ) of MST. Hamid Begum etc. was thereafter allowed by this Court vide judgment dated 27-3-1972. About a month later, on 25-4-1972, twenty-four people including the successors-in- interest of the aforementioned Hakim, applied for a review of the afore-said judgment dated 27-3- 1972, allowing the appeal, on the ground that Hakim had died on 17- 6-1971, before the appeal was heard and that the judgment in appeal against a dead person was OT no legal effect. BV order dated 8-5-1972, the applicants were directed by this Court to file ah application for setting aside the ex parte decree and Judgment on THS ground that Hakim respondent had died, and his legal heirs had not been brought on the record, and were not beard. The successors-in-interest of Hakim accordingly, filed an application for getting aside the ex parte judgment. The Review Petition (No. ) was ordered to be heard along with that application. The Court heard both the matters and allowed the same only with respect to the heirs of Hakim vide Order dated 27-11-1979 (which is reported in 1980 SCMR at page 531). The relevant portion reads as follows «. Therefore, an eminently just and proper order in the circumstances, is to allow their application for review of judgment in Civil Appeal No. and to redecide it after hearing it m the presence of the petitioners. Order is accordingly. Necessary correction shall be made in the record. The other application (CM ) is also allowed consequently. It is made clear that such a reopening of the harem in this Civil Appeal is not for the benefit of the other nineteen petitioners who have joined in the review petition filed by the heirs of Hakim Ali because we find that they, or their predecessor-in-interest were fully formed of the proceedings pending before the# Custodian and its nature and took the land subject to result of that adjudication and at no earlier stage evinced any merest in the proceedings in spite of having knowledge of it”. (PLD 1980 SC 540). 2. Civil Appeal No. is, therefore, being reheard by this Court in accordance with the afore-mentioned order only with respect to the interest of the successors-in-intcrest of Hakim Ali. 3. The facts giving rise to the appeal, briefly, stated, are that Mid. Iqbal Begum mother of MST. Hamid Begum owned some land in Chalk No. 28/J. B. Thesis and District Lyallpur (now Faisalabad) She sold a part of the land to K.arm Singh (Jat) on 14-6-1946 and the remaining to Sadhu Singh (Jat) on 13-11-1946. The mutations were entered in tho revenue record giving effect to the same but were rejected by the Revenue authorities on the ground that MST. Iqbal Begum being a ‘Wahhabi Sikh* had been declared as belonging to an ‘agricultural tribe’ through notification under section 3 of the Punjab Alienation of the Lands Act, 1900, she could not, therefore, alienate the land in question to the member of another agricultural tribe (Jats in this case) without prior permission of the Deputy Commissioner, under subsection (2) of section 3 of the said Act. For proper understanding of this objection it would be useful to reproduce section 3 of the Punjab Alienation of Lands Act : - *3. Sanction of Deputy Commissioner required to certain permanent alienation.-(1) Save as hereafter provided a period who desires to matte a permanent alienation of his alienation of hit land shall be at liberty to make such alienation where (a) the aliener is not a member of an agricultural tribe, or (b) the aliener is a member of an agricultural tribe and the alienee 1a a member of the same tribe or of tribe in the same group. (2) Except in the cases provided for under subsection a permanent alienation of land shall not take effect as such unless and until sanction is given thereto of a Deputy Commissioner ; Provided that - (1) sanction may be given after the act of alienation is otherwise completed, and (2) sanction shall not be necessary in the came of (a) sale of a night of occupancy by a tenant to his landlord, or (b) a gift made in good faith for a religious or charitable purpose, whether inter vivos or by will (3) The Deputy Commissioner shall inquire into the circumstances of the alienation and shall have discretion to grant or refuse me sanction required by subsection (2)”. 4. Since the land in question had, in the meanwhile, been treated as Evacuee Property and allotted to certain persons in lieu of the claims, the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, tiled an appeal against mis order which was accepted by the Settlement Commissioner of 17-4-1950 to whom the matter had been forwarded for disposal by TNE Collector, on the condition that MST. Iqbal Begum snail apply for sanction 01 me same to the Deputy Commissioner. TNE latter, however, refused to grant Notification No. 2449-R (Punjab Gazette dated 25-12-192) (.ante PO.t,on emerged from Nottucatioa No. 1229 date 26-.-1JH). The result of the refusal to grant sanction was that the sale of land by MST Iqbal Begum to Karma Singh and Sadhu SMG (Jats), was treated BV the Revenue authorities as void, the land in question continued 1S? the Monet of MST. Iqbal Begum etc. and for the.s reason it could not be deemed to have become evacuee property. MST. Iqbal Begum etc., thereafter applied to the Assistant Custodian, under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII) of 1957. for. declaration that the property in dispute was not evacuee proper The Assistant Custodian dismissed her application by order dated 22-4- 1960. Her anneal was dismissed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property. She then filed a revision petition before the Custodian of Evacuee Property which met the same fate. Feeling aggrieved she challenged the aforementioned order of the Custodian through a writ petition before the High Court in which she imp leaded Hakim As and other allottees of the land m question as respondents. The writ petition was dismissed tide the impugned judgment. The relevant observation of the High Court reads as follows : “Admittedly MST. Iqbal Begum had embraced Islam before she sold the land in dispute under the two sale deeds to the evacuee respond* dents. By the very fact of her conversion to Islam she ceased to be a 'Wahhabi Sikh’ were notified as members of agricultural tribe under section of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act, 1900, by reason of the fact that they belonged to that religious sect and not by reason or ANV caste to which they originally belonged before their conversion to Sikhism. We are inclined to agree with the order of the learned Custodian, Evacuee Property dated the 6th of July, !962, in bolding that MST. Iqbal Begum ceased to be a Wahhabi Sikh, and, thereby, also ceased to be a member of the notified agricultural tribe. The two sale deeds cannot be avoided on this ground. ’ 7. The appellants challenged this decision before the Supreme Court and leave was granted to them to consider and whether by changing her religion MST. Iqbal Begum had ceased to be a member of a‘notified tribe’. The appeal was finally heard and allowed by a Full Bench of this Court on 27-3-1970. It was held that by adopting Islam as her religion she did not lose her status as member of a notified tribe. The result was that the sale by MST. Iqbal Begum to the two Jats became void ; the land in question ceased to be evacuee property and the respondents who were allotted of the said land were deprived of the same. 8. It 1* against this order that the successors-in-interest of Hakim Ali filed review petition as also an application for setting aside the ex parte Judgment on the ground that Hakim Ali had not been served with a notice and was not therefore able to press his case before this Court. As already observed the said application was allowed and the case has come op for rehearing only as far the successors-in-interest of Hakim All are concern *d. 9. The learned counsel for the appellant surgery before UA that Wahhabi Sikhs who usually known as Churns(sweepers), had been included amongst agricultural tribes only by virtue of their religion and as such when MST. Iqbal Begum, who was admittedly a Mumbai Sikh became a Muslim she was no longer a Wahhabi Sikh and, consequently, did not remain a member of the agricultural tribe and could therefore, sell the land in question without the sanction of the Deputy Commissioner required by section 3 (2) of the Punjab Alienation of Lands Act. 10. On the other hand learned counsel for MST Iqbal Begum urged that mere conversion to Islam did not alter the caste of a Hindoo or Sikh. For this contention he relied on Gautam Ahmad v. Ghulam Farid and another, AIR 1933 Lab, 844. In that case a family of Royal Brahmins had converted to Islam. Subsequently a notification was issuedwheieby all persons belonging to Royal Brahmins Tribe were declared to be members of agricultural tribe. The matter was contested before the High Court on the ground that after conversion to Islam they had lost their status as Royal Brahmins. It was, however, held that their conversion to Islam did not make any difference as far as their caste was concerned and their caste still remained Royal Brahmin and as such they continued to be members of agricultural tribe by virtue of the notification issued to that effect. 11. It may be mentioned that the same pleas had been raised by the counsel for the parties before this Court earlier, when this Appeal (No. ) was heard with respect to the other respondents and the last mentioned plea put forward by the learned counsel for MST. Iqbal Begum, etc. had found favor with the Court which allowed the appeal in the following words “A perusal of the notification would show it is tube of Wahhabi Sikhs who were declared to be agriculturist. Admittedly MST. Iqbal B;gum was a member of the tribe of Wahhabi Sikh, and she was a member of the tribe of Mumbai Sikh, and she was member of the agricultural tribe. In these circumstances the two sales made by her would not be valid unless and until they were sent to the Deputy Commissioner under section 3 of the Punjab Alienation of Lands Act.” 12. We have carefully reconsidered the matter. Nothing has been red by the learned counsel for Hakim Ali to persuade us to change our mind and take a different view than the one already taken by this Court mm its judgment dated 27-3-1970. 13. Learned counsel for Hakim Ali contended next that the Custodian of Evacuee Property had the exclusive jurisdiction to declare whether only land was evacuee property and as such no Court could take a view other than the expressed by the Custodian Evacuee Property. For this proposition he relied on Main Muhammad Saeed and another v. Province of West Pakistan and others, PLD 1964 SC 372, 14. We are afraid this is an altogether a new plea. Hakim Ali was duly represented before the High Court when the appellant’s writ petition was argued, but this contention had not been urged on his behalf at that occasion. We, cannot therefore, find any flaw in the impugned judgment of the High Court on this score. Moreover, this Court being a Court of ultimate jurisdiction, has the power to give an authoritative pronouncement on any question of law including the one involved in this case, namely whether a person having been declared as a member of an agricultural tribe through a notification under section 3 (I) of the Punjab Alienation of Lands Act, would cease to be a member of his/her caste conversion to Islam and lose his/her status as member of an agricultural tribe. In view of the above discussion we find ourselves in respectful agreement with the view taken by a Full Bench of this Court earlier in its order dated 27-3-1970, while hearing the same appeal against the co-respondents, Consequently, the appeal is accepted. The parties shall bear their own costs. Appeal accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1985-01-26): Islam Rim Hussain, J.-This Appeal by MST. Hamid Begum and another TS directed against the order of the former High Court of West Pakistan, dated 1-7-1964, dismissed their Writ Petition (No. ), as far as the legal heirs of Hakim, are concerned. It may be mentioned that MST. Hamid Begum and MST. Zubaydah Begum had filed the afore-mentioned writ petition against 11 persons, including Hakim son of Boor (who was respondent No. therein), the writ petition was dismissed In liming MST. Hamid and MST. Zubaydah Begum thereupon challenged the order of the High Court through a petition for leave to appeal against all the* respondents. Leave was granted to the petitioner on 26-11- 1964, whereupon notices were served on all the respondents except Hakim who could not be served. Ex parte proceedings were, therefore, ordered against him on 16-11- 1968 The appeal (No. ) of MST. Hamid Begum etc. was thereafter allowed by this Court vide judgment dated 27-3-1972. About a month later, on 25-4-1972, twenty-four people including the successors-in- interest of the aforementioned Hakim, applied for a review of the afore-said judgment dated 27-3- 1972, allowing the appeal, on the ground that Hakim had died on 17- 6-1971, before the appeal was heard and that the judgment in appeal against a dead person was OT no legal effect. BV order dated 8-5-1972, the applicants were directed by this Court to file ah application for setting aside the ex parte decree and Judgment on THS ground that Hakim respondent had died, and his legal heirs had not been brought on the record, and were not beard. The successors-in-interest of Hakim accordingly, filed an application for getting aside the ex parte judgment. The Review Petition (No. ) was ordered to be heard along with that application. The Court heard both the matters and allowed the same only with respect to the heirs of Hakim vide Order dated 27-11-1979 (which is reported in 1980 SCMR at page 531). The relevant portion reads as follows «. Therefore, an eminently just and proper order in the circumstances, is to allow their application for review of judgment in Civil Appeal No. and to redecide it after hearing it m the presence of the petitioners. Order is accordingly. Necessary correction shall be made in the record. The other application (CM ) is also allowed consequently. It is made clear that such a reopening of the harem in this Civil Appeal is not for the benefit of the other nineteen petitioners who have joined in the review petition filed by the heirs of Hakim Ali because we find that they, or their predecessor-in-interest were fully formed of the proceedings pending before the# Custodian and its nature and took the land subject to result of that adjudication and at no earlier stage evinced any merest in the proceedings in spite of having knowledge of it”. (PLD 1980 SC 540). 2. Civil Appeal No. is, therefore, being reheard by this Court in accordance with the afore-mentioned order only with

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1985-01-26): took the land subject to result of that adjudication and at no earlier stage evinced any merest in the proceedings in spite of having knowledge of it”. (PLD 1980 SC 540). 2. Civil Appeal No. is, therefore, being reheard by this Court in accordance with the afore-mentioned order only with respect to the interest of the successors-in-intcrest of Hakim Ali. 3. The facts giving rise to the appeal, briefly, stated, are that Mid. Iqbal Begum mother of MST. Hamid Begum owned some land in Chalk No. 28/J. B. Thesis and District Lyallpur (now Faisalabad) She sold a part of the land to K.arm Singh (Jat) on 14-6-1946 and the remaining to Sadhu Singh (Jat) on 13-11-1946. The mutations were entered in tho revenue record giving effect to the same but were rejected by the Revenue authorities on the ground that MST. Iqbal Begum being a ‘Wahhabi Sikh* had been declared as belonging to an ‘agricultural tribe’ through notification under section 3 of the Punjab Alienation of the Lands Act, 1900, she could not, therefore, alienate the land in question to the member of another agricultural tribe (Jats in this case) without prior permission of the Deputy Commissioner, under subsection (2) of section 3 of the said Act. For proper understanding of this objection it would be useful to reproduce section 3 of the Punjab Alienation of Lands Act : - *3. Sanction of Deputy Commissioner required to certain permanent alienation.-(1) Save as hereafter provided a period who desires to matte a permanent alienation of his alienation of hit land shall be at liberty to make such alienation where (a) the aliener is not a member of an agricultural tribe, or (b) the aliener is a member of an agricultural tribe and the alienee 1a a member of the same tribe or of tribe in the same group. (2) Except in the cases provided for under subsection a permanent alienation of land shall not take effect as such unless and until sanction is given thereto of a Deputy Commissioner ; Provided that - (1) sanction may be given after the act of alienation is otherwise completed, and (2) sanction shall not be necessary in the came of (a) sale of a night of occupancy by a tenant to his landlord, or (b) a gift made in good faith for a religious or charitable purpose, whether inter vivos or by will (3) The Deputy Commissioner shall inquire into the circumstances of the alienation and shall have discretion to grant or refuse me sanction required by subsection (2)”. 4. Since the land in question had, in the meanwhile, been treated as Evacuee Property and allotted to certain persons in lieu of the claims, the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, tiled an appeal against mis order which was accepted by the Settlement Commissioner of 17-4-1950 to whom the matter had been forwarded for disposal by TNE Collector, on the condition that MST. Iqbal Begum snail apply for sanction 01 me same to the Deputy

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1985-01-26): the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, tiled an appeal against mis order which was accepted by the Settlement Commissioner of 17-4-1950 to whom the matter had been forwarded for disposal by TNE Collector, on the condition that MST. Iqbal Begum snail apply for sanction 01 me same to the Deputy Commissioner. TNE latter, however, refused to grant Notification No. 2449-R (Punjab Gazette dated 25-12-192) (.ante PO.t,on emerged from Nottucatioa No. 1229 date 26-.-1JH). The result of the refusal to grant sanction was that the sale of land by MST Iqbal Begum to Karma Singh and Sadhu SMG (Jats), was treated BV the Revenue authorities as void, the land in question continued 1S? the Monet of MST. Iqbal Begum etc. and for the.s reason it could not be deemed to have become evacuee property. MST. Iqbal Begum etc., thereafter applied to the Assistant Custodian, under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII) of 1957. for. declaration that the property in dispute was not evacuee proper The Assistant Custodian dismissed her application by order dated 22-4- 1960. Her anneal was dismissed by the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property. She then filed a revision petition before the Custodian of Evacuee Property which met the same fate. Feeling aggrieved she challenged the aforementioned order of the Custodian through a writ petition before the High Court in which she imp leaded Hakim As and other allottees of the land m question as respondents. The writ petition was dismissed tide the impugned judgment. The relevant observation of the High Court reads as follows : “Admittedly MST. Iqbal Begum had embraced Islam before she sold the land in dispute under the two sale deeds to the evacuee respond* dents. By the very fact of her conversion to Islam she ceased to be a 'Wahhabi Sikh’ were notified as members of agricultural tribe under section of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act, 1900, by reason of the fact that they belonged to that religious sect and not by reason or ANV caste to which they originally belonged before their conversion to Sikhism. We are inclined to agree with the order of the learned Custodian, Evacuee Property dated the 6th of July, !962, in bolding that MST. Iqbal Begum ceased to be a Wahhabi Sikh, and, thereby, also ceased to be a member of the notified agricultural tribe. The two sale deeds cannot be avoided on this ground. ’ 7. The appellants challenged this decision before the Supreme Court and leave was granted to them to consider and whether by changing her religion MST. Iqbal Begum had ceased to be a member of a‘notified tribe’. The appeal was finally heard and allowed by a Full Bench of this Court on 27-3-1970. It was held that by adopting Islam as her religion she did not lose her status as member of a notified tribe. The result was that the sale by MST. Iqbal Begum to the two Jats became void ; the land in question ceased

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1985-01-26): Bench of this Court on 27-3-1970. It was held that by adopting Islam as her religion she did not lose her status as member of a notified tribe. The result was that the sale by MST. Iqbal Begum to the two Jats became void ; the land in question ceased to be evacuee property and the respondents who were allotted of the said land were deprived of the same. 8. It 1* against this order that the successors-in-interest of Hakim Ali filed review petition as also an application for setting aside the ex parte Judgment on the ground that Hakim Ali had not been served with a notice and was not therefore able to press his case before this Court. As already observed the said application was allowed and the case has come op for rehearing only as far the successors-in-interest of Hakim All are concern *d. 9. The learned counsel for the appellant surgery before UA that Wahhabi Sikhs who usually known as Churns(sweepers), had been included amongst agricultural tribes only by virtue of their religion and as such when MST. Iqbal Begum, who was admittedly a Mumbai Sikh became a Muslim she was no longer a Wahhabi Sikh and, consequently, did not remain a member of the agricultural tribe and could therefore, sell the land in question without the sanction of the Deputy Commissioner required by section 3 (2) of the Punjab Alienation of Lands Act. 10. On the other hand learned counsel for MST Iqbal Begum urged that mere conversion to Islam did not alter the caste of a Hindoo or Sikh. For this contention he relied on Gautam Ahmad v. Ghulam Farid and another, AIR 1933 Lab, 844. In that case a family of Royal Brahmins had converted to Islam. Subsequently a notification was issuedwheieby all persons belonging to Royal Brahmins Tribe were declared to be members of agricultural tribe. The matter was contested before the High Court on the ground that after conversion to Islam they had lost their status as Royal Brahmins. It was, however, held that their conversion to Islam did not make any difference as far as their caste was concerned and their caste still remained Royal Brahmin and as such they continued to be members of agricultural tribe by virtue of the notification issued to that effect. 11. It may be mentioned that the same pleas had been raised by the counsel for the parties before this Court earlier, when this Appeal (No. ) was heard with respect to the other respondents and the last mentioned plea put forward by the learned counsel for MST. Iqbal Begum, etc. had found favor with the Court which allowed the appeal in the following words “A perusal of the notification would show it is tube of Wahhabi Sikhs who were declared to be agriculturist. Admittedly MST. Iqbal B;gum was a member of the tribe of Wahhabi Sikh, and she was a member of the tribe of Mumbai Sikh, and she was member of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1985-01-26): words “A perusal of the notification would show it is tube of Wahhabi Sikhs who were declared to be agriculturist. Admittedly MST. Iqbal B;gum was a member of the tribe of Wahhabi Sikh, and she was a member of the tribe of Mumbai Sikh, and she was member of the agricultural tribe. In these circumstances the two sales made by her would not be valid unless and until they were sent to the Deputy Commissioner under section 3 of the Punjab Alienation of Lands Act.” 12. We have carefully reconsidered the matter. Nothing has been red by the learned counsel for Hakim Ali to persuade us to change our mind and take a different view than the one already taken by this Court mm its judgment dated 27-3-1970. 13. Learned counsel for Hakim Ali contended next that the Custodian of Evacuee Property had the exclusive jurisdiction to declare whether only land was evacuee property and as such no Court could take a view other than the expressed by the Custodian Evacuee Property. For this proposition he relied on Main Muhammad Saeed and another v. Province of West Pakistan and others, PLD 1964 SC 372, 14. We are afraid this is an altogether a new plea. Hakim Ali was duly represented before the High Court when the appellant’s writ petition was argued, but this contention had not been urged on his behalf at that occasion. We, cannot therefore, find any flaw in the impugned judgment of the High Court on this score. Moreover, this Court being a Court of ultimate jurisdiction, has the power to give an authoritative pronouncement on any question of law including the one involved in this case, namely whether a person having been declared as a member of an agricultural tribe through a notification under section 3 (I) of the Punjab Alienation of Lands Act, would cease to be a member of his/her caste conversion to Islam and lose his/her status as member of an agricultural tribe. In view of the above discussion we find ourselves in respectful agreement with the view taken by a Full Bench of this Court earlier in its order dated 27-3-1970, while hearing the same appeal against the co-respondents, Consequently, the appeal is accepted. The parties shall bear their own costs. Appeal accepted.

Question: What is case 1985 PLD 61 about?
Answer: Case 1985 PLD 61 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1985-04-28. The case involved BASHIR AHMAD KHAN (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, MUZAFFARABAD AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTYACT (XII OF 1957) (AS AMENDED BY ORDINANCE (LII OF 1982) - S. 18(6) (7) PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S. 11(4). The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD ASHRAF KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1985 PLD 61?
Answer: In case 1985 PLD 61, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTYACT (XII OF 1957) (AS AMENDED BY ORDINANCE (LII OF 1982) - S. 18(6) (7) PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT (XLII OF 1956) - S. 11(4). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1985-04-28.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1985 PLD 61?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1985 PLD 61 were: RAJA MUHAMMAD HANIF KHAN FOR PETITIONER. KH. MUHAMMAD SAEED FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD ASHRAF KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1985 PLD 61?
Answer: The parties in case 1985 PLD 61 were: BASHIR AHMAD KHAN (PETITIONER) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, MUZAFFARABAD AND ANOTHER (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1985 PLD 61.
Answer: This constitutional petition under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, is directed against the order of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated 5-5-1981 whereby he set aside the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner allowing certain evacuee property to the petitioner. 2. The brief facts of the case are that the land measuring 26 Canals out of Survey Nos. 804 and 806 situate in village Jaguar, Thesis Bag, District Pooch stood allotted in the name of one Bash Ahmad Khan son of Kala Khan. The said allottee surrendered his above allotment in favor of Noor Ahmad Khan, the father of the petitioner by way of executing an agreement to that effect on 7-9-1963 and making an application in a case pending in the Court of Deputy Custodian MN respect of the said land after which the same was allotted to the petitioner by the Rehabilitation Commissioner vide his order, dated 28-11-1969. 3. The above allotment in the name of the petitioner was challenged by Her DIL Khan, respondent in a revision petition before Rehabilitation Commissioner who dismissed the same vide his order dated 30-9-1980 on the ground that the allotment having been made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner, it was not revisable by him. Feeling aggrieved by the above order, the respondent No. filed a revision petition before the learned Custodian against the orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 28-11-1969 and 30-9-1980 whereby the land in question was allotted to the petitioner and the revision petition filed by the said respondent against such an allotment was dismissed, respectively which was accepted and the allotment of the petitioner made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner was set aside by the learned Custodian vide his order, dated 28-11-1969 and the Nail- Tonsilar was directed to take necessary action against the unauthorized occupants of the aforesaid land. Hence this writ petition. 4. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the respondents and have also examined the entire record of the case. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the revision petition before the learned Custodian was time-barred and as such the impugned order of the learned Custodian is unlawful having been made without jurisdiction. It has been further contended by him that the petitioner is a local destitute owning only Canals of land and was also in possession of the but the land in question prior to its allotment to him learned Custodian contrary to and in disregard of the findings of the Rehabilitation Authorities up to the Rehabilitation Commissioner in this regard has wrongly held that the petitioner was neither in possession of the land in question at the time of its allotment, nor he had been able to prove himself to be a local destitute. It is further contended by him that Her DIL, respondent.was neither in possession of the land in question nor claimed any entitlement to its allotment and as such he had no locus standi to file an application for revision against the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner allowing land in the name of the petitioner before the learned Custodian because he was not a person aggrieved by such an allotment. 5. The learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand, have contended that the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner allowing the land in question to the petitioner was unlawful and without authority mas much as at the time of making the same, the said land already stood allotted to one Bashir Ahmad son of Kala Khan. They have further contended that the petitioner was never MN possession of the land under discussion at the time of its allotment to him which was in possession of his father Noor Ahmad and the respondent No. and that it was the said father of the respondent who had maneuvered to secure the allotment of the same in the name of the petitioner with a view to protecting his unlawful possession. As regards the objection of the learned counsel for the petitioner regarding the application of revision filed by the respondent No. before the learned Custodian being time-barred, it has been contended by the learned counsel for the respondents that the same having been filed within time from the date of the knowledge of the allotment in question, it was not barred by imitation. 6. After giving my due consideration to the above arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record OL the cases of all the subordinate authorities, I am of the option that the allotment of the evacuee property in question in the name of the petitioner was made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner without jurisdiction and lawful authority with the result that the order of the learned Custodian impugned in this writ petition does not call for any interference by this Court in this constitutional petition. It is a common ground between the parties that the land in question was originally allotted to one Bashir Ahmad son of Kala Khan by the competent authority as TS also evident from the perusal of the order of allotment of the Rehabilitation Commissioner allowing the same to the petitioner and from the fact that the said Bash Ahmad, allottee was a party to the proceedings MN both the revision petitions filed by the respondent No. before the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the learned Custodian. The land in question was allotted to the petitioner on the ground that the said allottee had surrendered or abandoned his allotment in favor of Noor Ahmad Khan, the father of the petitioner in an application made Ina case before a Court as well as though an agreement executed by him in his favor. 7. Even if, it is assumed that the said Bashir Ahmad allottee had m fact surrendered or abandoned his allotment in favor of the petitioner, but in my view, still subsists in his name, and he continues to be the lawful allottee of the land in question inasmuch as neither before its allotment to the petitioner nor after that uphill now it has been cancelled from his name by any Rehabilitation authority, what to speak of the competent authority in the matter. The law conferring powers for the cancellation of allotment of an evacuee property from the name of its allottee on the ground of It's have been abandoned by him is provided in section 3 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (Ordinance L1I of 1982) and its succeeding Ordinance on the subject whereby in section 18 after subsection a new subsection (7) was added in the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957) as was in force m Azad Jammu and Kashmir. Section 3 of the B said Ordinance is reproduced below which reads as under ‘3. Amendment of section 18 Act, XII of 1957- In the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, XII of 1957) hereinafter referred to as the said Act, in section 18 subsection <6) the following new subsection (7) shall be added and shall be deemed always to have been so added ; (7) The Government may, cancel the allotment of an evacuee property made in favor of any allottee, where it is proved, to the satisfaction of the Government on the basis of inquiry made by the Rehabilitation Authority that the allottee has abandoned the allotted property or has consented to the cancellation of allotment.” 8. From the perusal of the provisions of law reproduced above it becomes quite clear that newly added subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 has been given retrospective effect from the date of the adaptation 'of the said Act in the Azad Kashmir which was adapted in 1959. In other words, the aforesaid subsection (7) of section J 8 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 shall be deemed to be the part of the said section from the date of the enforcement of the said Act and is to be given effect to from the date, the said Act was adapted. 9. Before the promulgation of the aforesaid Ordinance under which subsection (7) MN section 18 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act was added, there was no provision in the relevant law governing allotment of evacuee property which empowered any Rehabilitation authority to cancel allotment of evacuee property lawfully made to any person and having become final from the name of its allottee on the ground that the same has been abandoned or surrendered by him. Since the enactment of the Adaptation of Law Act, 1959, the allotment of evacuee property is governed by the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 as the same was adapted in Azad Kashmir by virtue of an entry contained at Serial No. 86 of the Schedule to the said former Act. In the said Rehabilitation Act, a provision in section 11(4) has been made which confers powers on the Rehabilitation Commissioner to call for the record of any proceedings which TS pending before or has been disposed of by any of the subordinate Rehabilitation authority for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or proprietary of any order passed by him in the said proceedings c and to pass such order in relation thereto as he thinks fit provided that he shall not pass an order revising or modifying the same affecting any person without giving such a person an opportunity of beg head. The above provision of law, in my view, can only be pressed into service by the Rehabilitation Commissioner for the purpose of canceling the allotment of an evacuee property by way of revision if he comes to the conclusion that the order of the Rehabilitation authority of such an allotment was illegal or improper and before cancelling the same he is bound to give the allottee of the evacuee property, an opportunity of being heard. The Rehabilitation Commissioner does not possess any authority to cancel an allotment of evacuee property which has become final in exercise of his revisional powers under the aforesaid section of the Rehabilitation Act where its allottee is alleged to have or has surrendered or abandoned his allotment because in case of such an abandonment or surrender, no question of legality or proprietary of allotment sought to be revised is involved with the result that such a case falls outside the ambit of sect 11(4) of the Rehabilitation Act and consequently is outside the scope of the revisional jurisdiction of the Rehabilitation Commissioner vested in him under the aforesaid provision of law. 48 authority muchness by the Government, which was only competent to do so at the relevant time in view of the provision of subsection (7) of section 18 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, as added by section 3 of the aforesaid Ordinance. This being the undisputed and established fact, the land in question was not available for allotment and thus the Rehabilitation authority had no power to allot the same to the petitioner mas much as in presence of the existence of its allotment in the name of Bashir Ahmad son of Kala Khan, it could not be legally allotted to any other person. It would have been available for allotment to any deserving person, if in the first place its allotment in the name of its former allottee had been cancelled by the Government. The competent Rehabilitation authority is clothed with the powers to allot only that evacuee property which at the time of its allotment has not been allotted to any person, and it lacks the power to make any allotment of the same which already stands allotted to any person by the authority competent to make such allotment. 11. Now it is an established law that new order of allotment of evacuee property without cancelling the earlier order of its allotment is E illegal and ineffective. 12. The sum total of the above discussion is that the allotment of the land in question still legally and validly subsists in the name of its original allottee Basher Ahmad son of Kala Khan and will be only available for allotment to any other person when its allotment is cancelled from his name by the competent authority on the alleged ground of his having surrendered the same. This being the legal position, the order of allotment of the land in question to the petitioner by the Rehabilitation Commissioner was illegal, ineffective and ab initio void and thus by setting aside it in exercise of its revisional powers, the learned Custodian has committed no illegality for which reason his impugned order be interfered with in exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction conferred on this Court by the Constitution. The writ jurisdiction is not to be exercised to support or to restore an order which has been made without jurisdiction and is ab initio void and ineffective. 13. In the above view of the matter, I have taken other contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner in support of this writ petition become insignificant and lose any importance for which reason, I do not feel the necessity of discussing them and giving decision thereon. 14. For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to the costs. a. a. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 PLD 61?
Answer: From case 1985 PLD 61 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1985-04-28): This constitutional petition under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, is directed against the order of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated 5-5-1981 whereby he set aside the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner allowing certain evacuee property to the petitioner. 2. The brief facts of the case are that the land measuring 26 Canals out of Survey Nos. 804 and 806 situate in village Jaguar, Thesis Bag, District Pooch stood allotted in the name of one Bash Ahmad Khan son of Kala Khan. The said allottee surrendered his above allotment in favor of Noor Ahmad Khan, the father of the petitioner by way of executing an agreement to that effect on 7-9-1963 and making an application in a case pending in the Court of Deputy Custodian MN respect of the said land after which the same was allotted to the petitioner by the Rehabilitation Commissioner vide his order, dated 28-11-1969. 3. The above allotment in the name of the petitioner was challenged by Her DIL Khan, respondent in a revision petition before Rehabilitation Commissioner who dismissed the same vide his order dated 30-9-1980 on the ground that the allotment having been made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner, it was not revisable by him. Feeling aggrieved by the above order, the respondent No. filed a revision petition before the learned Custodian against the orders of the Rehabilitation Commissioner dated 28-11-1969 and 30-9-1980 whereby the land in question was allotted to the petitioner and the revision petition filed by the said respondent against such an allotment was dismissed, respectively which was accepted and the allotment of the petitioner made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner was set aside by the learned Custodian vide his order, dated 28-11-1969 and the Nail- Tonsilar was directed to take necessary action against the unauthorized occupants of the aforesaid land. Hence this writ petition. 4. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the respondents and have also examined the entire record of the case. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the revision petition before the learned Custodian was time-barred and as such the impugned order of the learned Custodian is unlawful having been made without jurisdiction. It has been further contended by him that the petitioner is a local destitute owning only Canals of land and was also in possession of the but the land in question prior to its allotment to him learned Custodian contrary to and in disregard of the findings of the Rehabilitation Authorities up to the Rehabilitation Commissioner in this regard has wrongly held that the petitioner was neither in possession of the land in question at the time of its allotment, nor he had been able to prove himself to be a local destitute. It is further contended by him that Her DIL, respondent.was neither in possession of the land in question nor claimed any entitlement to its allotment and as such he had no locus standi to file an

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 PLD 61?
Answer: From case 1985 PLD 61 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1985-04-28): allotment, nor he had been able to prove himself to be a local destitute. It is further contended by him that Her DIL, respondent.was neither in possession of the land in question nor claimed any entitlement to its allotment and as such he had no locus standi to file an application for revision against the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner allowing land in the name of the petitioner before the learned Custodian because he was not a person aggrieved by such an allotment. 5. The learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand, have contended that the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner allowing the land in question to the petitioner was unlawful and without authority mas much as at the time of making the same, the said land already stood allotted to one Bashir Ahmad son of Kala Khan. They have further contended that the petitioner was never MN possession of the land under discussion at the time of its allotment to him which was in possession of his father Noor Ahmad and the respondent No. and that it was the said father of the respondent who had maneuvered to secure the allotment of the same in the name of the petitioner with a view to protecting his unlawful possession. As regards the objection of the learned counsel for the petitioner regarding the application of revision filed by the respondent No. before the learned Custodian being time-barred, it has been contended by the learned counsel for the respondents that the same having been filed within time from the date of the knowledge of the allotment in question, it was not barred by imitation. 6. After giving my due consideration to the above arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record OL the cases of all the subordinate authorities, I am of the option that the allotment of the evacuee property in question in the name of the petitioner was made by the Rehabilitation Commissioner without jurisdiction and lawful authority with the result that the order of the learned Custodian impugned in this writ petition does not call for any interference by this Court in this constitutional petition. It is a common ground between the parties that the land in question was originally allotted to one Bashir Ahmad son of Kala Khan by the competent authority as TS also evident from the perusal of the order of allotment of the Rehabilitation Commissioner allowing the same to the petitioner and from the fact that the said Bash Ahmad, allottee was a party to the proceedings MN both the revision petitions filed by the respondent No. before the Rehabilitation Commissioner and the learned Custodian. The land in question was allotted to the petitioner on the ground that the said allottee had surrendered or abandoned his allotment in favor of Noor Ahmad Khan, the father of the petitioner in an application made Ina case before a Court as well as though an agreement executed by him in his

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 PLD 61?
Answer: From case 1985 PLD 61 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1985-04-28): question was allotted to the petitioner on the ground that the said allottee had surrendered or abandoned his allotment in favor of Noor Ahmad Khan, the father of the petitioner in an application made Ina case before a Court as well as though an agreement executed by him in his favor. 7. Even if, it is assumed that the said Bashir Ahmad allottee had m fact surrendered or abandoned his allotment in favor of the petitioner, but in my view, still subsists in his name, and he continues to be the lawful allottee of the land in question inasmuch as neither before its allotment to the petitioner nor after that uphill now it has been cancelled from his name by any Rehabilitation authority, what to speak of the competent authority in the matter. The law conferring powers for the cancellation of allotment of an evacuee property from the name of its allottee on the ground of It's have been abandoned by him is provided in section 3 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (Ordinance L1I of 1982) and its succeeding Ordinance on the subject whereby in section 18 after subsection a new subsection (7) was added in the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957) as was in force m Azad Jammu and Kashmir. Section 3 of the B said Ordinance is reproduced below which reads as under ‘3. Amendment of section 18 Act, XII of 1957- In the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, XII of 1957) hereinafter referred to as the said Act, in section 18 subsection <6) the following new subsection (7) shall be added and shall be deemed always to have been so added ; (7) The Government may, cancel the allotment of an evacuee property made in favor of any allottee, where it is proved, to the satisfaction of the Government on the basis of inquiry made by the Rehabilitation Authority that the allottee has abandoned the allotted property or has consented to the cancellation of allotment.” 8. From the perusal of the provisions of law reproduced above it becomes quite clear that newly added subsection (7) of section 18 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 has been given retrospective effect from the date of the adaptation 'of the said Act in the Azad Kashmir which was adapted in 1959. In other words, the aforesaid subsection (7) of section J 8 of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 shall be deemed to be the part of the said section from the date of the enforcement of the said Act and is to be given effect to from the date, the said Act was adapted. 9. Before the promulgation of the aforesaid Ordinance under which subsection (7) MN section 18 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act was added, there was no provision in the relevant law governing allotment of evacuee property which empowered any Rehabilitation authority to cancel allotment of evacuee property

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 PLD 61?
Answer: From case 1985 PLD 61 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1985-04-28): was adapted. 9. Before the promulgation of the aforesaid Ordinance under which subsection (7) MN section 18 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act was added, there was no provision in the relevant law governing allotment of evacuee property which empowered any Rehabilitation authority to cancel allotment of evacuee property lawfully made to any person and having become final from the name of its allottee on the ground that the same has been abandoned or surrendered by him. Since the enactment of the Adaptation of Law Act, 1959, the allotment of evacuee property is governed by the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 as the same was adapted in Azad Kashmir by virtue of an entry contained at Serial No. 86 of the Schedule to the said former Act. In the said Rehabilitation Act, a provision in section 11(4) has been made which confers powers on the Rehabilitation Commissioner to call for the record of any proceedings which TS pending before or has been disposed of by any of the subordinate Rehabilitation authority for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or proprietary of any order passed by him in the said proceedings c and to pass such order in relation thereto as he thinks fit provided that he shall not pass an order revising or modifying the same affecting any person without giving such a person an opportunity of beg head. The above provision of law, in my view, can only be pressed into service by the Rehabilitation Commissioner for the purpose of canceling the allotment of an evacuee property by way of revision if he comes to the conclusion that the order of the Rehabilitation authority of such an allotment was illegal or improper and before cancelling the same he is bound to give the allottee of the evacuee property, an opportunity of being heard. The Rehabilitation Commissioner does not possess any authority to cancel an allotment of evacuee property which has become final in exercise of his revisional powers under the aforesaid section of the Rehabilitation Act where its allottee is alleged to have or has surrendered or abandoned his allotment because in case of such an abandonment or surrender, no question of legality or proprietary of allotment sought to be revised is involved with the result that such a case falls outside the ambit of sect 11(4) of the Rehabilitation Act and consequently is outside the scope of the revisional jurisdiction of the Rehabilitation Commissioner vested in him under the aforesaid provision of law. 48 authority muchness by the Government, which was only competent to do so at the relevant time in view of the provision of subsection (7) of section 18 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, as added by section 3 of the aforesaid Ordinance. This being the undisputed and established fact, the land in question was not available for allotment and thus the Rehabilitation authority had no power to allot the same to the petitioner mas much as in presence of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1985 PLD 61?
Answer: From case 1985 PLD 61 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1985-04-28): Evacuee Property Act, as added by section 3 of the aforesaid Ordinance. This being the undisputed and established fact, the land in question was not available for allotment and thus the Rehabilitation authority had no power to allot the same to the petitioner mas much as in presence of the existence of its allotment in the name of Bashir Ahmad son of Kala Khan, it could not be legally allotted to any other person. It would have been available for allotment to any deserving person, if in the first place its allotment in the name of its former allottee had been cancelled by the Government. The competent Rehabilitation authority is clothed with the powers to allot only that evacuee property which at the time of its allotment has not been allotted to any person, and it lacks the power to make any allotment of the same which already stands allotted to any person by the authority competent to make such allotment. 11. Now it is an established law that new order of allotment of evacuee property without cancelling the earlier order of its allotment is E illegal and ineffective. 12. The sum total of the above discussion is that the allotment of the land in question still legally and validly subsists in the name of its original allottee Basher Ahmad son of Kala Khan and will be only available for allotment to any other person when its allotment is cancelled from his name by the competent authority on the alleged ground of his having surrendered the same. This being the legal position, the order of allotment of the land in question to the petitioner by the Rehabilitation Commissioner was illegal, ineffective and ab initio void and thus by setting aside it in exercise of its revisional powers, the learned Custodian has committed no illegality for which reason his impugned order be interfered with in exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction conferred on this Court by the Constitution. The writ jurisdiction is not to be exercised to support or to restore an order which has been made without jurisdiction and is ab initio void and ineffective. 13. In the above view of the matter, I have taken other contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner in support of this writ petition become insignificant and lose any importance for which reason, I do not feel the necessity of discussing them and giving decision thereon. 14. For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to the costs. a. a. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 1971 SCMR 543 about?
Answer: Case 1971 SCMR 543 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1971-05-31. The case involved PIR SALEH SHAH AND OTHERS—APPELLANTSVERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND ANOTHER —RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ARTICLE 98. The case was heard by M.R. KHAN, WAHEEDUDDIN AHMAD AND SALAHUDDIN AHMED.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: In case 1971 SCMR 543, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ARTICLE 98. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1971-05-31.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 SCMR 543 were: PIR MUHAMMAD RAFIUDDIN SHAH, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BYMUHAMMAD MEHDI ANWAR, ADVOCATE-ON- RECORD FOR APPELLANTS.. The judges presiding were: M.R. KHAN, WAHEEDUDDIN AHMAD AND SALAHUDDIN AHMED.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 SCMR 543 were: PIR SALEH SHAH AND OTHERS—APPELLANTSVERSUS THE CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND ANOTHER —RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 SCMR 543.
Answer: Judgment 1/SCMR/html_TXT/SCMR_1971_543. HTML M. R. Khan, J*—This appeal, by special leave, is directed against the order of a Division Bench of the former High Court of West Pakistan, Lahore, by which the appellants’ Writ Petition No. 509 of 1963 was dismissed in lime. The subject-matters of the said writ petition were 290 canals of agricultural lands in village Footwall, Thesis and District Montgomery, recorded in That No. 1, Khotan Nos. 732 to 736, 743, 747 to 750, 752 to 756, 764, 766 and 773 to 775 as per jacaranda of 1942-43 and 28 canals of agricultural lands in village Chalk Noor Shah, Thesis and District Montgomery, recorded in That No. 1, Khotan Nos. 58 to 62 as per jacaranda of 1945-46. These lands shall hereinafter be called the ‘disputed lands’. The facts of the case, as it appears from the writ petition and the other materials placed on record by the appellants, were as follows — The disputed lands were tenanted lands, and the appellants were the landlords MN respect thereof All the tenants concerned were non-Muslims. On the 28th May 1948, the appellants made three applications under section 8 of the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1948. Two of these applications related to the appellants’ lands in the villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall, and the third- application related to their lands in village Our Shah. These applications were made for a declaration that the non-Muslim tenants, who had been holding the lands in occupancy right, having left Pakistan, their occupancy tenancies were abandoned, and the tenants had therefore no right in the lands. In other words, the prayer made in the said three applications was one for declaration that the disputed lands and the tenanted lands of village Our Shah of which the appellants are owners, were not evacuee property. These applications were dismissed by the Deputy Custodian, by his order, dated the 31st January 1950. On appeal, this order dismissing the said applications was affirmed by the Custodian on the 20th May 1950. About six years thereafter, that 1s, sometime in the year 1956, the present appellants filed three. Fresh applications under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 (Ordinance No. XV of 1949) in respect of the above and some other lands of the said three villages for a declaration that these were non-evacuee property. It was contended in the said applications that the non-Muslim occupancy tenants having been killed, the lands could not be treated as evacuee-property. These three applications were also dismissed by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th April 1958, on the ground that the tenancies in respect of the lands having been admitted in the applications to be occupancy tenancies, the same was not extinguished, and the tenancy rights vested in the Custodian. An appeal was taken against the Deputy Custodian’s order, dated the 19th April.1958. This appeal was accepted by the Additional Custodian, vide his order, dated the 18th November 1959. In the course of the hearing of the appeal, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the status of the tenancies was wrongly stated in the applications to be occupancy tenancies. A prayer was accordingly made for amendment of those applications. This prayer was allowed by the Additional Custodian, and the case was remanded to the Deputy Custodian. After the order of remand, the present appellants filed as many as 14 fresh applications under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957) sometime in the year 1960. Fourteen separate cases were started on the said applications out of which Cases Nos. and 11 related to the appellants’ lands in village Chalk Noor Shah and Cases Nos. 5, 13 and 15 related to the lands in village Footwall. The Deputy Custodian, by his orders, dated the 30th June 1961, dismissed all these cases. The present appellants then preferred 14 Appeals Nos. 78 to 91 of 1962 against the Deputy Custodian’s orders, dated the 30th June 1961, out of which Appeals Nos. 78, 84 and 85 of 1962 were dismissed for non-prosecution and the remaining appeals were dismissed by the Custodian on the 31st October 1962, mainly on the ground that the appellants’ applications made in 1948 for declaring the lands to be non-evacuee property were dismissed by the Deputy Custodian and the order of dismissal was affirmed on appeal, but this fact was fraudulently suppressed in their fresh applications made in 1960 under section 22 of Act XII of 1957. The further ground for dismissing the appeals was that the lands in question had already been allotted to refugees by the Rehabilitation Authorities, but the allottees were not imp leaded in the applications and the appeals arising therefrom. As the appeals were dismissed on these grounds, the Custodian did not consider them on merits. The present appellants then made the Writ Petition No. 509 of 1963, calling in question the validity of the order of the Custodian, dated the 31st October 1962, dismissing their appeals relating only to the lands in villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall. The learned Judges of the High Court dismissed the writ WW. petition in imine mainly on the ground that “the delay in filing the applications until 1956 itself disentitled the present appellants from obtain a declaration that on account of exodus of the non-Muslims tenants, their rights had been expropriated, and they were disentitled to reenter the lands”. The learned Judges also took the view that the tenancy rights of the evacuee tenants, in view of specific provisions in all the evacuee laws, remained unaffected by their exodus. Nonjoinder of the allottees in the writ petition also weighed with them. The main ground on which the Custodian dismissed the appellants’ appeals was, in his own words, as follows — “T am dismissing all these appeals without hearing the learned counsel of the appellants on merits, because in my option the appellants by concealing the fact that the earlier applications had been dismissed by the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, and that their appeals had been dismissed by the Custodial! of Evacuee Property, have tried to practice fraud by filing these fresh applications in the year 1960.” The question is whether there was any real basis for the Custodian’s taking the above view. The appellants admitted in the writ petition that on the 28th May 1948, they had made three applications under section 8 of the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1948 for declaring their lands in the villages Chalk Noor Shah, Footwall and Our Shah as non-evacuee property. The lands in the villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall were described at the beginning of the writ petition with reference to the numbers of their hats and rhatanies. The said three applications of the 28th May 1948, were admittedly dismissed and the appeals arising therefrom were also dismissed. The appellants further admitted that sometime in 1956 they filed three other applications for the same relief under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 (Ordinance No. XV of 1949). This was admitted in the writ petition in the following words ‘That in 1956, petitioners filed three applications before the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Montgomery, under section 18 of Act XV of 1949 (Act XV of 1949 is a mistake for Ordinance No. 15 of 1949) in respect of the above and other lands situated in the three villages Monza Noor Shah, CHK Noor Shah and Monza Footwall.” WW. The words “in respect of the above and other lands” occurring in the said quotation are significant. They clearly referred to lands which included the lands of villages Chalk Noor Shah and Maura Footwall, that is, the disputed lands as described in the earlier part of the writ petition. The further admission in the" writ petition was that the applications filed by the appellants before the Custodian in the year 1960 under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 included, among others, the disputed lands. Thus on the appellants’ own admission, the lands of the villages Chat Noor Shah and Footwall as described in the writ petition and which were also the subject-matters of the appeals before the Custodian, had been involved in their applications made on the 28th May 1948. In fact, it was not the appellants’ case in the writ petition that the lands covered by their applications made on the 28th May 1948, appertaining to the villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall were different from the lands involved in the appeals before the Custodian. What,’ however, was made out in the writ petition was that in the applications filed in* 1948, the tenancies were occupancy tenancies, whereas the tenancies evolved in the relevant appeals before the* Custodian were nor-occupancy tenancies. This means that while the lands mvolved'm the applications made in the year 1948 and the. appeals before the Custodian were the same, the status of the tenancies con* "r corned was different. This is evident from the following ground taken in the writ petition — ». ‘That the applications filed in 1948 related; to the. occupancy tenancies and were based on the. Ground that the abandonment had taken place by the non-Muslim occupancy tenants while 7 out of the. 14 applications filed later on were related to the non-occupancy tenancies and. Possession of which, had passed to the petitioners long before 1947.” hi Thus it is abundantly clear that heads of villages Chalk Noor Shah. And Footwall which?had been the. subject-matters of the applications made in 1948 were also the subject-matters of the appeals before the Custodian. The appellants did not file in the High Court any of their applications successively made'by them in the WW. years 1948, 1956 and 1960 for the same relief, It was only at a late; stage that a certified copy fan application relating to certain lands of village Chalk Noor Shah was produced in this Court. This application related to as much as, 1221 canals 18 Marley. of lands of village, Chalk Noor Shah, whereas the appellants’ writ petition related to only 28 canals of lands of that village. Moreover, the rhatanies{ of these; lands are different. Thus it appears that the lands. Mentioned in the. said certified copy and the lands of village Chalk Noor. Shah as stated in the writ petition are different.’ But it does* not necessarily follow therefrom that the appellants did not make any application MN the year 1948 for declared 28 canals of lands of village Chalk Noor Shah as non-evacuee property. It has been the consistent, case of the appellants that they had applied in the year 1948 for declaring 28 canals of lands of village Chalk Noor Shah as nonevacuee property. This was the appellants’ positive case in the writ petition and the petition for special leave. Hence, the certified copy of the application* filed in this Court has no bearing on the present case. It might be that the appellants had made another separate application in the year 1948 in respect of entirely different lands of Chalk Noor Shah measuring as much as 1221 canals 18 Marley. In their writ petition, the appellants took the stand that they did not suppress the film of the applications in 1948 and the dismissal of those applications inasmuch as the tenancies shown therein were occupancy tenancies, whereas the tenancies stated in the applications of the year 1960 which give rise to the appeals before the Custodian, related to non- o.occupancy tenancies. This contention is of no substance. When the applications of 1948 as also the applications of 1960 related to the same lands, the appellants should have stated in the latter applications that their earlier applications of 1948 had been dismissed and the order of dismissal had been maintained on appeal. The mere fact that the status of the tenancies was alleged to be non-occupancy tenancies in the appellants* subsequent applications of the year 1960 did not alter the lands which were the same in all the applications. The learned Custodian was therefore right in take the view that the appellants tried to practice fraud by filing fresh applications in the year 1960 by suppressing the dismissal of the earlier applications made in 1948, It is an accepted principle that no person is entitled to any assistance from a Court or tribunal unless he comes with clean hands. WW. A The learned Judges of the High Court found that the appellants were not entitled to any relief because of the ordinate delay they made in filing the applications in 1960. It 1s, therefore, -to >be considered-if this view of the learned Judges is correct. It is admitted that sometime in the year 1956 the appellants made three applications under section 18 of the Ordinance No. XV of 1949 for the same relief in respect of the same lands. Two of these applications admittedly related to the lands of villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall, that is, the subject-matters of the writ petition. These applications were admittedly dismissed by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th April 1958. It was the appellants* case that, on appeal, the Additional Custodian remanded the case to the Deputy Custodian and permitted the appellants to amend their applications by changing the status of the tenancies from occupancy to non-occupancy. After the remand, the appellants, instead of taking steps for amending the applications made in the year 1956, filed fresh applications sometime in 1960 under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act No. XII of 1957), for the same relief in respect of the same lands. The disputed lands, as contended by the learned counsel representing the Rehabilitation Authority (respondent No. 2), had been allotted to a number of refugees sometime in the year 1948. The learned counsel, in fact, produced some official records to show that the allotments had been made to the refugees in 1948, The prescribed period for making an application for declaring a property to be a non-evacuee property is 60 days from the date of treating the property as evacuee property. As the disputed lands had been treated to be evacuee property mm the year 1948, the applications made in 1960, out of which the appeals before the Custodian arose, were Clearly barred by time. The learned Judges of the High Court were, therefore, right in holding that the appellants were not entitled. to any relief on the ground of inordinate delay. Thus the appeal is liable to be dismissed, and the appellants are not entitled to any relief in any case. Hence, it is not necessary to consider the other two ports, namely, whether there was ordinate delay in film the wait petition itself and whether the non-joinder of the allottees was a fatal defect. In the result, I would dismiss the appeal. I would, however, leave the parties to bear the own costs. _ Appeal dismissed. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 543 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-05-31): Judgment 1/SCMR/html_TXT/SCMR_1971_543. HTML M. R. Khan, J*—This appeal, by special leave, is directed against the order of a Division Bench of the former High Court of West Pakistan, Lahore, by which the appellants’ Writ Petition No. 509 of 1963 was dismissed in lime. The subject-matters of the said writ petition were 290 canals of agricultural lands in village Footwall, Thesis and District Montgomery, recorded in That No. 1, Khotan Nos. 732 to 736, 743, 747 to 750, 752 to 756, 764, 766 and 773 to 775 as per jacaranda of 1942-43 and 28 canals of agricultural lands in village Chalk Noor Shah, Thesis and District Montgomery, recorded in That No. 1, Khotan Nos. 58 to 62 as per jacaranda of 1945-46. These lands shall hereinafter be called the ‘disputed lands’. The facts of the case, as it appears from the writ petition and the other materials placed on record by the appellants, were as follows — The disputed lands were tenanted lands, and the appellants were the landlords MN respect thereof All the tenants concerned were non-Muslims. On the 28th May 1948, the appellants made three applications under section 8 of the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1948. Two of these applications related to the appellants’ lands in the villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall, and the third- application related to their lands in village Our Shah. These applications were made for a declaration that the non-Muslim tenants, who had been holding the lands in occupancy right, having left Pakistan, their occupancy tenancies were abandoned, and the tenants had therefore no right in the lands. In other words, the prayer made in the said three applications was one for declaration that the disputed lands and the tenanted lands of village Our Shah of which the appellants are owners, were not evacuee property. These applications were dismissed by the Deputy Custodian, by his order, dated the 31st January 1950. On appeal, this order dismissing the said applications was affirmed by the Custodian on the 20th May 1950. About six years thereafter, that 1s, sometime in the year 1956, the present appellants filed three. Fresh applications under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 (Ordinance No. XV of 1949) in respect of the above and some other lands of the said three villages for a declaration that these were non-evacuee property. It was contended in the said applications that the non-Muslim occupancy tenants having been killed, the lands could not be treated as evacuee-property. These three applications were also dismissed by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th April 1958, on the ground that the tenancies in respect of the lands having been admitted in the applications to be occupancy tenancies, the same was not extinguished, and the tenancy rights vested in the Custodian. An appeal was taken against the Deputy Custodian’s order, dated the 19th April.1958. This appeal was accepted by the Additional Custodian, vide his order, dated the 18th November 1959. In the course of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 543 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-05-31): to be occupancy tenancies, the same was not extinguished, and the tenancy rights vested in the Custodian. An appeal was taken against the Deputy Custodian’s order, dated the 19th April.1958. This appeal was accepted by the Additional Custodian, vide his order, dated the 18th November 1959. In the course of the hearing of the appeal, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the status of the tenancies was wrongly stated in the applications to be occupancy tenancies. A prayer was accordingly made for amendment of those applications. This prayer was allowed by the Additional Custodian, and the case was remanded to the Deputy Custodian. After the order of remand, the present appellants filed as many as 14 fresh applications under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957) sometime in the year 1960. Fourteen separate cases were started on the said applications out of which Cases Nos. and 11 related to the appellants’ lands in village Chalk Noor Shah and Cases Nos. 5, 13 and 15 related to the lands in village Footwall. The Deputy Custodian, by his orders, dated the 30th June 1961, dismissed all these cases. The present appellants then preferred 14 Appeals Nos. 78 to 91 of 1962 against the Deputy Custodian’s orders, dated the 30th June 1961, out of which Appeals Nos. 78, 84 and 85 of 1962 were dismissed for non-prosecution and the remaining appeals were dismissed by the Custodian on the 31st October 1962, mainly on the ground that the appellants’ applications made in 1948 for declaring the lands to be non-evacuee property were dismissed by the Deputy Custodian and the order of dismissal was affirmed on appeal, but this fact was fraudulently suppressed in their fresh applications made in 1960 under section 22 of Act XII of 1957. The further ground for dismissing the appeals was that the lands in question had already been allotted to refugees by the Rehabilitation Authorities, but the allottees were not imp leaded in the applications and the appeals arising therefrom. As the appeals were dismissed on these grounds, the Custodian did not consider them on merits. The present appellants then made the Writ Petition No. 509 of 1963, calling in question the validity of the order of the Custodian, dated the 31st October 1962, dismissing their appeals relating only to the lands in villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall. The learned Judges of the High Court dismissed the writ WW. petition in imine mainly on the ground that “the delay in filing the applications until 1956 itself disentitled the present appellants from obtain a declaration that on account of exodus of the non-Muslims tenants, their rights had been expropriated, and they were disentitled to reenter the lands”. The learned Judges also took the view that the tenancy rights of the evacuee tenants, in view of specific provisions in all the evacuee laws, remained unaffected by their exodus. Nonjoinder of the allottees in the writ petition also weighed with

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 543 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-05-31): expropriated, and they were disentitled to reenter the lands”. The learned Judges also took the view that the tenancy rights of the evacuee tenants, in view of specific provisions in all the evacuee laws, remained unaffected by their exodus. Nonjoinder of the allottees in the writ petition also weighed with them. The main ground on which the Custodian dismissed the appellants’ appeals was, in his own words, as follows — “T am dismissing all these appeals without hearing the learned counsel of the appellants on merits, because in my option the appellants by concealing the fact that the earlier applications had been dismissed by the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, and that their appeals had been dismissed by the Custodial! of Evacuee Property, have tried to practice fraud by filing these fresh applications in the year 1960.” The question is whether there was any real basis for the Custodian’s taking the above view. The appellants admitted in the writ petition that on the 28th May 1948, they had made three applications under section 8 of the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1948 for declaring their lands in the villages Chalk Noor Shah, Footwall and Our Shah as non-evacuee property. The lands in the villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall were described at the beginning of the writ petition with reference to the numbers of their hats and rhatanies. The said three applications of the 28th May 1948, were admittedly dismissed and the appeals arising therefrom were also dismissed. The appellants further admitted that sometime in 1956 they filed three other applications for the same relief under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 (Ordinance No. XV of 1949). This was admitted in the writ petition in the following words ‘That in 1956, petitioners filed three applications before the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Montgomery, under section 18 of Act XV of 1949 (Act XV of 1949 is a mistake for Ordinance No. 15 of 1949) in respect of the above and other lands situated in the three villages Monza Noor Shah, CHK Noor Shah and Monza Footwall.” WW. The words “in respect of the above and other lands” occurring in the said quotation are significant. They clearly referred to lands which included the lands of villages Chalk Noor Shah and Maura Footwall, that is, the disputed lands as described in the earlier part of the writ petition. The further admission in the" writ petition was that the applications filed by the appellants before the Custodian in the year 1960 under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 included, among others, the disputed lands. Thus on the appellants’ own admission, the lands of the villages Chat Noor Shah and Footwall as described in the writ petition and which were also the subject-matters of the appeals before the Custodian, had been involved in their applications made on the 28th May 1948. In fact, it was not the appellants’ case in the writ petition that the lands covered

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 543 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-05-31): Noor Shah and Footwall as described in the writ petition and which were also the subject-matters of the appeals before the Custodian, had been involved in their applications made on the 28th May 1948. In fact, it was not the appellants’ case in the writ petition that the lands covered by their applications made on the 28th May 1948, appertaining to the villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall were different from the lands involved in the appeals before the Custodian. What,’ however, was made out in the writ petition was that in the applications filed in* 1948, the tenancies were occupancy tenancies, whereas the tenancies evolved in the relevant appeals before the* Custodian were nor-occupancy tenancies. This means that while the lands mvolved'm the applications made in the year 1948 and the. appeals before the Custodian were the same, the status of the tenancies con* "r corned was different. This is evident from the following ground taken in the writ petition — ». ‘That the applications filed in 1948 related; to the. occupancy tenancies and were based on the. Ground that the abandonment had taken place by the non-Muslim occupancy tenants while 7 out of the. 14 applications filed later on were related to the non-occupancy tenancies and. Possession of which, had passed to the petitioners long before 1947.” hi Thus it is abundantly clear that heads of villages Chalk Noor Shah. And Footwall which?had been the. subject-matters of the applications made in 1948 were also the subject-matters of the appeals before the Custodian. The appellants did not file in the High Court any of their applications successively made'by them in the WW. years 1948, 1956 and 1960 for the same relief, It was only at a late; stage that a certified copy fan application relating to certain lands of village Chalk Noor Shah was produced in this Court. This application related to as much as, 1221 canals 18 Marley. of lands of village, Chalk Noor Shah, whereas the appellants’ writ petition related to only 28 canals of lands of that village. Moreover, the rhatanies{ of these; lands are different. Thus it appears that the lands. Mentioned in the. said certified copy and the lands of village Chalk Noor. Shah as stated in the writ petition are different.’ But it does* not necessarily follow therefrom that the appellants did not make any application MN the year 1948 for declared 28 canals of lands of village Chalk Noor Shah as non-evacuee property. It has been the consistent, case of the appellants that they had applied in the year 1948 for declaring 28 canals of lands of village Chalk Noor Shah as nonevacuee property. This was the appellants’ positive case in the writ petition and the petition for special leave. Hence, the certified copy of the application* filed in this Court has no bearing on the present case. It might be that the appellants had made another separate application in the year 1948 in respect of entirely different lands of Chalk Noor

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 543 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-05-31): writ petition and the petition for special leave. Hence, the certified copy of the application* filed in this Court has no bearing on the present case. It might be that the appellants had made another separate application in the year 1948 in respect of entirely different lands of Chalk Noor Shah measuring as much as 1221 canals 18 Marley. In their writ petition, the appellants took the stand that they did not suppress the film of the applications in 1948 and the dismissal of those applications inasmuch as the tenancies shown therein were occupancy tenancies, whereas the tenancies stated in the applications of the year 1960 which give rise to the appeals before the Custodian, related to non- o.occupancy tenancies. This contention is of no substance. When the applications of 1948 as also the applications of 1960 related to the same lands, the appellants should have stated in the latter applications that their earlier applications of 1948 had been dismissed and the order of dismissal had been maintained on appeal. The mere fact that the status of the tenancies was alleged to be non-occupancy tenancies in the appellants* subsequent applications of the year 1960 did not alter the lands which were the same in all the applications. The learned Custodian was therefore right in take the view that the appellants tried to practice fraud by filing fresh applications in the year 1960 by suppressing the dismissal of the earlier applications made in 1948, It is an accepted principle that no person is entitled to any assistance from a Court or tribunal unless he comes with clean hands. WW. A The learned Judges of the High Court found that the appellants were not entitled to any relief because of the ordinate delay they made in filing the applications in 1960. It 1s, therefore, -to >be considered-if this view of the learned Judges is correct. It is admitted that sometime in the year 1956 the appellants made three applications under section 18 of the Ordinance No. XV of 1949 for the same relief in respect of the same lands. Two of these applications admittedly related to the lands of villages Chalk Noor Shah and Footwall, that is, the subject-matters of the writ petition. These applications were admittedly dismissed by the Deputy Custodian on the 19th April 1958. It was the appellants* case that, on appeal, the Additional Custodian remanded the case to the Deputy Custodian and permitted the appellants to amend their applications by changing the status of the tenancies from occupancy to non-occupancy. After the remand, the appellants, instead of taking steps for amending the applications made in the year 1956, filed fresh applications sometime in 1960 under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act No. XII of 1957), for the same relief in respect of the same lands. The disputed lands, as contended by the learned counsel representing the Rehabilitation Authority (respondent No. 2), had been allotted to a number of refugees sometime in the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 543?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 543 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-05-31): the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act No. XII of 1957), for the same relief in respect of the same lands. The disputed lands, as contended by the learned counsel representing the Rehabilitation Authority (respondent No. 2), had been allotted to a number of refugees sometime in the year 1948. The learned counsel, in fact, produced some official records to show that the allotments had been made to the refugees in 1948, The prescribed period for making an application for declaring a property to be a non-evacuee property is 60 days from the date of treating the property as evacuee property. As the disputed lands had been treated to be evacuee property mm the year 1948, the applications made in 1960, out of which the appeals before the Custodian arose, were Clearly barred by time. The learned Judges of the High Court were, therefore, right in holding that the appellants were not entitled. to any relief on the ground of inordinate delay. Thus the appeal is liable to be dismissed, and the appellants are not entitled to any relief in any case. Hence, it is not necessary to consider the other two ports, namely, whether there was ordinate delay in film the wait petition itself and whether the non-joinder of the allottees was a fatal defect. In the result, I would dismiss the appeal. I would, however, leave the parties to bear the own costs. _ Appeal dismissed. WW.

Question: What is case 1971 SCMR 353 about?
Answer: Case 1971 SCMR 353 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1971-03-17. The case involved NATIONAL BANK OF LAHORE LTD.—APPELLANTVERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include ENEMY PROPERTY (CUSTODYAND REGISTRATION) ORDER 1965 - PARAGRAPH 4(IV). The case was heard by HAMOODUR RAHMAN, C.J, MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALLSAJJAD AHMAD, WAHIDUDDIN AHMAD AND SALAHUDDIN AHMAD.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 SCMR 353?
Answer: In case 1971 SCMR 353, the court applied the following statutes: ENEMY PROPERTY (CUSTODYAND REGISTRATION) ORDER 1965 - PARAGRAPH 4(IV). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1971-03-17.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 SCMR 353?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 SCMR 353 were: RAJA MUHAMMAD ANWAR, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BYS. INAYAT HUSSAIN, ATTORNEY FOR APPELLANT,,MLAN HIDAYAT ALI TAIB, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 5.. The judges presiding were: HAMOODUR RAHMAN, C.J, MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALLSAJJAD AHMAD, WAHIDUDDIN AHMAD AND SALAHUDDIN AHMAD.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 SCMR 353?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 SCMR 353 were: NATIONAL BANK OF LAHORE LTD.—APPELLANTVERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 SCMR 353.
Answer: Judgment Muhammad Vague Al, J. —The appellant called in question in the High Court by a Writ Petition the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property that the appellant and its property were evacuee. The matter coming up before a Division Bench, the petition was dismissed on 25th April 1966, on the ground that in the meantime the appellant had become an enemy alien and under para. 4(/w) of the Enemy Property (Custodian and Registration) Order, 1965, framed under the Defense of Pakistan Rules, 1965, it had no locus standi to continue with the petition. Reliance was placed on Reference No. of 1965 The power of attorney filed by Mr. Istanbul Had, Advocate, on behalf of the Custodian, Enemy Properly, to continue with the petition was also rejected on the ground that “he was not a party to the proceedings and even if he was the position could not, IQ any way, be different.” Leave to appeal was given to consider whether the High Court had nightly refused to allow the Custodian of Enemy Property to continue with the writ petition. The view expressed by the High Court was plainly incorrect Clause (12v) of sub-para (2) of Paragraph of the aforementioned Order expressly gives a right to the Custodian of Enemy Property to “institute”, defend or continue any suit or other legal proceed-, NGS, refer any dispute to arbitration, and. Compromise any debts,}, claims or abilities”. A WNT, petition is certainly “other legal proceedings” which the Custodian could continue in the High Court. The‘decision reported-in PLD 1966' Keir. 160 is based on the provisions o.f "section!83 of the. Civil. Procedure Code, but at page /172T of the Report itisremarked.: (2) The suits i which the defendants are enemy aliens : pan proceed.» If the-enemy property is evolved and vests in i the. Custodian'of Enemy. Property it is open to him to continue -or defend the suit.’.’ «¢( As'seen the Custodian4 of Enemy Property had apported Mr/ Istanbul'Harris his! Advocate to continue-with the Writ Petition, subcontrary’ to the provisions of Rule 4(/v), the learned Judged did not permit hire to; continue; with it. It’ appears that the attention 6f the' learned’ Judges' was not drawn tootsie rule as well as FTO,vth(S Observation sin the Karachi "case re above.‘-‘.I ' The appears, accordingly,allowed, and the cases remanded to the High' Cost* for'disposal is \accordance with law!" There will h'e*NRL-- firtteraato* FV, 1'’ will be-n o or der w to* So'STS. V-\f*1l phi ’—wl11*k -tint Yi" Appeal accepted*

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 353?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 353 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-03-17): Judgment Muhammad Vague Al, J. —The appellant called in question in the High Court by a Writ Petition the order of the Custodian of Evacuee Property that the appellant and its property were evacuee. The matter coming up before a Division Bench, the petition was dismissed on 25th April 1966, on the ground that in the meantime the appellant had become an enemy alien and under para. 4(/w) of the Enemy Property (Custodian and Registration) Order, 1965, framed under the Defense of Pakistan Rules, 1965, it had no locus standi to continue with the petition. Reliance was placed on Reference No. of 1965 The power of attorney filed by Mr. Istanbul Had, Advocate, on behalf of the Custodian, Enemy Properly, to continue with the petition was also rejected on the ground that “he was not a party to the proceedings and even if he was the position could not, IQ any way, be different.” Leave to appeal was given to consider whether the High Court had nightly refused to allow the Custodian of Enemy Property to continue with the writ petition. The view expressed by the High Court was plainly incorrect Clause (12v) of sub-para (2) of Paragraph of the aforementioned Order expressly gives a right to the Custodian of Enemy Property to “institute”, defend or continue any suit or other legal proceed-, NGS, refer any dispute to arbitration, and. Compromise any debts,}, claims or abilities”. A WNT, petition is certainly “other legal proceedings” which the Custodian could continue in the High Court. The‘decision reported-in PLD 1966' Keir. 160 is based on the provisions o.f "section!83 of the. Civil. Procedure Code, but at page /172T of the Report itisremarked.: (2) The suits i which the defendants are enemy aliens : pan proceed.» If the-enemy property is evolved and vests in i the. Custodian'of Enemy. Property it is open to him to continue -or defend the suit.’.’ «¢( As'seen the Custodian4 of Enemy Property had apported Mr/ Istanbul'Harris his! Advocate to continue-with the Writ Petition, subcontrary’ to the provisions of Rule 4(/v), the learned Judged did not permit hire to; continue; with it. It’ appears that the attention 6f the' learned’ Judges' was not drawn tootsie rule as well as FTO,vth(S Observation sin the Karachi "case re above.‘-‘.I ' The appears, accordingly,allowed, and the cases remanded to the High' Cost* for'disposal is \accordance with law!" There will h'e*NRL-- firtteraato* FV, 1'’ will be-n o or der w to* So'STS. V-\f*1l phi ’—wl11*k -tint Yi" Appeal accepted*

Question: What is case 1971 SCMR 387 about?
Answer: Case 1971 SCMR 387 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1964-01-22. The case involved THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN— APPELLANTVERSUS MRS. DOREEN BARKAT RAM AND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 41 (3) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1971/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_1971_387.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 01:52 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/197 1/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_1971_387.htm|. The case was heard by A. R. CORNELIUS, C. J. S. A. RAHM AN,FAZLE-AKBAR, B. Z. KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: In case 1971 SCMR 387, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 41 (3) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1971/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_1971_387.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 01:52 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/197 1/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_1971_387.htm|. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1964-01-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 SCMR 387 were: GHIAS MUHAMMAD, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT (F. M. ANWARI, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH HIM) INSTRUCTED BY SIDDIQ COMPANY, ATTORNEYS FOR APPELLANT. MANZUR QADIR, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT (‘S. M. ZAFAR, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH HIM) INSTRUCTED BY IFTIKHAR-UD-DIN AHMAD, ATTORNEY FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.. The judges presiding were: A. R. CORNELIUS, C. J. S. A. RAHM AN,FAZLE-AKBAR, B. Z. KAIKAUS AND HAMOODUR RAHMAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 SCMR 387 were: THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN— APPELLANTVERSUS MRS. DOREEN BARKAT RAM AND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 SCMR 387.
Answer: Seymour Rahman, J.—This is a certificated appeal from the judgment and order of a Division Bench of the High Court of West Pakistan in a writ petition. The said writ petition was filed on the 4th of August 1960, by the respondent No. herein for having the order passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, on the 31st of May 1960, in the purported exercise of his review jurisdiction, quashed by a writ of certiorari and for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Settlement authorities to give to the said respondent her J/Alioth share in the joint family properties of her deceased husband, Mr. Bark at Ram, after partitioning the same. The deceased Bark at Ram was a grandson of the late Sir Gang Ram and he along with his father Hard Ram and his three brothers Jesus Ram, Ten Ram and Shiv Ram constituted a Jolt Hindu family. Bark at Ram married the respondent No. under the Special Marriages Act of 1872 on the 10th of August 1948S, but he died about a year later on the 29th of September 1946. After his death his widow, the respondent No. 1, on the 23rd of March 1947, filed a suit for the administration of the property of her late husband. This suit was pending when the two domains of Pakistan and India were set up and the father and brothers of Bark at Ram, who were defendants in the said administration suit and had duly entered appearance therein through counsel, migrated to India. On the 10th of July 1948, however, a compromise was effected in the said suit and a decree was passed in terms of the compromise. Under the terms of the said compromise the widow was -to be paid in full and final settlement of her claim CERTAM movable and immovable properties valued at Rs. 1,87,000. The immovable properties included in the list of properties to be given to the widow were a garden and two shops at Tarantula in the district of Lyallpur, valued at Rs. 3,500. The widow of Bark at Ram was to be given 20% of the sale proceeds of certain other properties, if she was unable to realize the estimated value of Rs. 1,87,000 from the properties agreed to be transferred to her and the latter properties were to be charged for the recovery of the shortfall, if any, from the said sum of Rs. 1,87,000. In the meantime, however, on or about the 23rd of December 1947, the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Punjab, treated the entire joint family properties as evacuee properties and assumed possession of the same under the West Punjab Protection of WW. Evacuee Property Ordinance No. VII of 1947. This Ordinance was replaced and the 19th of February 1948, by the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act No. VII of 1948 and later by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance No. XV of 1949. The respondent Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram, therefore, made an application under section 18 of the above-mentioned Ordinance of 1949 on the 28th of April 1955, for a declaration that she was entitled to a V/Sth share in the afore-mentioned joint family properties and that IDP s?me were not evacuee properties. T{£1 Deputy Custodian found that she was not an 'evacuee but came to the conclusion 1 WTF-*»TL‘-Vt'M Var»‘r4't that by reason of the compromise enter,ed into m the administration suit she could not get anything more, and hence he ordered that after deducting the amount which she may have already received or which she can receive after bona fide efforts to dispose of the shares given to her the balance that may be found to be due out of the said sum of Rs. 1,87,COO should be paid to her out of the evacuee properties under section 20(2){k) of {he said Ordinance of 1949. She went on appeal to the Custodian from the above order of the Deputy Custodian. This appeal Yves heard by the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Lahore, who upheld the finding that the respondent Mrs. Bark at Ram was not an evacuee but reversed the order of the Deputy Custodian and granted ‘her a ‘ declaration to the effect that she was the owner of an undivided /10th star.e and not *SL,‘as claimed by her, inch? jpiaffatfy ' PFOB&TIE?OF W deceased husband. He came to this year, because, in his opinion, the compromise decree was hit by the provisions of action 34 of Prince Jo.' XV of 19.49 and section *1 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, which had since replaced the Ordinance. Both of these were 8&e“ retrospective Effie.ct.” The ordinance validated decrees passed after the 14th August 1947, but. The Act declared decrees or orders of civil. 'Courts passed between the IST day of March 1947, "and the" 15th\day pfOetpber 1949\(the the.the |the 9rvdinane,e came into force), TP b.e' incapable of affecting any right or interest of any evacuee in any property or being binding on the Custodian ‘unless accepted or'approved by him: These provisions also. Took a way. The jurisdiction of all. Civil or range Courts or another author.ty “to entertain or adjudicate upon any. EU,estipn arising",in' any suit, appeal, application or o,ihr proceedings whether any person is or is not an evacuee or whether. Any property is ox is hot. Evacuee property or what’ right or least, if any, an. Evacuee has in any EU.ch property,”. WW. The Additional Custodian was also of the TAH"' M. w compromise was, in any. Event, hit by sections 11 and 9 of the West. Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act {j.o, VII of 1948. Under section 11 of the above Act also the jurisdiction of civil Courts to.enter tam or adjudicate upon any. Claim in any suit, appeal," exec,u,tip application or other projcsed&gs as.to whether any property is or is not evacuee prpperjypr as to what interest, if any, an eya9u.EE has in s.such property, OVAs also excluded. Under suction of the said' section any S of the. Said t.also mad* all Transfers of evacuee property on PR. After the 15,the Paul 19 valid and flee'active unless registered by the Custodian within the prescribed time. Since the compromise purported to transfer at- least Afro immovable properties at Lyallpur as ALS:c> to create a charge on certain other immovable properties, it fell within the mischief of these provisions and was held to be ineffective.- As such, Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram, who had been found to be a non-evacuee, was declared to be entitled to' a half share in her deceased husband’s share in the joint family properties; -, Against time said order of the Additional Custodian the Rehabilitation Authority went up in revision before the,then Custodian Mr. Muhammad Jan. He affirmed the decision of the Additional Custodian and dismissed the revision petition. Thereafter, the Central Government referred the case to the Tribunal set up under section 43-A of the Pakistan (Administration Of Evacuee Property) Act,- 1957, but during the pendency of the reference before the Tribunal the Rehabilitation Department acting upon a suggestion which fell from the Tribunal applied to the successor Custodian Maud Ahmad, J; for a review Of the order passed by his predecessor Mr. Muhammad Jan on (he is 4th of July 1958. Maud Ahmad, J. took the view that the Custodian’s pow'a* to review his predecessor’s order was very wide and that such an order of a predecessor Custodian could be reviewed b the successor Ciistodiafa without any limit 6‘f time so moth “On any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case* may require, in his view the justice of the present case required that the compromise decree should be approved index the powers given to the Custodian by subsection (3) of section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) AET, 1957, and tie respondent Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram should get only. the WW. ‘fruit-of the compromise decree which she had Obtained in time year 1948 and nothing more.” He, accordingly, restored the order of the Deputy Custodian. This was the order that was challenged by the respondent Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram in the. High Court. The High Court disagreed With the view of the Custodian Maud Ahmad, J. that the Custodian’s power of review was AIs wide as claimed by him; Relying Ripon spine observations in THD decision of this Court in the case of Samurai v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi (1) the High Court held that even though the provisions of Order XLVII Of the Code DF Civil Procedure were not in terms applicable to proceedings for review before the Custodian of Evacuee Property, yet they served as a valuable guide for determine the scope of the powers of review. The power of review of the Custodian, however wide it might be, could not, it was held, possibly extend to the passing of an order it reviews which was Opposed to law,’ merely _ because the Custodian, as he cleared* was Satisfied that the justice of the case! demanded the making of such an order. Having rejected this wide claim of the Custodian the High Court went on to hold that the Compromise decree was invalid in law and could not have been acted upon and, therefore, the Custodian in purporting to give effect to the said compromise decree in the exercise of his powers of review had acted contrary to law and in excess of his jurisdiction, for he was purporting to validate something which the evacuee property law then in force declared to be invalid and of no legal effect whatsoever. The order passed in review by the Custodian Maud Ahmad, J. was, therefore, quashed by a writ of certiorari and as in consequential relief a further direction in the nature of a mandamus was issued to the Settlement authorities to partition the joint family properties of the deceased Bark at Ram and to give to his widow a Both share therein after partitioning the same. Since the value of the subject-matter in dispute in the writ petition was worth more than Rs. 15,Q00 and there was also an important question of law arising, namely, as to the scope of the powers of review of a Custodian of Evacuee Property under the relevant evacuee laws, a certificate was also granted on the application of the Custodian of Evacuee Property for preferring an appeal to this Court. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Custodian in support of this appeal has not attempted to support the claim of the Custodian that bis power of review was so wide that he could review any order of his predecessor, if; in his opinion, the justice of the case so required or that when exercising such powers of review be could pass any order that he WW. thought fit. He hasvcontended, however, that the High Court was wrong in taking the view that section 41 of the Act of 1957, which is more or less in the same terms as section 34 of Ordinance XV of 1949, invalidated all the decrees passed by civil Courts between the IST of March 1947, and the 15th of October 1'949, for subsection (3) of section 41 gave to the Custodian the power to accept or approve of such decrees. The relevant provisions of section 41 of the Act of 1957 are in these terms — “41. Jurisdiction of Courts barred—’(I) Save as expressly provided in this Act no civil or revenue Court or any other authority shall have jurisdiction— (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person is or is not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property ; (c)um (3) No decision, decree or order of any Court or authority in respect of any evacuee or evacuee property passed between the first day of March 1947, and the fifteenth day of October 1949, shall be binding on the Custodian or affect any right or merest of an evacuee in any property affected by such decision, decree or order unless it is accepted or approved by the Custodian, The 15th. Of October ;1949, was the date on. Which the Ordinance No.; XV of 149 came into force, and it is worth noting that under section 34(3) of, the said Ordinance ho power was given to the Custodian to approve or accept any such decree of a civil; -Court which adjudicated upon any question whether any property’ was or was not evacuee property or what right or -interest, if any, an evacuee<’had in any such property* It is clear, therefore, that from after the 15th of October 1949, no civil Court had any; power to adjudicate upon any such question, for, that power’ was expressly taken-away and exclusively vested in the Custodian. Subsection (3) of section 41, therefore; made provision for decrees which-may have been passed between the IST March-1947, and the 15th of October 1949, and it was provided that-'even if any such decree had been made by a Court which was competent cat that time to pass such a decree that decree would -not be binding on the Custodian or affect any right or interest in any evacuee property unless it was accepted or approved by the Custodian. So far as West Punjab was concerned,' it has to be noticed that under section LOF the West Punjab Pro TEC lion of Evacuee Property Act.1948,' which came into' force on the 19th of February 1948, before the compromise decree in this case was passed, there was a similar exclusion of -the jurisdiction of the civil Courts with regard to such matters and subsection (2) of the said-section provided:— ] - ’, 11. Jurisdiction of civil Courts barred in certain matters. m. (2) FCDO. decision of any Court on a claim such as is referred. to in subsection (1) given between the 15th of August 1947, and the coming into force of this Act, shall be binding on the Custodian or shall affect the rights or interests of any evacuee in the property in question.” 4A‘*J So far, therefore, as the territories of West Punjab were; concerned, the civil Courts did not from and after the 19th of February 1948, possess any jurisdiction either to'entertain or TQ adjudicate upon any claim in any suit, appeal, execution application or other proceeding whether any property is or is not evacuee property or as to what interest, if any, an evacuee has in such property, except in a case where the claimant has been referred to the civil Court by the Custodian authorities for the. Establishment of bis or her title. On the 10th. of July 1948, therefore, the civil Court at Lahore had no jurisdiction to pass the compromise decree, the effect of which was to transfer CERTAM evacuee properties to a non-evacuee and -to declare a charge over certain other immovable evacuee properties in favor of such a non.evacuee. The decree passed in terms of the -compromise was certainly a decree which purported to give to Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram. certain properties which were evacuee properties and. to determine that the shares of the evacuees other than Mrs. Doreen Bark at R»m MN certain other properties were to b? subjected to 9 charge. The decree, therefore, fell within the mischief, of section 11 of the West Punjab Act of 1948, section 34 the Ordinance of 1949 and clause (a) of subsection (1) of section 41 of the Act’ of 1957 and was, the:referee matter with respect to which the jurisdiction of the civil Courts had been’ expressly excluded* as long ago as the 19th of February 1948. » Pp. Subsection 1(3)> of section 41 was designed to; invalidate even decrees. passed before. The Ordinance, of 1949, Its mention; was,not. Tow protect, as,contended. by the learned/ counsel; appearing on behalf of the,Custodian,@U ®n t9'l—--Jr_ V jurisdiction at the: relevant time to pass any, decree on,the basis.of a- compromise and the same'could not be approved, or accepted by the. Custodian under, subsection of section 41 of the Act ofL1957.~ The. contention that -the Custodian had, ‘RFR,lbrj £ FH‘ By the power event to approve of invalid, decrees is not’ tenable. The ‘exception:made by subsection j(3) - of section 41, is available only in the case of (.decrees or ; orders, passed by - a civil,Court or other, authority in respect, of any evacuee, property between the dates,mentioned therein. only if: such a decree or order is-made competently.j in.the: awful exercise of the jurisdiction-of that Court or authority.A decree or order-passed without jurisdiction is a'nullity’ and it would be’ wholly’ Unreasonable, to hold that the Legislature intended to give by subset'action (3) of million *4:1 "BF the Act of 1957 any. power to-the “'Custodian to. accept'l or ’approve of something which did not: exist in the eye of the law. I RV: t. n,- Another argument advanced DN behalf Of< the Custodian was that since the trait filed by Mrs. Bark at Ram was only a suit' for administration, ‘it was :not' a suit V of the nature in v'which ‘ any question as to the evacuee’ nature of any-property of as to 'the share of interest of any evacuee In such property could legitimately Jews for consideration. This argument is also without any substance; for, whatever might -be the true nature of an administration-suit pure and simple,: the decree that was actually purported to'be passed on the basis of the compromise in the present 'case did directly affect evacuee property by providing for the transfer of some in favor of Mrs. Bark at Rain and for. the creation of a: charge over some others. If the decree is given effect to, then the evacuee nature of the properties transferred to Mrs. Bark at Ram will be certainly affected and to. that extent also the shares or interests of the evacuee owners in these properties' will be diminished. The decree passed, ’ therefore, came within the mischief of the provisions of section 41(I(a) of the Act of 1957, section 34 of the. Ordinance of 1949 and also OP subsection (1) of section 11 the West Punjab Act of 1948, - - 1 In this view of the matter we are satisfied that the High Court, rightly set aside the. order of the Custodian. This appeal must, accordingly, fail and is dismissed with costs. ‘Appeal dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 387 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-01-22): Seymour Rahman, J.—This is a certificated appeal from the judgment and order of a Division Bench of the High Court of West Pakistan in a writ petition. The said writ petition was filed on the 4th of August 1960, by the respondent No. herein for having the order passed by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, on the 31st of May 1960, in the purported exercise of his review jurisdiction, quashed by a writ of certiorari and for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Settlement authorities to give to the said respondent her J/Alioth share in the joint family properties of her deceased husband, Mr. Bark at Ram, after partitioning the same. The deceased Bark at Ram was a grandson of the late Sir Gang Ram and he along with his father Hard Ram and his three brothers Jesus Ram, Ten Ram and Shiv Ram constituted a Jolt Hindu family. Bark at Ram married the respondent No. under the Special Marriages Act of 1872 on the 10th of August 1948S, but he died about a year later on the 29th of September 1946. After his death his widow, the respondent No. 1, on the 23rd of March 1947, filed a suit for the administration of the property of her late husband. This suit was pending when the two domains of Pakistan and India were set up and the father and brothers of Bark at Ram, who were defendants in the said administration suit and had duly entered appearance therein through counsel, migrated to India. On the 10th of July 1948, however, a compromise was effected in the said suit and a decree was passed in terms of the compromise. Under the terms of the said compromise the widow was -to be paid in full and final settlement of her claim CERTAM movable and immovable properties valued at Rs. 1,87,000. The immovable properties included in the list of properties to be given to the widow were a garden and two shops at Tarantula in the district of Lyallpur, valued at Rs. 3,500. The widow of Bark at Ram was to be given 20% of the sale proceeds of certain other properties, if she was unable to realize the estimated value of Rs. 1,87,000 from the properties agreed to be transferred to her and the latter properties were to be charged for the recovery of the shortfall, if any, from the said sum of Rs. 1,87,000. In the meantime, however, on or about the 23rd of December 1947, the Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Punjab, treated the entire joint family properties as evacuee properties and assumed possession of the same under the West Punjab Protection of WW. Evacuee Property Ordinance No. VII of 1947. This Ordinance was replaced and the 19th of February 1948, by the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act No. VII of 1948 and later by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance No. XV of 1949. The respondent Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 387 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-01-22): Property Ordinance No. VII of 1947. This Ordinance was replaced and the 19th of February 1948, by the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act No. VII of 1948 and later by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance No. XV of 1949. The respondent Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram, therefore, made an application under section 18 of the above-mentioned Ordinance of 1949 on the 28th of April 1955, for a declaration that she was entitled to a V/Sth share in the afore-mentioned joint family properties and that IDP s?me were not evacuee properties. T{£1 Deputy Custodian found that she was not an 'evacuee but came to the conclusion 1 WTF-*»TL‘-Vt'M Var»‘r4't that by reason of the compromise enter,ed into m the administration suit she could not get anything more, and hence he ordered that after deducting the amount which she may have already received or which she can receive after bona fide efforts to dispose of the shares given to her the balance that may be found to be due out of the said sum of Rs. 1,87,COO should be paid to her out of the evacuee properties under section 20(2){k) of {he said Ordinance of 1949. She went on appeal to the Custodian from the above order of the Deputy Custodian. This appeal Yves heard by the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Lahore, who upheld the finding that the respondent Mrs. Bark at Ram was not an evacuee but reversed the order of the Deputy Custodian and granted ‘her a ‘ declaration to the effect that she was the owner of an undivided /10th star.e and not *SL,‘as claimed by her, inch? jpiaffatfy ' PFOB&TIE?OF W deceased husband. He came to this year, because, in his opinion, the compromise decree was hit by the provisions of action 34 of Prince Jo.' XV of 19.49 and section *1 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, which had since replaced the Ordinance. Both of these were 8&e“ retrospective Effie.ct.” The ordinance validated decrees passed after the 14th August 1947, but. The Act declared decrees or orders of civil. 'Courts passed between the IST day of March 1947, "and the" 15th\day pfOetpber 1949\(the the.the |the 9rvdinane,e came into force), TP b.e' incapable of affecting any right or interest of any evacuee in any property or being binding on the Custodian ‘unless accepted or'approved by him: These provisions also. Took a way. The jurisdiction of all. Civil or range Courts or another author.ty “to entertain or adjudicate upon any. EU,estipn arising",in' any suit, appeal, application or o,ihr proceedings whether any person is or is not an evacuee or whether. Any property is ox is hot. Evacuee property or what’ right or least, if any, an. Evacuee has in any EU.ch property,”. WW. The Additional Custodian was also of the TAH"' M. w compromise was, in any. Event, hit by sections 11 and 9 of the West. Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act {j.o, VII of 1948. Under section 11 of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 387 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-01-22): or least, if any, an. Evacuee has in any EU.ch property,”. WW. The Additional Custodian was also of the TAH"' M. w compromise was, in any. Event, hit by sections 11 and 9 of the West. Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act {j.o, VII of 1948. Under section 11 of the above Act also the jurisdiction of civil Courts to.enter tam or adjudicate upon any. Claim in any suit, appeal," exec,u,tip application or other projcsed&gs as.to whether any property is or is not evacuee prpperjypr as to what interest, if any, an eya9u.EE has in s.such property, OVAs also excluded. Under suction of the said' section any S of the. Said t.also mad* all Transfers of evacuee property on PR. After the 15,the Paul 19 valid and flee'active unless registered by the Custodian within the prescribed time. Since the compromise purported to transfer at- least Afro immovable properties at Lyallpur as ALS:c> to create a charge on certain other immovable properties, it fell within the mischief of these provisions and was held to be ineffective.- As such, Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram, who had been found to be a non-evacuee, was declared to be entitled to' a half share in her deceased husband’s share in the joint family properties; -, Against time said order of the Additional Custodian the Rehabilitation Authority went up in revision before the,then Custodian Mr. Muhammad Jan. He affirmed the decision of the Additional Custodian and dismissed the revision petition. Thereafter, the Central Government referred the case to the Tribunal set up under section 43-A of the Pakistan (Administration Of Evacuee Property) Act,- 1957, but during the pendency of the reference before the Tribunal the Rehabilitation Department acting upon a suggestion which fell from the Tribunal applied to the successor Custodian Maud Ahmad, J; for a review Of the order passed by his predecessor Mr. Muhammad Jan on (he is 4th of July 1958. Maud Ahmad, J. took the view that the Custodian’s pow'a* to review his predecessor’s order was very wide and that such an order of a predecessor Custodian could be reviewed b the successor Ciistodiafa without any limit 6‘f time so moth “On any ground whatsoever as the justice of the case* may require, in his view the justice of the present case required that the compromise decree should be approved index the powers given to the Custodian by subsection (3) of section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) AET, 1957, and tie respondent Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram should get only. the WW. ‘fruit-of the compromise decree which she had Obtained in time year 1948 and nothing more.” He, accordingly, restored the order of the Deputy Custodian. This was the order that was challenged by the respondent Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram in the. High Court. The High Court disagreed With the view of the Custodian Maud Ahmad, J. that the Custodian’s power of review was AIs wide as claimed by him; Relying Ripon spine observations in THD decision of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 387 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-01-22): order that was challenged by the respondent Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram in the. High Court. The High Court disagreed With the view of the Custodian Maud Ahmad, J. that the Custodian’s power of review was AIs wide as claimed by him; Relying Ripon spine observations in THD decision of this Court in the case of Samurai v. Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi (1) the High Court held that even though the provisions of Order XLVII Of the Code DF Civil Procedure were not in terms applicable to proceedings for review before the Custodian of Evacuee Property, yet they served as a valuable guide for determine the scope of the powers of review. The power of review of the Custodian, however wide it might be, could not, it was held, possibly extend to the passing of an order it reviews which was Opposed to law,’ merely _ because the Custodian, as he cleared* was Satisfied that the justice of the case! demanded the making of such an order. Having rejected this wide claim of the Custodian the High Court went on to hold that the Compromise decree was invalid in law and could not have been acted upon and, therefore, the Custodian in purporting to give effect to the said compromise decree in the exercise of his powers of review had acted contrary to law and in excess of his jurisdiction, for he was purporting to validate something which the evacuee property law then in force declared to be invalid and of no legal effect whatsoever. The order passed in review by the Custodian Maud Ahmad, J. was, therefore, quashed by a writ of certiorari and as in consequential relief a further direction in the nature of a mandamus was issued to the Settlement authorities to partition the joint family properties of the deceased Bark at Ram and to give to his widow a Both share therein after partitioning the same. Since the value of the subject-matter in dispute in the writ petition was worth more than Rs. 15,Q00 and there was also an important question of law arising, namely, as to the scope of the powers of review of a Custodian of Evacuee Property under the relevant evacuee laws, a certificate was also granted on the application of the Custodian of Evacuee Property for preferring an appeal to this Court. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Custodian in support of this appeal has not attempted to support the claim of the Custodian that bis power of review was so wide that he could review any order of his predecessor, if; in his opinion, the justice of the case so required or that when exercising such powers of review be could pass any order that he WW. thought fit. He hasvcontended, however, that the High Court was wrong in taking the view that section 41 of the Act of 1957, which is more or less in the same terms as section 34 of Ordinance XV of 1949, invalidated all

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 387 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-01-22): be could pass any order that he WW. thought fit. He hasvcontended, however, that the High Court was wrong in taking the view that section 41 of the Act of 1957, which is more or less in the same terms as section 34 of Ordinance XV of 1949, invalidated all the decrees passed by civil Courts between the IST of March 1947, and the 15th of October 1'949, for subsection (3) of section 41 gave to the Custodian the power to accept or approve of such decrees. The relevant provisions of section 41 of the Act of 1957 are in these terms — “41. Jurisdiction of Courts barred—’(I) Save as expressly provided in this Act no civil or revenue Court or any other authority shall have jurisdiction— (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person is or is not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property ; (c)um (3) No decision, decree or order of any Court or authority in respect of any evacuee or evacuee property passed between the first day of March 1947, and the fifteenth day of October 1949, shall be binding on the Custodian or affect any right or merest of an evacuee in any property affected by such decision, decree or order unless it is accepted or approved by the Custodian, The 15th. Of October ;1949, was the date on. Which the Ordinance No.; XV of 149 came into force, and it is worth noting that under section 34(3) of, the said Ordinance ho power was given to the Custodian to approve or accept any such decree of a civil; -Court which adjudicated upon any question whether any property’ was or was not evacuee property or what right or -interest, if any, an evacuee<’had in any such property* It is clear, therefore, that from after the 15th of October 1949, no civil Court had any; power to adjudicate upon any such question, for, that power’ was expressly taken-away and exclusively vested in the Custodian. Subsection (3) of section 41, therefore; made provision for decrees which-may have been passed between the IST March-1947, and the 15th of October 1949, and it was provided that-'even if any such decree had been made by a Court which was competent cat that time to pass such a decree that decree would -not be binding on the Custodian or affect any right or interest in any evacuee property unless it was accepted or approved by the Custodian. So far as West Punjab was concerned,' it has to be noticed that under section LOF the West Punjab Pro TEC lion of Evacuee Property Act.1948,' which came into' force on the 19th of February 1948, before the compromise decree in this case was passed, there was a similar exclusion of -the jurisdiction of the civil Courts with regard to such matters and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 387 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-01-22): under section LOF the West Punjab Pro TEC lion of Evacuee Property Act.1948,' which came into' force on the 19th of February 1948, before the compromise decree in this case was passed, there was a similar exclusion of -the jurisdiction of the civil Courts with regard to such matters and subsection (2) of the said-section provided:— ] - ’, 11. Jurisdiction of civil Courts barred in certain matters. m. (2) FCDO. decision of any Court on a claim such as is referred. to in subsection (1) given between the 15th of August 1947, and the coming into force of this Act, shall be binding on the Custodian or shall affect the rights or interests of any evacuee in the property in question.” 4A‘*J So far, therefore, as the territories of West Punjab were; concerned, the civil Courts did not from and after the 19th of February 1948, possess any jurisdiction either to'entertain or TQ adjudicate upon any claim in any suit, appeal, execution application or other proceeding whether any property is or is not evacuee property or as to what interest, if any, an evacuee has in such property, except in a case where the claimant has been referred to the civil Court by the Custodian authorities for the. Establishment of bis or her title. On the 10th. of July 1948, therefore, the civil Court at Lahore had no jurisdiction to pass the compromise decree, the effect of which was to transfer CERTAM evacuee properties to a non-evacuee and -to declare a charge over certain other immovable evacuee properties in favor of such a non.evacuee. The decree passed in terms of the -compromise was certainly a decree which purported to give to Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram. certain properties which were evacuee properties and. to determine that the shares of the evacuees other than Mrs. Doreen Bark at R»m MN certain other properties were to b? subjected to 9 charge. The decree, therefore, fell within the mischief, of section 11 of the West Punjab Act of 1948, section 34 the Ordinance of 1949 and clause (a) of subsection (1) of section 41 of the Act’ of 1957 and was, the:referee matter with respect to which the jurisdiction of the civil Courts had been’ expressly excluded* as long ago as the 19th of February 1948. » Pp. Subsection 1(3)> of section 41 was designed to; invalidate even decrees. passed before. The Ordinance, of 1949, Its mention; was,not. Tow protect, as,contended. by the learned/ counsel; appearing on behalf of the,Custodian,@U ®n t9'l—--Jr_ V jurisdiction at the: relevant time to pass any, decree on,the basis.of a- compromise and the same'could not be approved, or accepted by the. Custodian under, subsection of section 41 of the Act ofL1957.~ The. contention that -the Custodian had, ‘RFR,lbrj £ FH‘ By the power event to approve of invalid, decrees is not’ tenable. The ‘exception:made by subsection j(3) - of section 41, is available only in the case of (.decrees or ; orders, passed by - a civil,Court

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 387?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 387 (SUPREME COURT, 1964-01-22): of the Act ofL1957.~ The. contention that -the Custodian had, ‘RFR,lbrj £ FH‘ By the power event to approve of invalid, decrees is not’ tenable. The ‘exception:made by subsection j(3) - of section 41, is available only in the case of (.decrees or ; orders, passed by - a civil,Court or other, authority in respect, of any evacuee, property between the dates,mentioned therein. only if: such a decree or order is-made competently.j in.the: awful exercise of the jurisdiction-of that Court or authority.A decree or order-passed without jurisdiction is a'nullity’ and it would be’ wholly’ Unreasonable, to hold that the Legislature intended to give by subset'action (3) of million *4:1 "BF the Act of 1957 any. power to-the “'Custodian to. accept'l or ’approve of something which did not: exist in the eye of the law. I RV: t. n,- Another argument advanced DN behalf Of< the Custodian was that since the trait filed by Mrs. Bark at Ram was only a suit' for administration, ‘it was :not' a suit V of the nature in v'which ‘ any question as to the evacuee’ nature of any-property of as to 'the share of interest of any evacuee In such property could legitimately Jews for consideration. This argument is also without any substance; for, whatever might -be the true nature of an administration-suit pure and simple,: the decree that was actually purported to'be passed on the basis of the compromise in the present 'case did directly affect evacuee property by providing for the transfer of some in favor of Mrs. Bark at Rain and for. the creation of a: charge over some others. If the decree is given effect to, then the evacuee nature of the properties transferred to Mrs. Bark at Ram will be certainly affected and to. that extent also the shares or interests of the evacuee owners in these properties' will be diminished. The decree passed, ’ therefore, came within the mischief of the provisions of section 41(I(a) of the Act of 1957, section 34 of the. Ordinance of 1949 and also OP subsection (1) of section 11 the West Punjab Act of 1948, - - 1 In this view of the matter we are satisfied that the High Court, rightly set aside the. order of the Custodian. This appeal must, accordingly, fail and is dismissed with costs. ‘Appeal dismissed

Question: What is case 1971 SCMR 769 about?
Answer: Case 1971 SCMR 769 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1970-12-08. The case involved ABDUR REHMAN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY PUNJABLAHORE AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 2(2) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION PF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 18. The case was heard by SAJJAD AHMAD AND M. R. KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 SCMR 769?
Answer: In case 1971 SCMR 769, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 2(2) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION PF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 18. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1970-12-08.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 SCMR 769?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 SCMR 769 were: SAEED AKHTAR; ADVOCATE.SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY TAN VIRAHMAD, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONERS':1. NEMO FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SAJJAD AHMAD AND M. R. KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 SCMR 769?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 SCMR 769 were: ABDUR REHMAN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY PUNJABLAHORE AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 SCMR 769.
Answer: Judgment '' Ir’ Salad Ahmad, J.-In this petition for special leave, the dispute relates to a house, bearing No. C. B. I. 1-146, situated on Paris Road, Poo ran Nagar, Sialkot, which declared as nonevacuee property by the Custodian, by his order dated the 28th of November 1962.- The said house originally belonged to a non-Muslim. Named Walk Ram, who sold RTO one, Choose Lai, on the 18th of March 1943. The latter in turn, sold it to Muhammad Sharif the father of the respondents Nos. to 9, and his brother, Allah Radha, by*execution of,a sale deed dated the 29th of September–1947, executed.at Nairobi, in East Africa, Choose Lai, the afore-mentioned, who was a. resident of Sialkot, had left his hometown in the year-1945 long before Partition and had settled down in Nairobi, where he took up the British citizenship. On the 30th of August 1954, Muhammad Sharif, aforesaid, had moved an application to the Deputy Custodian at Sialkot, under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, for a declaration that the property was non-evacuee.- This application was rejected by the Deputy Custodian, and LAN appeal preferred against his order was also dismissed by the Additional Custodian.- However, on a revision petition, the learned Custodian, by his order dated the 28th of November 1962; declared that Choose Lai was a nonevacuee and so was the house in dispute. The petitioners who are allottee-transferees of the house MN question from the Rehabilitation Department" challenged the order of: the Custodian by a writ petition in the High Court, which has been dismissed, leading to the present; petition. FJ. The learned Custodian and the learned Judges, in the High Court have held that Choose Lai was not an evacuee within the definition of that, term, as contamed in section 2 (2) of the Pakistan, (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, as, admittedly, he" had never left any place in the territories now comprising Pakistan for any place outside that territory on or after the IST day of March 1947, on account of the setting up of the Dominions of Pakistan and India, or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances. It was also held that there was no evidence to show that after the aforesaid date, Choose Lai ‘had acquired, by way of allotment or otherwise, any right to or interest in or benefit from any property, Chichewa treated as evacuee property in India. It was* further held that Choose Lai had, at no relevant time, resided or was residing at any time in the territory now comprising in India. Mr. Saeed Akhtar, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended before.us that in answer to the interrogatories submitted by Choose Lai, it was admitted by him. that his brother had filed a claim in Bharat for the properties left by him in Pakistan. From this, he has tried to build an argument that it must be presumed that Chew Lai had become an evacuee. The mere fact of Choose Lai, or someone on his behalf, having filed a claim in Bharat, would not show that Choose Lai had either acquired any interest from any evacuee property in India, or that he is a resident of any place m India. Mr. Saeed Akhtar, however, argued that from this fac tum of the filing of the claim, it must be inferred that Chew Lai had left Pakistan on account of the setting up of the two Dominions of Pakistan and India, as contemplated by clause (a) of section 2 of Act XII of 1957. The argument on the face of TT is fallacious and must be rejected. A Mr. Saeed Akhtar also submitted that the application of Muhammad Sharif under section 18 was time-barred, and should have been dismissed by the learned Custodian on that ground. As noted by the learned Single Judge in the High Court, the learned Custodian did take note of the delay in the filing of the application by Muhammad Sharif, but entertained TT in spite of it, and there was no justification for interference by the High Court in the exercise of discretion. B It was also argued by Mr. Saeed Akhtar that the Custodian ceased to have jurisdiction to declare the house in question as non-evacuee at the time when he, did so, because the house by then had become a part of the compensation pool, by a notification issued by the Central Government on the 2nd of August 1959, under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. This argument fails to take note of the fact that the notification aforementioned had itself excluded from its purview properties, regarding which proceedings under Act XII of 1957 were pending on the date of the notification, as was the position in the present case. Muhammad Sharif had made his application, under section 18 of the 1949-Ordinance, on the 30th of August 1954, which remained pending with the Deputy Custom 1an till the 27th of July 1961, and an appeal and a revision preferred against that order were not finally disposed of until the 28th of November 1962. We consider that both the Custodian and the learned Judges in the High Court, on the facts of the case, have rightly decided that Chew Lai was a non-evacuee, and the house in dispute, BMG of a non-evacuee character, no exception could be taken to the sale of that house by Choose Lai in favor of Muhammad Sharif.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 769?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 769 (SUPREME COURT, 1970-12-08): Judgment '' Ir’ Salad Ahmad, J.-In this petition for special leave, the dispute relates to a house, bearing No. C. B. I. 1-146, situated on Paris Road, Poo ran Nagar, Sialkot, which declared as nonevacuee property by the Custodian, by his order dated the 28th of November 1962.- The said house originally belonged to a non-Muslim. Named Walk Ram, who sold RTO one, Choose Lai, on the 18th of March 1943. The latter in turn, sold it to Muhammad Sharif the father of the respondents Nos. to 9, and his brother, Allah Radha, by*execution of,a sale deed dated the 29th of September–1947, executed.at Nairobi, in East Africa, Choose Lai, the afore-mentioned, who was a. resident of Sialkot, had left his hometown in the year-1945 long before Partition and had settled down in Nairobi, where he took up the British citizenship. On the 30th of August 1954, Muhammad Sharif, aforesaid, had moved an application to the Deputy Custodian at Sialkot, under section 18 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949, for a declaration that the property was non-evacuee.- This application was rejected by the Deputy Custodian, and LAN appeal preferred against his order was also dismissed by the Additional Custodian.- However, on a revision petition, the learned Custodian, by his order dated the 28th of November 1962; declared that Choose Lai was a nonevacuee and so was the house in dispute. The petitioners who are allottee-transferees of the house MN question from the Rehabilitation Department" challenged the order of: the Custodian by a writ petition in the High Court, which has been dismissed, leading to the present; petition. FJ. The learned Custodian and the learned Judges, in the High Court have held that Choose Lai was not an evacuee within the definition of that, term, as contamed in section 2 (2) of the Pakistan, (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, as, admittedly, he" had never left any place in the territories now comprising Pakistan for any place outside that territory on or after the IST day of March 1947, on account of the setting up of the Dominions of Pakistan and India, or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances. It was also held that there was no evidence to show that after the aforesaid date, Choose Lai ‘had acquired, by way of allotment or otherwise, any right to or interest in or benefit from any property, Chichewa treated as evacuee property in India. It was* further held that Choose Lai had, at no relevant time, resided or was residing at any time in the territory now comprising in India. Mr. Saeed Akhtar, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended before.us that in answer to the interrogatories submitted by Choose Lai, it was admitted by him. that his brother had filed a claim in Bharat for the properties left by him in Pakistan. From this, he has tried to build an argument that it must be presumed that Chew Lai had become

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 SCMR 769?
Answer: From case 1971 SCMR 769 (SUPREME COURT, 1970-12-08): in answer to the interrogatories submitted by Choose Lai, it was admitted by him. that his brother had filed a claim in Bharat for the properties left by him in Pakistan. From this, he has tried to build an argument that it must be presumed that Chew Lai had become an evacuee. The mere fact of Choose Lai, or someone on his behalf, having filed a claim in Bharat, would not show that Choose Lai had either acquired any interest from any evacuee property in India, or that he is a resident of any place m India. Mr. Saeed Akhtar, however, argued that from this fac tum of the filing of the claim, it must be inferred that Chew Lai had left Pakistan on account of the setting up of the two Dominions of Pakistan and India, as contemplated by clause (a) of section 2 of Act XII of 1957. The argument on the face of TT is fallacious and must be rejected. A Mr. Saeed Akhtar also submitted that the application of Muhammad Sharif under section 18 was time-barred, and should have been dismissed by the learned Custodian on that ground. As noted by the learned Single Judge in the High Court, the learned Custodian did take note of the delay in the filing of the application by Muhammad Sharif, but entertained TT in spite of it, and there was no justification for interference by the High Court in the exercise of discretion. B It was also argued by Mr. Saeed Akhtar that the Custodian ceased to have jurisdiction to declare the house in question as non-evacuee at the time when he, did so, because the house by then had become a part of the compensation pool, by a notification issued by the Central Government on the 2nd of August 1959, under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. This argument fails to take note of the fact that the notification aforementioned had itself excluded from its purview properties, regarding which proceedings under Act XII of 1957 were pending on the date of the notification, as was the position in the present case. Muhammad Sharif had made his application, under section 18 of the 1949-Ordinance, on the 30th of August 1954, which remained pending with the Deputy Custom 1an till the 27th of July 1961, and an appeal and a revision preferred against that order were not finally disposed of until the 28th of November 1962. We consider that both the Custodian and the learned Judges in the High Court, on the facts of the case, have rightly decided that Chew Lai was a non-evacuee, and the house in dispute, BMG of a non-evacuee character, no exception could be taken to the sale of that house by Choose Lai in favor of Muhammad Sharif.

Question: What is case 1971 PLD 228 about?
Answer: Case 1971 PLD 228 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1970-09-22. The case involved EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST BOARD, HYDERABAD— APPELLANTVERSUS SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER, KARACHI AND ANOTHER—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include LETTERS PATENT (LAHORE) - CL. 10 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XLI, R. WEST PAKISTAN URBAN RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (VI OF 1959) -S. 13. The case was heard by DORAB PATELAND MUHAMMAD HALEEM.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: In case 1971 PLD 228, the court applied the following statutes: LETTERS PATENT (LAHORE) - CL. 10 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XLI, R. WEST PAKISTAN URBAN RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (VI OF 1959) -S. 13. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1970-09-22.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 PLD 228 were: MUHAMMAD ALI SHAIKH FOR APPELLANT. NAIMUDDIN FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.. The judges presiding were: DORAB PATELAND MUHAMMAD HALEEM.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 PLD 228 were: EVACUEE PROPERTY TRUST BOARD, HYDERABAD— APPELLANTVERSUS SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER, KARACHI AND ANOTHER—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 PLD 228.
Answer: Judgment Muhammad Hakeem, J. -This is a Letters Patent appeal against the order dated the 15th of May 1970, of learned Single Judge of this Court by which he vacated the interim order of status quo dated the 3rd of March 1970. The dispute relates to houses bearing Survey Nos. and. The former comprises one room, bearing Sub No. while the latter six rooms, bearing Sub Nos. to 6 and each is described as a house. They are situated m Hyderabad Cantonment and were purchased in public auction by respondent No. on 7th of February 1964 ; she was accordingly issued a P. T. O. dated the 20th of April, 1964 followed by a P. T. D. dated the 29th of April 1965. Mutation in her name was effected in the records of the Cantonment Board on the 23rd of June 1965. It appears, thereafter, that respondent No. 2, mitigated proceedings of ejectment of the tenants under West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction Ordinance, 1959 and orders for their ejectment were granted, but before the tenants could be ejected, an application was filed by the appellant in September 1966, under section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, before the Settlement Commissioner, exercising powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, Karachi, in which it was prayed that the house bearing Sub No. be declared a temple and the six houses bearing Sub Nos. to 6 as property attached' to the temple. The Settlement Commissioner vide his order dated the 2. the of October 1969, accepted the application to the extent that he granted a declaration that house bearing Sub No. is a temple but rejected the other relief namely, the houses bearing Sub Nos. to 6 are attached to the temple. The appellant thereupon appealed to this Court under section 4(4) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act (XXVII of 1958), against the order of the Settlement Commissioner rejecting his other relief namely, the declaration sought in respect of six houses bearing Sub Nos. to 6. Along with the appeal an application under Order XLI, rule 5 read with section 151, C. P. C. was filed to the following effect: “TT is prayed on behalf of the appellant that due to the facts disclosed in the memo, of appeal and the accompanying affidavit -----that this Court-wil-be-pleased to- grant. a. stay restraining the _ respondents from ejecting the tenants of the appellant from the property attached to the Manner and MN dispute before this Court.” The appeal was admitted to regular hearing on the 3rd of March 1970, and in the meantime status Qin was ordered. Again on the 11th of May 1970 when this matter came up for hearing after notice to respondent No. 2, the learned counsel stated : ‘He has the oral instructions of the appellants’ Evacuee Trust Board that they would be willing to furnish undertaking to this Court m respect of the term stay order dated 3-3- 1970.” He took time to get instruction in writing for being submitted to Court on the 15th of May 1970. The learned counsel for respondent No. 2, however, stated that he had no objection. The matter again came up before a learned Single Judge on the 15th of May 1970 and upon the ground that the letter containing the statement of the Secretary of the appellant did not amount to any undertaking, withdrew the earlier, order of status quo and dismissed the application. It is against this order that the appellant has filed this appeal under -clause 10 of the Letters Patent. 2. At the outset, on behalf of respondent No. 2, an objection was taken as to the maintainability of the appeal on the ground that the order withdrawing, the earlier order of status quo does not determine any right or ability and therefore, it is not appealable as a Judgment under clause. 10 of the Letters Patent. For and against the proposition, the learned counsel for the parties cited the under-noted cases (j) Mohair Prasad Singh and others v. Adviser Kun war and others I LR 21 Cal. 474. (ii) Srikanth Raja Karaganda Durga Prasad Xanadu and another v. Srikanth Raja Karaganda Malikaryuna Prasad Xanadu I LR 24 Mad. 358, (Hi) T. V. Gujarat Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier I LR 35 Mad. 371, (iv) Abdul Nazi Sahib v. Marti Ramalakshmammah AI R 1948 Mad. 371. (v) Industrial Sales and Services, Karachi and others v. Archiver Opal Laboratories Ltd. PLD 1969 Keir. 418, (vi) Mumbai Khan v. Chief Settlement Commissioner PLD 1966 S C 276, (oil) Ghulam Hussain and another v. Ghulam Mustafa and others PLD 1967 LAH. 439, and (it) Syed Iqbal Hussain v. MST. Stewart Begum PLD 1967 LAH. 1138. In support of the contentions to the non-maintainability of the appeal, the learned counsel for the respondent relied on the case of Mohair Prasad Singh and others v. Shikari Kun war and others and Srikanth Raja Karaganda Durga Prasad Xanadu and another v. Srikanth Raja Karaganda Mallikerjuna Prasad Xanadu. In these two cases the question for consideration was whether an order refusing to stay the execution of the decree was a Judgment under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent (which corresponds to clause 10 of the Letters Patent of this Court). The answer to this question was given in the negative upon the ground that the order did not affect the merits of the question between the parties by determine any right or liability in dispute, either MN the suit or appeal; and it was therefore, that the order was not appealable as a Judgment under clause 15 of the Letters Patent. The Madras case cited above followed the view of the Calcutta High Court expressed in the case of Mohair Prasad Singh and others v. Shikari Kun war and others in which reliance was placed on an earlier view of that Court in the case of The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company This view was not accepted in the form in which it was expressed in the subsequent Madras case reported as T. V. Tularemia Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier. In this case also an order refusing to frame an issue was appealed as a Judgment under clause 15 of the Letters Patent and the question which arose for decision was whether it was a Judgment under clause 15 of the Letters Patent. The question was referred to a Full Bench and two of the three learned Judges comprising the Bench gave separate Judgments while the third concurred with them. Sir Arnold white Chief Justice, gave a wider meaning to the word “Judgment” and in his view, orders other than those passed as a step towards obtaining a final adjudication in the suit would be covered by the word “Judgment”. While rejecting the view expressed in The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company, the learned Chief Justice observed : “Speaking generally I tank the word ‘Judgment’ means any ‘final order, decree or Judgment’ within the meaning of those words as used in section 12 of the English Judicature Act, 1875. An order made on an application which is interlocutory in point of form may be a judgment within the meaning of section 15 of the Letters Patent. On the other hand I am not prepared to say as was held in The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company and in Sinai v. Ahmedabad Habibbhai (1872) 9 BH C R 398 it must be a decision though it does not affect the merits of the suit or proceeding and does not determine any question of right raised in the suit or proceeding.” Krishaswami Iyyar, J. after reviewing the authorities held that an interlocutory order would not be covered within the meaning of the word “Judgment”, but the word “Judgment” would cover an interlocutory or preliminary Judgment. He accordingly repelled the contention that all orders were included within the term “Judgment”. The same question arose for decision in the case of Abdul Nazi Sahib v. Marti Ramalakshmammah, and it was decided on the view taken by Sir Arnold White, Chief Justice in T. V. Gujarat Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier. While construing the_ term “Judgment” m Mumbai_ Khan v. The Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner and another the Lordships of the Supreme Court considered the Calcutta case and the Madras case reported as “The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company’ and “T. V. Gujarat Row v.M. K.R. V. Alabama Chattier” and observed at pages 281-282 of the report as under “In both these judgments, reference was made to a decision of the Calcutta High Court published as Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company 1872 Such. W. R. 374 and a decision of the Madras High Court in T. V. Gujarat Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier I R 1912 Mad. 1. In the Calcutta case Couch, C. J. had defined “Judgment” in the context of clause 15 of the Letters Patent of that High Court (which corresponds, to clause 10 of the West Pakistan High Court) as meaning “a decision which affected the merits of the question between the parties, by determine some right or ability, which may be either preliminary or interlocutory, the difference between them being that a final judgment determines the whole cause or suit and a preliminary or interlocutory judgment determines only a part of it, leaving other matters to be determined”. In the Madras case, apparently, the definition given by Couch, C. J. was considered to be too narrow and Sir Mold White, the learned Chief Justice, thought that the test should be ‘not the form of the adjudication but its affect in the suit or proceeding in which it is made’. If according to him, its effect, whatever its form may be, and whatever may be the nature of the application on which TT is made, is to put an end to the suit or proceeding, so far as the Court before which the suit or proceeding is pending, is concerned, or if TTS effect, if it is not complied with, is to put an end to the suit or proceeding, the adjudication would be a ‘Judgment’, within the meaning of the clause.” Their Lordships also considered the Full Bench Judgment of the Lahore High Court reported as Firm Shaw Hard Dial Sons v. Messes Sauna Mai Belt Ram wherein the definition attempted by the Madras High Court in T. V. Gujarat Row's case was accepted as good working guide though it was not regarded as an exhaustive definition. The emphasis was on the word “Judgment” in clause 10 of the Letters Patent which was unqualified by any adjective. Concluding their Lordships held that the word is of wider import and observed at page 283 of the report as under — ‘In the general connotation of the term a ‘Judgment’ would merely mean a ‘judicial determination or a decision of a Court’ A, and it could be interlocutory or final. Reference in this connection may be made to the explanations given in Warton’s Law Lexicon, under the heading ‘Judgment’.” In Industrial Sales and Service, Karachi and another v. Archival Opal Laboratories Ltd. a Division Bench of the Karachi Seat, as it then was, considered this question and again reviewed the case-law on the subject and reached the following conclusion : “TN the light of the above discussion and the analysis of various rulings cited at bar, I have come to the conclusion that the decision of whether or not an order falls within the connotation of a Judgment for the purpose of Letters Patent appeal, depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case. In considering the facts and circumstances, the following criteria, which have been deducted from the case-law and which, by no means, provide an exhaustive list, can be kept in view.” It is clear from the above discussion that the word ‘Judgment’ cannot be given a limited meaning. The view propounded in the earlier Madras case reported as Srikanth Raja Karaganda Durga Prasad Xanadu and another v. Srikanth Raja Karaganda Mallikarjuna Prasad Xanadu and the Calcutta case reported as Mohair Prasad Singh and others v. Shikari Kun war and others which took support from the view expressed in the case of The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company has not been accepted either in the Supreme Court case or in the Division Bench case of the Karachi Seat. It is therefore, not possible to exclude orders from the term “Judgment” as it is not qualified by any adjective and a wider meaning has to be given to it. In the instant case the order vacating the status quo granted earlier affects the rights of the parties though temporarily in the context of the decisions discussed above, and accordingly we are of the view that the order is appealable as a “Judgment” under clause 10 of the Letters Patent. The contention of the respondent as to TB.e non-mamtamability of the appeal has no substance and is repelled. 3. However, we are of the view that the relief sought in the application under Order XLI, rule 5,C. P. C. was misconceived. The ejectment of tenants was under the West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction Ordinance, 1959, and those proceedings were not challenged before this Court and accordingly their ejectment could not have been stayed by way of an interlocutory relief in ANL appeal filed against the order of the Settlement Commissioner rejecting the declaration. The appellant could only ask for the suspension of the impugned order or other ancillary relief connected therewith which was not done. It was for the tenants to resist their ejectment before an appropriate forum, if so advised. In this view of the matter, whether the learned. Single Judge erroneously refused to consider the statement as an under* taking does not arise. C 4. For the foregoing reasons we do not see any substance in this appeal, and it is accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs. K. B.A., Appeal dismissed. Case Result :

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 228 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1970-09-22): Judgment Muhammad Hakeem, J. -This is a Letters Patent appeal against the order dated the 15th of May 1970, of learned Single Judge of this Court by which he vacated the interim order of status quo dated the 3rd of March 1970. The dispute relates to houses bearing Survey Nos. and. The former comprises one room, bearing Sub No. while the latter six rooms, bearing Sub Nos. to 6 and each is described as a house. They are situated m Hyderabad Cantonment and were purchased in public auction by respondent No. on 7th of February 1964 ; she was accordingly issued a P. T. O. dated the 20th of April, 1964 followed by a P. T. D. dated the 29th of April 1965. Mutation in her name was effected in the records of the Cantonment Board on the 23rd of June 1965. It appears, thereafter, that respondent No. 2, mitigated proceedings of ejectment of the tenants under West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction Ordinance, 1959 and orders for their ejectment were granted, but before the tenants could be ejected, an application was filed by the appellant in September 1966, under section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, before the Settlement Commissioner, exercising powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner, Karachi, in which it was prayed that the house bearing Sub No. be declared a temple and the six houses bearing Sub Nos. to 6 as property attached' to the temple. The Settlement Commissioner vide his order dated the 2. the of October 1969, accepted the application to the extent that he granted a declaration that house bearing Sub No. is a temple but rejected the other relief namely, the houses bearing Sub Nos. to 6 are attached to the temple. The appellant thereupon appealed to this Court under section 4(4) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act (XXVII of 1958), against the order of the Settlement Commissioner rejecting his other relief namely, the declaration sought in respect of six houses bearing Sub Nos. to 6. Along with the appeal an application under Order XLI, rule 5 read with section 151, C. P. C. was filed to the following effect: “TT is prayed on behalf of the appellant that due to the facts disclosed in the memo, of appeal and the accompanying affidavit -----that this Court-wil-be-pleased to- grant. a. stay restraining the _ respondents from ejecting the tenants of the appellant from the property attached to the Manner and MN dispute before this Court.” The appeal was admitted to regular hearing on the 3rd of March 1970, and in the meantime status Qin was ordered. Again on the 11th of May 1970 when this matter came up for hearing after notice to respondent No. 2, the learned counsel stated : ‘He has the oral instructions of the appellants’ Evacuee Trust Board that they would be willing to furnish undertaking to this Court m respect of the term stay order dated 3-3- 1970.” He took time to get instruction

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 228 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1970-09-22): hearing after notice to respondent No. 2, the learned counsel stated : ‘He has the oral instructions of the appellants’ Evacuee Trust Board that they would be willing to furnish undertaking to this Court m respect of the term stay order dated 3-3- 1970.” He took time to get instruction in writing for being submitted to Court on the 15th of May 1970. The learned counsel for respondent No. 2, however, stated that he had no objection. The matter again came up before a learned Single Judge on the 15th of May 1970 and upon the ground that the letter containing the statement of the Secretary of the appellant did not amount to any undertaking, withdrew the earlier, order of status quo and dismissed the application. It is against this order that the appellant has filed this appeal under -clause 10 of the Letters Patent. 2. At the outset, on behalf of respondent No. 2, an objection was taken as to the maintainability of the appeal on the ground that the order withdrawing, the earlier order of status quo does not determine any right or ability and therefore, it is not appealable as a Judgment under clause. 10 of the Letters Patent. For and against the proposition, the learned counsel for the parties cited the under-noted cases (j) Mohair Prasad Singh and others v. Adviser Kun war and others I LR 21 Cal. 474. (ii) Srikanth Raja Karaganda Durga Prasad Xanadu and another v. Srikanth Raja Karaganda Malikaryuna Prasad Xanadu I LR 24 Mad. 358, (Hi) T. V. Gujarat Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier I LR 35 Mad. 371, (iv) Abdul Nazi Sahib v. Marti Ramalakshmammah AI R 1948 Mad. 371. (v) Industrial Sales and Services, Karachi and others v. Archiver Opal Laboratories Ltd. PLD 1969 Keir. 418, (vi) Mumbai Khan v. Chief Settlement Commissioner PLD 1966 S C 276, (oil) Ghulam Hussain and another v. Ghulam Mustafa and others PLD 1967 LAH. 439, and (it) Syed Iqbal Hussain v. MST. Stewart Begum PLD 1967 LAH. 1138. In support of the contentions to the non-maintainability of the appeal, the learned counsel for the respondent relied on the case of Mohair Prasad Singh and others v. Shikari Kun war and others and Srikanth Raja Karaganda Durga Prasad Xanadu and another v. Srikanth Raja Karaganda Mallikerjuna Prasad Xanadu. In these two cases the question for consideration was whether an order refusing to stay the execution of the decree was a Judgment under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent (which corresponds to clause 10 of the Letters Patent of this Court). The answer to this question was given in the negative upon the ground that the order did not affect the merits of the question between the parties by determine any right or liability in dispute, either MN the suit or appeal; and it was therefore, that the order was not appealable as a Judgment under clause 15 of the Letters Patent. The Madras case cited above followed the view

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 228 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1970-09-22): the merits of the question between the parties by determine any right or liability in dispute, either MN the suit or appeal; and it was therefore, that the order was not appealable as a Judgment under clause 15 of the Letters Patent. The Madras case cited above followed the view of the Calcutta High Court expressed in the case of Mohair Prasad Singh and others v. Shikari Kun war and others in which reliance was placed on an earlier view of that Court in the case of The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company This view was not accepted in the form in which it was expressed in the subsequent Madras case reported as T. V. Tularemia Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier. In this case also an order refusing to frame an issue was appealed as a Judgment under clause 15 of the Letters Patent and the question which arose for decision was whether it was a Judgment under clause 15 of the Letters Patent. The question was referred to a Full Bench and two of the three learned Judges comprising the Bench gave separate Judgments while the third concurred with them. Sir Arnold white Chief Justice, gave a wider meaning to the word “Judgment” and in his view, orders other than those passed as a step towards obtaining a final adjudication in the suit would be covered by the word “Judgment”. While rejecting the view expressed in The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company, the learned Chief Justice observed : “Speaking generally I tank the word ‘Judgment’ means any ‘final order, decree or Judgment’ within the meaning of those words as used in section 12 of the English Judicature Act, 1875. An order made on an application which is interlocutory in point of form may be a judgment within the meaning of section 15 of the Letters Patent. On the other hand I am not prepared to say as was held in The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company and in Sinai v. Ahmedabad Habibbhai (1872) 9 BH C R 398 it must be a decision though it does not affect the merits of the suit or proceeding and does not determine any question of right raised in the suit or proceeding.” Krishaswami Iyyar, J. after reviewing the authorities held that an interlocutory order would not be covered within the meaning of the word “Judgment”, but the word “Judgment” would cover an interlocutory or preliminary Judgment. He accordingly repelled the contention that all orders were included within the term “Judgment”. The same question arose for decision in the case of Abdul Nazi Sahib v. Marti Ramalakshmammah, and it was decided on the view taken by Sir Arnold White, Chief Justice in T. V. Gujarat Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier. While construing the_ term “Judgment” m Mumbai_ Khan v. The Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner and another the Lordships

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 228 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1970-09-22): Nazi Sahib v. Marti Ramalakshmammah, and it was decided on the view taken by Sir Arnold White, Chief Justice in T. V. Gujarat Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier. While construing the_ term “Judgment” m Mumbai_ Khan v. The Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner and another the Lordships of the Supreme Court considered the Calcutta case and the Madras case reported as “The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company’ and “T. V. Gujarat Row v.M. K.R. V. Alabama Chattier” and observed at pages 281-282 of the report as under “In both these judgments, reference was made to a decision of the Calcutta High Court published as Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company 1872 Such. W. R. 374 and a decision of the Madras High Court in T. V. Gujarat Row v. M. K. R. V. Alabama Chattier I R 1912 Mad. 1. In the Calcutta case Couch, C. J. had defined “Judgment” in the context of clause 15 of the Letters Patent of that High Court (which corresponds, to clause 10 of the West Pakistan High Court) as meaning “a decision which affected the merits of the question between the parties, by determine some right or ability, which may be either preliminary or interlocutory, the difference between them being that a final judgment determines the whole cause or suit and a preliminary or interlocutory judgment determines only a part of it, leaving other matters to be determined”. In the Madras case, apparently, the definition given by Couch, C. J. was considered to be too narrow and Sir Mold White, the learned Chief Justice, thought that the test should be ‘not the form of the adjudication but its affect in the suit or proceeding in which it is made’. If according to him, its effect, whatever its form may be, and whatever may be the nature of the application on which TT is made, is to put an end to the suit or proceeding, so far as the Court before which the suit or proceeding is pending, is concerned, or if TTS effect, if it is not complied with, is to put an end to the suit or proceeding, the adjudication would be a ‘Judgment’, within the meaning of the clause.” Their Lordships also considered the Full Bench Judgment of the Lahore High Court reported as Firm Shaw Hard Dial Sons v. Messes Sauna Mai Belt Ram wherein the definition attempted by the Madras High Court in T. V. Gujarat Row's case was accepted as good working guide though it was not regarded as an exhaustive definition. The emphasis was on the word “Judgment” in clause 10 of the Letters Patent which was unqualified by any adjective. Concluding their Lordships held that the word is of wider import and observed at page 283 of the report as under — ‘In the general connotation of the term a ‘Judgment’ would merely mean a ‘judicial determination or a decision of a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 228 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1970-09-22): Letters Patent which was unqualified by any adjective. Concluding their Lordships held that the word is of wider import and observed at page 283 of the report as under — ‘In the general connotation of the term a ‘Judgment’ would merely mean a ‘judicial determination or a decision of a Court’ A, and it could be interlocutory or final. Reference in this connection may be made to the explanations given in Warton’s Law Lexicon, under the heading ‘Judgment’.” In Industrial Sales and Service, Karachi and another v. Archival Opal Laboratories Ltd. a Division Bench of the Karachi Seat, as it then was, considered this question and again reviewed the case-law on the subject and reached the following conclusion : “TN the light of the above discussion and the analysis of various rulings cited at bar, I have come to the conclusion that the decision of whether or not an order falls within the connotation of a Judgment for the purpose of Letters Patent appeal, depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case. In considering the facts and circumstances, the following criteria, which have been deducted from the case-law and which, by no means, provide an exhaustive list, can be kept in view.” It is clear from the above discussion that the word ‘Judgment’ cannot be given a limited meaning. The view propounded in the earlier Madras case reported as Srikanth Raja Karaganda Durga Prasad Xanadu and another v. Srikanth Raja Karaganda Mallikarjuna Prasad Xanadu and the Calcutta case reported as Mohair Prasad Singh and others v. Shikari Kun war and others which took support from the view expressed in the case of The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. The Oriental Gas Company has not been accepted either in the Supreme Court case or in the Division Bench case of the Karachi Seat. It is therefore, not possible to exclude orders from the term “Judgment” as it is not qualified by any adjective and a wider meaning has to be given to it. In the instant case the order vacating the status quo granted earlier affects the rights of the parties though temporarily in the context of the decisions discussed above, and accordingly we are of the view that the order is appealable as a “Judgment” under clause 10 of the Letters Patent. The contention of the respondent as to TB.e non-mamtamability of the appeal has no substance and is repelled. 3. However, we are of the view that the relief sought in the application under Order XLI, rule 5,C. P. C. was misconceived. The ejectment of tenants was under the West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction Ordinance, 1959, and those proceedings were not challenged before this Court and accordingly their ejectment could not have been stayed by way of an interlocutory relief in ANL appeal filed against the order of the Settlement Commissioner rejecting the declaration. The appellant could only ask for the suspension of the impugned order or other ancillary relief connected therewith which was not done.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 228?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 228 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1970-09-22): accordingly their ejectment could not have been stayed by way of an interlocutory relief in ANL appeal filed against the order of the Settlement Commissioner rejecting the declaration. The appellant could only ask for the suspension of the impugned order or other ancillary relief connected therewith which was not done. It was for the tenants to resist their ejectment before an appropriate forum, if so advised. In this view of the matter, whether the learned. Single Judge erroneously refused to consider the statement as an under* taking does not arise. C 4. For the foregoing reasons we do not see any substance in this appeal, and it is accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs. K. B.A., Appeal dismissed. Case Result :

Question: What is case 1971 PLD 77 about?
Answer: Case 1971 PLD 77 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1970-04-01. The case involved SULEMAN AND OTHERS—PETITIONERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(4) ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY RULES - R. 17 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - SS. 58(C) AND 60 MORTGAGE ADVERSE POSSESSION PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S.5 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 28. CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1971/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_77.html 1/12 28/10/2025, 01:52 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/197 1/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_77.htmI (1962) - ARTICLE 98 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 3. The case was heard by ANWARUL HAQ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: In case 1971 PLD 77, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(4) ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY RULES - R. 17 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - SS. 58(C) AND 60 MORTGAGE ADVERSE POSSESSION PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S.5 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 28. CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1971/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_77.html 1/12 28/10/2025, 01:52 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/197 1/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_77.htmI (1962) - ARTICLE 98 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 3. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1970-04-01.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 PLD 77 were: MALIK SAEED HASSAN FOR PETITIONERS. SARDAR HIDAYAT ULLAH MOKAL (S. C.) LEGAL FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: ANWARUL HAQ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 PLD 77 were: SULEMAN AND OTHERS—PETITIONERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 PLD 77.
Answer: Judgment ' This petition under Article 98 of the Constitution seeks to challenge the correctness and legality of an order made by the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, on the 5th of December 1962, holding that the property in dispute, namely, agricultural land measure 75 Canals and situate in Village Tonga Khan Singh in Thesis Dimapur of District Sahiwal, is evacuee property and the petitioners are only entitled to remain in possession until the mortgage amount of Rs. 250 is paid to them by the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Sahiwal. The relevant facts are that the land was mortgaged by the : non-Muslim owner with the predecessorrin-interest of the present petitioners by means of a registered mortgage deed dated the 18th of April 1888. The terms of the mortgage included a condition that the land would be redeemed within seven years, but if it is not so redeemed then it shall stand sold to the Mort' Gage, and thereafter the mortgagor shall have no connection whatsoever with this property. It is stated that the mortgagee entered into possession simultaneously with the execution of the mortgage deed, and he and his successors have remained in continuous possession up-to-date. However, in the year 1959 the land was allotted to certain displaced persons, who are cited as respondents in- this petition. 2. On the 9th of September 1959 the petitioners made an application under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) for a declaration to the effect that the land in dispute was not evacuee property. This application was, however, rejected by the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property by his order dated the 10th of September 1960. He held that in the revenue records the petitioners were shown as mortgagees of the land, but the property had not been sold in the favor under the mortgage deed. He went on to add that “4t is a well-known proposition of law that once a mortgage always a mortgage”. He further observed that by the year 1947 sixty years had not elapsed and therefore, the right to redeem had not ceased to exist. He concluded by saying that the petitioners were only mortgagees to the extent of Rs. 250 and the property was evacuee property. 3. The petitioners thereupon filed an appeal which was accepted by the learned Additional Custodian by his order dated the 20th of April 1961. The learned Additional Custodian thought that from the date of the mortgage, namely, the 18th of April 1888 to the date of the petitioners’ application for declaration under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 a period of 71 years had elapsed, thus showing that the right of redemption stood extinguished. He concluded that the petitioners being in continuous possession of the property for more than the prescribed period of sixty years, had become its owners and, therefore, the property was non-evacuee and belonged to the petitioners. 4. The Rehabilitation Authority presented an application sometime MN the year 1962 (exact date not available on the record) for a review of this order. This application came up for consideration before the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, after having remained pending for some time before two Additional Custodians. The learned Custodian decided to treat the review application as an application for revision of the order made by the Additional Custodian, and accepted the same by his order dated the 5th of December 1962. He observed that in view of the provisions contained in section 5 of Act XII of 1957 anything inconsistent contained in the Limitation Act could not prevail, with the result that the time had stopped running against the Custodian from the IST of March 1947. As a result, the right to redeem still continued to subsist and, therefore, the petitioners were entitled only to the mortgage amount, and to continue in possession until such time as the amount was paid to them by the Rehabilitation Department. 5. It is contended by Mr. Saeed Hassan, the learned counsel for the petitioners, that : (a) the review/revision petition presented by the Rehabilitation Department was barred by time and could] not, therefore, have been considered on merits by the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property ; (b) the mortgage being one by way of conditional sale, the property automatically stood sold to the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners in the year 1895 as it had not been redeemed with the agreed period of seven years j (c) the time continued to run against the evacuee mortgagor or his successor-in- interest, namely, the Custodian of Evacuee Property, even after the IST of March 1947 and, therefore, the right to redeem stood extinguished in 1948 ; (d) in the alternative, the petitioners should be deemed to have been in adverse possession of the property since the 19th of April 1895 which matured into full ownership after the lapse of twelve years ; and (e) the property not having been treated as evacuee property -immediately preceding, the first day of January 1957, it could not be so treated in the year 1959. 6. As regards the first contention, it is true that Rule 17 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules prescribes a period of thirty days for filing a revision or review petition* but under subsection (4) of section 43 of the Act the Custodian has the power to so moth revise at any time an order passed by an officer subordinate to him. In the present case the learned Custodian has clearly acted in the exercise of this power, with the result that in these circumstances no question of limitation arose. The real question in this case is regarding the nature of the -transaction relied upon by the petitioners in support of their claim. 7. According to clause (a) of section 58 of the Transfer of, Property Act, “a mortgage is the transfer of an interest in specific immovable property for the purpose of securing the payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan, an existing or future debt, or. the performance of an engagement. Which may give rise to.a pecuniary lability’. The subsequent clauses of this section define the different kinds of mortgages. Clause which 1s relevant for our present purpose, runs. As follows “Where the mortgagor. Ostensibly sells the mortgaged property—.’. on condition that on default of payment. of the mortgage-' money on a certain date the sale shall become absolute, or on condition that on such payment being made the SAB shall become void, or on condition that on such payment being made the buyer shall transfer the property to the seller, the transaction is called a mortgage by conditional sale and the mortgage:, a mortgage by conditional sale Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed to be a mortgage, unless the condition is embodied in the document which effects or purports to effect the sale;"”. 8. Section 60 of the same Act spells out the right of redemption in the following terms —. “At any time after the principal money has become due, the mortgagor has a night, on payment or tender, at a proper time:and place, of the mortgage-money, to require the mortgagee (a) to deliver to the mortgagor the mortgage deed and all documents relating to the mortgaged property which are in the possession or. Power of the mortgagee, (b) where the mortgagee is in possession of the mortgaged property, to deliver, possession thereof to the mortgagor Provided that the right conferred by this section has not been extinguished by the act of the parties or by decree of a Court.” 9. It will be seen that the transaction in question in the present proceedings is a mortgage by conditional sale as defined in clause (c) of section 58 reproduced earlier, with the result that in terms of section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act the mortgagor would have the right to redeem the mortgage at any time after the principal money has become due, provided that this right has not been extinguished by the act of the parties or by decree of a Court. Now, in the present case neither of these two circumstances is present. There is no decree of the Court, nor did the parties take any action after the initial execution of the mortgage deed in the year 1888 to extinguish the right of redemption which had come into existence by the very nature of the transaction. The provisions contained in section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act are in the nature of statutory right to redeem the property in cases where the transaction falls within the definition of a mortgage as spelt out in the various clauses of section 58. Irrespective, therefore, of stipulation contained in the mortgage deed that if the mortgage is not redeemed within seven years the land will stand sold to the mortgagee, the right of redemption shall continue in view of the statutory provisions specially enacted by the Legislature to keep alive the right of the mortgagor to redeem the property in cases of this kind. Section 60 affirms the right of redemption in all mortgages and thus carries out the recommendations of the Privy Council in Thumbuswamy's case (1) that the Legislature should intervene to recognize a right of redemption in mortgages by conditional sale. The section, in other words, affirms the maxim “once a mortgage always a mortgage”. 10. The doctrine of a clog on redemption is in fact a rule of justice, equity and good conscience. The right of redemption cannot be controlled by any agreement made as part of the transaction of mortgage itself in view of the clear provision contained in section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act, although after the mortgage the mortgagor may deal as he pleases with his property and so the maxim “once a mortgage. Always a mortgage” has no reference to agreements after the mortgage. In support of these propositions one may refer to Founder Khan v. Abdul Salad Khan Ramachandra Kola Patio and others v. Han manta Layman Alaska and others (3) ; RAM v. Mandarin Path and others (4) ; K. Amu Carr v. E. C. Kelp Near and another (5) ; Mohammad Her Khan v. Raja Seth Swami Dayak (6) and P. Venkatasubbiah Chatty and others v. The Jumna Mosque Mylar, Madras 11. Mr. Saeed Hassan, the learned counsel for the petitioners, however, referred to Family Ramzi Mandala and others v. Suleiman Sheikh Ibrahim (8) in which it has been held that “in Sind, in the case of a mortgage by way of conditional sale, time is of the essence of the contract, and at the expiry of the term fixed for redemption, the contract executes itself and the transaction closes and becomes one of sale’. But it is interesting to note that m the body of the judgment the learned Judges have made the following observations !— - “The-legislation recommended by the-Privy Council in Thumbuswamy's case was undertaken in the Transfer of Property Act which settled the point for Madras in 1882 and for Bombay MN 1893. Section 60 of that Act gives a right of redemption to the mortgagor and makes no distinction between one class of mortgage and another. The provisions of this section are not subject to a contract to the contrary, and they give a uniform right of redemption in all mortgages, overriding any stipulations confining rights of redemption to a given period. This has been well pointed out in the case of Pereira v. Renata 11 Mad. 403. In Bengal and Allahabad and later on in the Punjab the rule once a mortgage always a mortgage was enacted by Bengal Regulation XVII of 1806, and as reference has been made to the case of Banished Was and others v. Legged 27 I A 58, I would observe that it was under this Regulation that redemption was there allowed after the fixed period. But in Sind neither this Regulation nor section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act apply. Nor has there been a course of judicial decisions applying the English rule. ” 12. The learned counsel for the petitioners next referred to Mange and others v. Nathaly (1) in which it was held by the Lower Burma Chief Court that in a mortgage by conditional sale as soon as the specified period had elapsed without the mortgagor exercising his right of redemption, that which was a mortgage in its inception became an absolute sale from the beginning, finally closing the transaction between the parties. Reliance for this view was placed on the observations of the Privy Council in Thumbuswamy's case already referred to. It will be seen that the application of this decision obviously stands excluded in the present case on account of the provisions contained in section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act as brought out in detail in the preceding paragraphs. 13. Reference was also made to Radar Ali v. Ghulam Mohtrud-Din and others (2) and Tea Singh v. Firm Kalyan Dashed Ram and another (3) which contain the observation that although the equitable principles underlying the Transfer of Property Act are allowed in the Punjab, the Act itself with its technicalities, does not apply. This observation does not, in any manner, benefit the present petitioners for the reason that the rule embodied in the maxim “once a mortgage always a. mortgage” is in fact a rule of equity, justice and good conscience and would, therefore, apply to the Punjab even though the technicalities of the Transfer of Property Act may not apply. As/ Lord Henley has said in Vernon v. Bethel “a condition! converting a mortgage into a sale is valid as a clog on the equity of redemption. This Court, as a Court of conscience, is very jealous of persons taking securities for a loan and converting such securities into purchases. And therefore I take it to be an established rule, that a mortgagee can never provide at the time of making the loan for any event or condition on which the equity of redemption shall be discharged, and the conveyance made absolute. And there is great reason and justice in this rule, for necessitous men are not, truly speaking, free men, but to answer a present exigency, will submit to any terms that the crafty may impose upon them’. 14. In view of the principles and the statutory provisions mentioned above, it is clear that the transaction entered MTO between the non-Muslim mortgagor and the predecessor-in- interest of the present petitioners in the year 1888 being a mortgage by conditional sale, the right of redemption continued to subsist even after the expiry of the prescribed period of seven years. The mortgage could, therefore, be redeemed any timer within the period of limitation as prescribed by Article 148 of the) Limitation Act. 15. On this view of the matter, no question arises of the mortgagee or his successors-in- interest being in adverse possession of the property since 1895. The mortgagee entered into per-missive possession under a mortgage deed, and he would continued to retain that character until the mortgage is redeemed, or the right to redeem is extinguished by lapse of time. 16. The next question, therefore, is whether in this case the night to redeem stood extinguished when the matter was taken up by the Custodian authorities. It will be recalled that for the first time the land was allotted by the Rehabilitation/Settlement authorities to displaced persons in the year 1959, and it was as a consequence thereof that on the 9th of September 1959 the petitioners made an application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 for a declaration regarding the non-evacuee character of the property. In other words, as far as the Custodian and Rehabilitation authorities were concerned, no action to redeem the property or otherwise deal with it as evacuee property was taken until after the expiry of 71 years since the mortgage was entered into in the year 1888. 17. The first legislation dealing with evacuee property was the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 (XV of 1949), the relevant provisions of which have been substantially repeated in Act XII of 1957. As in the present case the period of sixty years allowed for the redemption of the mortgage was to expire in 1948, it would be well to refer to Ordinance XV of 1949, which was given retrospective effect, rather than to the subsequent legislation, in order to ascertain the correct legal position. Clause (2) of section 2 of the Ordinance defines an evacuee as, inter alia, meaning “‘any person who, on account of the setting up of the Domains of Pakistan and India, or on account of civil disturbances, or the fear of such disturbances, on or after the first day of March 1947, leaves or has left any place in the territories now comprising Pakistan for any place outside those territories”. The term “evacuee property” is defined m- clause of the same section as meaning, inter alia, “any property in which an evacuee’ has any right or interest (whether personally or as. a trustee or a beneficiary or m any other capacity)”. The operative date in both these definitions is the first day of March 1947. From these definitions it becomes abundantly clear that the equity of redemption in the present case had become evacuee property since the first day of March 1947, and had vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property from that day under section 6 of the Ordinance (corresponding to section 7 of Act XII of 1957). Section 7 of the Ordinance (corresponding to section 10 of the Act) provides that every person who 1s, or has at any time after. The twenty-eighth day of February 1947, been in possession, supervision or management of any evacuee property, shall be deemed to hold or to have held, as the case may be, such property on behalf of the Custodian. Then comes section 12 of the Ordinance (corresponding to section 16 of the Act), which grants to evacuee property exemption from all legal process by declaring that “property which has vested in, or of which possession has been taken by, the Custodian shall be exempt from all legal process?, including. seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale by any officer of a Court or any other authority and no my unction or other order of whatever kind in respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court or any other authority’. Subsection (2) of section 12 of the Ordinance enjoins that “upon the commencement of this Ordinance, any such legal process as aforesaid subsisting immediately before such commencement shall cease to have effect, and all evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian or other officer or person apported by TT, shall, upon. Delivery of the same being called for by the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian”. 18. The cumulative effect of the provisions mentioned in the preceding paragraph is that from. the first day of March 1947 the interest of the evacuee owner vested in the Custodian by operation of law, and evacuee property so vested became immune from all legal process of any kind. Anyone holding the property or being in its possession was to be deemed to be dog so on behalf of the Custodian of Evacuee Property. At this stage we might take note of section 4. of the Ordinance (corresponding to section 5 of the Act) which lays down that “the provisions of this Ordinance, and any rule or order made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent herewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law”. It will be seen that the obvious intention of this sweeping provision is that once the property has vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property then it shall not be taken away from him or his control by the operation of any other law for the time being in force. And this would include section 28 of the Limitation Act as well which contemplates extinguishment of the right to property at the determination of the period of limitation. Any other position would have been simply impossible, as the Custodian of Evacuee Property could not be expected to acquire knowledge of time m the various legal obligations which the non-Muslim evacuee owners numbering several millions had already incurred or were able to incur with the passage of time. The Legislature, therefore, in its wisdom, chose to freeze the respective rights of the parties as they existed on a certain specified day, namely, the first day of March 1947. On this view of the matter it follows that time ceased to run against the Custodian from the IST of March 1947 and, therefore, the questions of limitation has to be decided in such cases with reference to this date and not to any subsequent date on which action may in fact be initiated by the Custodian/Rehabilitation authorities. On the IST of March 1947 the right to redeem was clearly in subsistence in the instant case. 19. The learned counsel for the petitioners, however, contended that it has been held by this Court in at least two cases that the powers of the Custodian and the nights acquired by him in respect of evacuee property are subject to the ordinary law and, therefore, time would continue to run against the Custodian as it would have against the non-Muslim evacuee owner, had he remained in Pakistan. The first case mentioned by Mr. Saeed Hassan is Quaffer Ali Jeffery and another v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, and another (1) in which the learned Custodian, while acting under section 16 of the Ordinance, had refused to confirm a sale on the ground of inadequacy of consideration. The Court found that as a matter of law it was not open to the parties in that case to effect the sale for a higher consideration than what was the declared value of the construction appearing from the Corporation records and, therefore, the Custodian had proceeded to withhold confirmation of the transaction on a ground which was legally untenable, and thus he exceeded his jurisdiction in refusing to confirm the sale. The learned Judges went on to observe that “the provisions of section 5 of Act XII of 1957 were obviously intended to protect evacuee property against the effect of transactions that may have been entered into after the 1st of March 1947. The provisions of the Act have been given retrospective effect for certain purposes from that date. The object could not be that the restrictions to which the property was subject when it was in. The possession of the original owner, who is now an evacuee, were abrogated wholesale”’. It will be seen that the learned Judges in this case were concerned with ascertaining as to what rights had accrued to the original owner at the time he became an evacuee, and they held that the Custodian did not acquire any superior, rights as compared to the original owner. However, this decision cannot, in any manner, be construed as laying down that the rights which had thus accrued to the Custodian or had vested in him by operation of law, could be subsequently abridged or abrogated by the operation of any other law for the time being in force. It is clear that the question before their Lordships was entirely different from the one which has arisen in the present case. 20. The second case relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners is Malik Amur Muhammad Khan, Nawab of Kala Bag v. The Custodian, West Pakistan and another Here again the learned Judges were concerned with the determination of the nature of the rights that had become evacuee property, and they held that “before a right can be declared to be evacuee property, it should satisfy the condition that it is property”. The question before them was whether the right to residence given to non-Muslim non-proprietors in villages which now form part of Pakistan could be treated as evacuee property if the non-Muslims had left the property voluntarily. The learned Judges held that section 8 of Act XII of 1957 was not intended to apply to those rights which would come to an end at any moment or at a specified time. They also observed that section 5 of the Act did not mean that a person who became an evacuee would be deemed to have left behind more rights than he would have had FHE had not become an evacuee. I am m respectful agreement with these observations, but consider that they have no relevance at all to the question of limitation with which we are concerned in the present case. The determination of the nature of the rights that are to be treated as evacuee property for the purpose of vesting in the Custodian is a question distinct and different from whether such rights can be subsequently affected or modified by the operation of any other law after the 1st of March 1947. Both the cases cited by Mr. Saeed Hassan are silent on this question. ' 21. The learned counsel also drew my attention to Muhammad Main Khan v. The Chief Settlement Commissioner etc. This case, however, deals with an entirely different question, namely, the power of the Custodian to impose certain additional terms and conditions on a lessee while confirming his lease under section 16(4) of the Ordinance. 22. I now take up the last contention raised by Mr. Saeed Hassan to the effect that the petitioners are protected by section 3 of Act XII of 1957, which lays down that property not treated as evacuee property immediately preceding the first day of January 1957 shall not be treated as such after that date. The first point to be noticed in this behalf is that this contention was not raised before any of the Custodian authorities, who proceeded on the undoubted assumption that the equity of redemption was evacuee property and the only question was whether the property could be redeemed or not after the expiry of sixty years. On this short ground alone, would be justified in G refusing to consider this plea which has been raised in the High Court for the first time. 23. Even otherwise, the contention is entirely misconceived. The present is not a case of the property in dispute being treated as evacuee property for the first time after the IST of January 1957. On the facts presented by the petitioners themselves the property was undoubtedly evacuee property by definition and the rights of the non-Muslim mortgagor had vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property. The only question, therefore, which arose in this case was whether the property could be redeemed after the expiry of sixty years. There is no attempt in this case to treat the rights of the petitioners as evacuee property and, therefore, no occasion arises for them to evoke the protection of section 3 of the Act. Their rights as mortgagees are definitely non-evacuee property, and they remain as such, subject to the right of redemption which has vested in the Custodian. 24. For the foregoing reasons, it is clear that the transaction entered into between the non-Muslim owner and the predecessor-in-interest of the present petitioners was a mortgage by conditional sale, which could be redeemed at any time within the period of limitation which was to expire in April 1948 ; but before that date the right of redemption became evacuee property with effect from the IST of March 1947. As a necessary consequence, the period of limitation ceased to run against the Custodian in view of several provisions contained in the legislation relating to administration of evacuee property and, therefore, it was open to the Custodian to order redemption at any time on the payment of the mortgage amount. The exercise of this right of redemption is not hit, in any manner, by the protection contained in section 3 of the Act. The petition, therefore, fails and is hereby dismissed. In view of the legal questions involved, the parties are left to bear their own costs. Petition dismissed. WWW

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): Judgment ' This petition under Article 98 of the Constitution seeks to challenge the correctness and legality of an order made by the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, on the 5th of December 1962, holding that the property in dispute, namely, agricultural land measure 75 Canals and situate in Village Tonga Khan Singh in Thesis Dimapur of District Sahiwal, is evacuee property and the petitioners are only entitled to remain in possession until the mortgage amount of Rs. 250 is paid to them by the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Sahiwal. The relevant facts are that the land was mortgaged by the : non-Muslim owner with the predecessorrin-interest of the present petitioners by means of a registered mortgage deed dated the 18th of April 1888. The terms of the mortgage included a condition that the land would be redeemed within seven years, but if it is not so redeemed then it shall stand sold to the Mort' Gage, and thereafter the mortgagor shall have no connection whatsoever with this property. It is stated that the mortgagee entered into possession simultaneously with the execution of the mortgage deed, and he and his successors have remained in continuous possession up-to-date. However, in the year 1959 the land was allotted to certain displaced persons, who are cited as respondents in- this petition. 2. On the 9th of September 1959 the petitioners made an application under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) for a declaration to the effect that the land in dispute was not evacuee property. This application was, however, rejected by the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property by his order dated the 10th of September 1960. He held that in the revenue records the petitioners were shown as mortgagees of the land, but the property had not been sold in the favor under the mortgage deed. He went on to add that “4t is a well-known proposition of law that once a mortgage always a mortgage”. He further observed that by the year 1947 sixty years had not elapsed and therefore, the right to redeem had not ceased to exist. He concluded by saying that the petitioners were only mortgagees to the extent of Rs. 250 and the property was evacuee property. 3. The petitioners thereupon filed an appeal which was accepted by the learned Additional Custodian by his order dated the 20th of April 1961. The learned Additional Custodian thought that from the date of the mortgage, namely, the 18th of April 1888 to the date of the petitioners’ application for declaration under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 a period of 71 years had elapsed, thus showing that the right of redemption stood extinguished. He concluded that the petitioners being in continuous possession of the property for more than the prescribed period of sixty years, had become its owners and, therefore, the property was non-evacuee and belonged to the petitioners. 4. The Rehabilitation Authority presented an application sometime MN the year 1962

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): stood extinguished. He concluded that the petitioners being in continuous possession of the property for more than the prescribed period of sixty years, had become its owners and, therefore, the property was non-evacuee and belonged to the petitioners. 4. The Rehabilitation Authority presented an application sometime MN the year 1962 (exact date not available on the record) for a review of this order. This application came up for consideration before the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, after having remained pending for some time before two Additional Custodians. The learned Custodian decided to treat the review application as an application for revision of the order made by the Additional Custodian, and accepted the same by his order dated the 5th of December 1962. He observed that in view of the provisions contained in section 5 of Act XII of 1957 anything inconsistent contained in the Limitation Act could not prevail, with the result that the time had stopped running against the Custodian from the IST of March 1947. As a result, the right to redeem still continued to subsist and, therefore, the petitioners were entitled only to the mortgage amount, and to continue in possession until such time as the amount was paid to them by the Rehabilitation Department. 5. It is contended by Mr. Saeed Hassan, the learned counsel for the petitioners, that : (a) the review/revision petition presented by the Rehabilitation Department was barred by time and could] not, therefore, have been considered on merits by the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property ; (b) the mortgage being one by way of conditional sale, the property automatically stood sold to the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners in the year 1895 as it had not been redeemed with the agreed period of seven years j (c) the time continued to run against the evacuee mortgagor or his successor-in- interest, namely, the Custodian of Evacuee Property, even after the IST of March 1947 and, therefore, the right to redeem stood extinguished in 1948 ; (d) in the alternative, the petitioners should be deemed to have been in adverse possession of the property since the 19th of April 1895 which matured into full ownership after the lapse of twelve years ; and (e) the property not having been treated as evacuee property -immediately preceding, the first day of January 1957, it could not be so treated in the year 1959. 6. As regards the first contention, it is true that Rule 17 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules prescribes a period of thirty days for filing a revision or review petition* but under subsection (4) of section 43 of the Act the Custodian has the power to so moth revise at any time an order passed by an officer subordinate to him. In the present case the learned Custodian has clearly acted in the exercise of this power, with the result that in these circumstances no question of limitation arose. The real question in this case is regarding the nature of the -transaction

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): an order passed by an officer subordinate to him. In the present case the learned Custodian has clearly acted in the exercise of this power, with the result that in these circumstances no question of limitation arose. The real question in this case is regarding the nature of the -transaction relied upon by the petitioners in support of their claim. 7. According to clause (a) of section 58 of the Transfer of, Property Act, “a mortgage is the transfer of an interest in specific immovable property for the purpose of securing the payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan, an existing or future debt, or. the performance of an engagement. Which may give rise to.a pecuniary lability’. The subsequent clauses of this section define the different kinds of mortgages. Clause which 1s relevant for our present purpose, runs. As follows “Where the mortgagor. Ostensibly sells the mortgaged property—.’. on condition that on default of payment. of the mortgage-' money on a certain date the sale shall become absolute, or on condition that on such payment being made the SAB shall become void, or on condition that on such payment being made the buyer shall transfer the property to the seller, the transaction is called a mortgage by conditional sale and the mortgage:, a mortgage by conditional sale Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed to be a mortgage, unless the condition is embodied in the document which effects or purports to effect the sale;"”. 8. Section 60 of the same Act spells out the right of redemption in the following terms —. “At any time after the principal money has become due, the mortgagor has a night, on payment or tender, at a proper time:and place, of the mortgage-money, to require the mortgagee (a) to deliver to the mortgagor the mortgage deed and all documents relating to the mortgaged property which are in the possession or. Power of the mortgagee, (b) where the mortgagee is in possession of the mortgaged property, to deliver, possession thereof to the mortgagor Provided that the right conferred by this section has not been extinguished by the act of the parties or by decree of a Court.” 9. It will be seen that the transaction in question in the present proceedings is a mortgage by conditional sale as defined in clause (c) of section 58 reproduced earlier, with the result that in terms of section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act the mortgagor would have the right to redeem the mortgage at any time after the principal money has become due, provided that this right has not been extinguished by the act of the parties or by decree of a Court. Now, in the present case neither of these two circumstances is present. There is no decree of the Court, nor did the parties take any action after the initial execution of the mortgage deed in the year 1888 to extinguish the right of redemption which had come

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): of a Court. Now, in the present case neither of these two circumstances is present. There is no decree of the Court, nor did the parties take any action after the initial execution of the mortgage deed in the year 1888 to extinguish the right of redemption which had come into existence by the very nature of the transaction. The provisions contained in section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act are in the nature of statutory right to redeem the property in cases where the transaction falls within the definition of a mortgage as spelt out in the various clauses of section 58. Irrespective, therefore, of stipulation contained in the mortgage deed that if the mortgage is not redeemed within seven years the land will stand sold to the mortgagee, the right of redemption shall continue in view of the statutory provisions specially enacted by the Legislature to keep alive the right of the mortgagor to redeem the property in cases of this kind. Section 60 affirms the right of redemption in all mortgages and thus carries out the recommendations of the Privy Council in Thumbuswamy's case (1) that the Legislature should intervene to recognize a right of redemption in mortgages by conditional sale. The section, in other words, affirms the maxim “once a mortgage always a mortgage”. 10. The doctrine of a clog on redemption is in fact a rule of justice, equity and good conscience. The right of redemption cannot be controlled by any agreement made as part of the transaction of mortgage itself in view of the clear provision contained in section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act, although after the mortgage the mortgagor may deal as he pleases with his property and so the maxim “once a mortgage. Always a mortgage” has no reference to agreements after the mortgage. In support of these propositions one may refer to Founder Khan v. Abdul Salad Khan Ramachandra Kola Patio and others v. Han manta Layman Alaska and others (3) ; RAM v. Mandarin Path and others (4) ; K. Amu Carr v. E. C. Kelp Near and another (5) ; Mohammad Her Khan v. Raja Seth Swami Dayak (6) and P. Venkatasubbiah Chatty and others v. The Jumna Mosque Mylar, Madras 11. Mr. Saeed Hassan, the learned counsel for the petitioners, however, referred to Family Ramzi Mandala and others v. Suleiman Sheikh Ibrahim (8) in which it has been held that “in Sind, in the case of a mortgage by way of conditional sale, time is of the essence of the contract, and at the expiry of the term fixed for redemption, the contract executes itself and the transaction closes and becomes one of sale’. But it is interesting to note that m the body of the judgment the learned Judges have made the following observations !— - “The-legislation recommended by the-Privy Council in Thumbuswamy's case was undertaken in the Transfer of Property Act which settled the point for Madras in 1882 and for Bombay MN

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): it is interesting to note that m the body of the judgment the learned Judges have made the following observations !— - “The-legislation recommended by the-Privy Council in Thumbuswamy's case was undertaken in the Transfer of Property Act which settled the point for Madras in 1882 and for Bombay MN 1893. Section 60 of that Act gives a right of redemption to the mortgagor and makes no distinction between one class of mortgage and another. The provisions of this section are not subject to a contract to the contrary, and they give a uniform right of redemption in all mortgages, overriding any stipulations confining rights of redemption to a given period. This has been well pointed out in the case of Pereira v. Renata 11 Mad. 403. In Bengal and Allahabad and later on in the Punjab the rule once a mortgage always a mortgage was enacted by Bengal Regulation XVII of 1806, and as reference has been made to the case of Banished Was and others v. Legged 27 I A 58, I would observe that it was under this Regulation that redemption was there allowed after the fixed period. But in Sind neither this Regulation nor section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act apply. Nor has there been a course of judicial decisions applying the English rule. ” 12. The learned counsel for the petitioners next referred to Mange and others v. Nathaly (1) in which it was held by the Lower Burma Chief Court that in a mortgage by conditional sale as soon as the specified period had elapsed without the mortgagor exercising his right of redemption, that which was a mortgage in its inception became an absolute sale from the beginning, finally closing the transaction between the parties. Reliance for this view was placed on the observations of the Privy Council in Thumbuswamy's case already referred to. It will be seen that the application of this decision obviously stands excluded in the present case on account of the provisions contained in section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act as brought out in detail in the preceding paragraphs. 13. Reference was also made to Radar Ali v. Ghulam Mohtrud-Din and others (2) and Tea Singh v. Firm Kalyan Dashed Ram and another (3) which contain the observation that although the equitable principles underlying the Transfer of Property Act are allowed in the Punjab, the Act itself with its technicalities, does not apply. This observation does not, in any manner, benefit the present petitioners for the reason that the rule embodied in the maxim “once a mortgage always a. mortgage” is in fact a rule of equity, justice and good conscience and would, therefore, apply to the Punjab even though the technicalities of the Transfer of Property Act may not apply. As/ Lord Henley has said in Vernon v. Bethel “a condition! converting a mortgage into a sale is valid as a clog on the equity of redemption. This Court, as a Court of conscience, is

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): the Punjab even though the technicalities of the Transfer of Property Act may not apply. As/ Lord Henley has said in Vernon v. Bethel “a condition! converting a mortgage into a sale is valid as a clog on the equity of redemption. This Court, as a Court of conscience, is very jealous of persons taking securities for a loan and converting such securities into purchases. And therefore I take it to be an established rule, that a mortgagee can never provide at the time of making the loan for any event or condition on which the equity of redemption shall be discharged, and the conveyance made absolute. And there is great reason and justice in this rule, for necessitous men are not, truly speaking, free men, but to answer a present exigency, will submit to any terms that the crafty may impose upon them’. 14. In view of the principles and the statutory provisions mentioned above, it is clear that the transaction entered MTO between the non-Muslim mortgagor and the predecessor-in- interest of the present petitioners in the year 1888 being a mortgage by conditional sale, the right of redemption continued to subsist even after the expiry of the prescribed period of seven years. The mortgage could, therefore, be redeemed any timer within the period of limitation as prescribed by Article 148 of the) Limitation Act. 15. On this view of the matter, no question arises of the mortgagee or his successors-in- interest being in adverse possession of the property since 1895. The mortgagee entered into per-missive possession under a mortgage deed, and he would continued to retain that character until the mortgage is redeemed, or the right to redeem is extinguished by lapse of time. 16. The next question, therefore, is whether in this case the night to redeem stood extinguished when the matter was taken up by the Custodian authorities. It will be recalled that for the first time the land was allotted by the Rehabilitation/Settlement authorities to displaced persons in the year 1959, and it was as a consequence thereof that on the 9th of September 1959 the petitioners made an application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 for a declaration regarding the non-evacuee character of the property. In other words, as far as the Custodian and Rehabilitation authorities were concerned, no action to redeem the property or otherwise deal with it as evacuee property was taken until after the expiry of 71 years since the mortgage was entered into in the year 1888. 17. The first legislation dealing with evacuee property was the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949 (XV of 1949), the relevant provisions of which have been substantially repeated in Act XII of 1957. As in the present case the period of sixty years allowed for the redemption of the mortgage was to expire in 1948, it would be well to refer to Ordinance XV of 1949, which was given retrospective effect, rather than to the subsequent legislation, in order to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): XII of 1957. As in the present case the period of sixty years allowed for the redemption of the mortgage was to expire in 1948, it would be well to refer to Ordinance XV of 1949, which was given retrospective effect, rather than to the subsequent legislation, in order to ascertain the correct legal position. Clause (2) of section 2 of the Ordinance defines an evacuee as, inter alia, meaning “‘any person who, on account of the setting up of the Domains of Pakistan and India, or on account of civil disturbances, or the fear of such disturbances, on or after the first day of March 1947, leaves or has left any place in the territories now comprising Pakistan for any place outside those territories”. The term “evacuee property” is defined m- clause of the same section as meaning, inter alia, “any property in which an evacuee’ has any right or interest (whether personally or as. a trustee or a beneficiary or m any other capacity)”. The operative date in both these definitions is the first day of March 1947. From these definitions it becomes abundantly clear that the equity of redemption in the present case had become evacuee property since the first day of March 1947, and had vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property from that day under section 6 of the Ordinance (corresponding to section 7 of Act XII of 1957). Section 7 of the Ordinance (corresponding to section 10 of the Act) provides that every person who 1s, or has at any time after. The twenty-eighth day of February 1947, been in possession, supervision or management of any evacuee property, shall be deemed to hold or to have held, as the case may be, such property on behalf of the Custodian. Then comes section 12 of the Ordinance (corresponding to section 16 of the Act), which grants to evacuee property exemption from all legal process by declaring that “property which has vested in, or of which possession has been taken by, the Custodian shall be exempt from all legal process?, including. seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale by any officer of a Court or any other authority and no my unction or other order of whatever kind in respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court or any other authority’. Subsection (2) of section 12 of the Ordinance enjoins that “upon the commencement of this Ordinance, any such legal process as aforesaid subsisting immediately before such commencement shall cease to have effect, and all evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian or other officer or person apported by TT, shall, upon. Delivery of the same being called for by the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian”. 18. The cumulative effect of the provisions mentioned in the preceding paragraph is that from. the first day of March 1947 the interest of the evacuee owner vested in the Custodian by operation of law, and evacuee property so vested became immune from

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian”. 18. The cumulative effect of the provisions mentioned in the preceding paragraph is that from. the first day of March 1947 the interest of the evacuee owner vested in the Custodian by operation of law, and evacuee property so vested became immune from all legal process of any kind. Anyone holding the property or being in its possession was to be deemed to be dog so on behalf of the Custodian of Evacuee Property. At this stage we might take note of section 4. of the Ordinance (corresponding to section 5 of the Act) which lays down that “the provisions of this Ordinance, and any rule or order made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent herewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law”. It will be seen that the obvious intention of this sweeping provision is that once the property has vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property then it shall not be taken away from him or his control by the operation of any other law for the time being in force. And this would include section 28 of the Limitation Act as well which contemplates extinguishment of the right to property at the determination of the period of limitation. Any other position would have been simply impossible, as the Custodian of Evacuee Property could not be expected to acquire knowledge of time m the various legal obligations which the non-Muslim evacuee owners numbering several millions had already incurred or were able to incur with the passage of time. The Legislature, therefore, in its wisdom, chose to freeze the respective rights of the parties as they existed on a certain specified day, namely, the first day of March 1947. On this view of the matter it follows that time ceased to run against the Custodian from the IST of March 1947 and, therefore, the questions of limitation has to be decided in such cases with reference to this date and not to any subsequent date on which action may in fact be initiated by the Custodian/Rehabilitation authorities. On the IST of March 1947 the right to redeem was clearly in subsistence in the instant case. 19. The learned counsel for the petitioners, however, contended that it has been held by this Court in at least two cases that the powers of the Custodian and the nights acquired by him in respect of evacuee property are subject to the ordinary law and, therefore, time would continue to run against the Custodian as it would have against the non-Muslim evacuee owner, had he remained in Pakistan. The first case mentioned by Mr. Saeed Hassan is Quaffer Ali Jeffery and another v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, and another (1) in which the learned Custodian, while acting under section 16 of the Ordinance, had refused to confirm a sale on the ground of inadequacy of consideration. The Court

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): case mentioned by Mr. Saeed Hassan is Quaffer Ali Jeffery and another v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property, Karachi, and another (1) in which the learned Custodian, while acting under section 16 of the Ordinance, had refused to confirm a sale on the ground of inadequacy of consideration. The Court found that as a matter of law it was not open to the parties in that case to effect the sale for a higher consideration than what was the declared value of the construction appearing from the Corporation records and, therefore, the Custodian had proceeded to withhold confirmation of the transaction on a ground which was legally untenable, and thus he exceeded his jurisdiction in refusing to confirm the sale. The learned Judges went on to observe that “the provisions of section 5 of Act XII of 1957 were obviously intended to protect evacuee property against the effect of transactions that may have been entered into after the 1st of March 1947. The provisions of the Act have been given retrospective effect for certain purposes from that date. The object could not be that the restrictions to which the property was subject when it was in. The possession of the original owner, who is now an evacuee, were abrogated wholesale”’. It will be seen that the learned Judges in this case were concerned with ascertaining as to what rights had accrued to the original owner at the time he became an evacuee, and they held that the Custodian did not acquire any superior, rights as compared to the original owner. However, this decision cannot, in any manner, be construed as laying down that the rights which had thus accrued to the Custodian or had vested in him by operation of law, could be subsequently abridged or abrogated by the operation of any other law for the time being in force. It is clear that the question before their Lordships was entirely different from the one which has arisen in the present case. 20. The second case relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners is Malik Amur Muhammad Khan, Nawab of Kala Bag v. The Custodian, West Pakistan and another Here again the learned Judges were concerned with the determination of the nature of the rights that had become evacuee property, and they held that “before a right can be declared to be evacuee property, it should satisfy the condition that it is property”. The question before them was whether the right to residence given to non-Muslim non-proprietors in villages which now form part of Pakistan could be treated as evacuee property if the non-Muslims had left the property voluntarily. The learned Judges held that section 8 of Act XII of 1957 was not intended to apply to those rights which would come to an end at any moment or at a specified time. They also observed that section 5 of the Act did not mean that a person who became an evacuee would be deemed to have left

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): XII of 1957 was not intended to apply to those rights which would come to an end at any moment or at a specified time. They also observed that section 5 of the Act did not mean that a person who became an evacuee would be deemed to have left behind more rights than he would have had FHE had not become an evacuee. I am m respectful agreement with these observations, but consider that they have no relevance at all to the question of limitation with which we are concerned in the present case. The determination of the nature of the rights that are to be treated as evacuee property for the purpose of vesting in the Custodian is a question distinct and different from whether such rights can be subsequently affected or modified by the operation of any other law after the 1st of March 1947. Both the cases cited by Mr. Saeed Hassan are silent on this question. ' 21. The learned counsel also drew my attention to Muhammad Main Khan v. The Chief Settlement Commissioner etc. This case, however, deals with an entirely different question, namely, the power of the Custodian to impose certain additional terms and conditions on a lessee while confirming his lease under section 16(4) of the Ordinance. 22. I now take up the last contention raised by Mr. Saeed Hassan to the effect that the petitioners are protected by section 3 of Act XII of 1957, which lays down that property not treated as evacuee property immediately preceding the first day of January 1957 shall not be treated as such after that date. The first point to be noticed in this behalf is that this contention was not raised before any of the Custodian authorities, who proceeded on the undoubted assumption that the equity of redemption was evacuee property and the only question was whether the property could be redeemed or not after the expiry of sixty years. On this short ground alone, would be justified in G refusing to consider this plea which has been raised in the High Court for the first time. 23. Even otherwise, the contention is entirely misconceived. The present is not a case of the property in dispute being treated as evacuee property for the first time after the IST of January 1957. On the facts presented by the petitioners themselves the property was undoubtedly evacuee property by definition and the rights of the non-Muslim mortgagor had vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property. The only question, therefore, which arose in this case was whether the property could be redeemed after the expiry of sixty years. There is no attempt in this case to treat the rights of the petitioners as evacuee property and, therefore, no occasion arises for them to evoke the protection of section 3 of the Act. Their rights as mortgagees are definitely non-evacuee property, and they remain as such, subject to the right of redemption which has vested in the Custodian. 24.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 77?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 77 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-04-01): rights of the petitioners as evacuee property and, therefore, no occasion arises for them to evoke the protection of section 3 of the Act. Their rights as mortgagees are definitely non-evacuee property, and they remain as such, subject to the right of redemption which has vested in the Custodian. 24. For the foregoing reasons, it is clear that the transaction entered into between the non-Muslim owner and the predecessor-in-interest of the present petitioners was a mortgage by conditional sale, which could be redeemed at any time within the period of limitation which was to expire in April 1948 ; but before that date the right of redemption became evacuee property with effect from the IST of March 1947. As a necessary consequence, the period of limitation ceased to run against the Custodian in view of several provisions contained in the legislation relating to administration of evacuee property and, therefore, it was open to the Custodian to order redemption at any time on the payment of the mortgage amount. The exercise of this right of redemption is not hit, in any manner, by the protection contained in section 3 of the Act. The petition, therefore, fails and is hereby dismissed. In view of the legal questions involved, the parties are left to bear their own costs. Petition dismissed. WWW

Question: What is case 1971 PLD 217 about?
Answer: Case 1971 PLD 217 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1970-03-16. The case involved CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE— APPELLANTVERSUS MUHAMMAD DIN AND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - SS. 4(4) AND 19 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD IQBALAND MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 PLD 217?
Answer: In case 1971 PLD 217, the court applied the following statutes: DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - SS. 4(4) AND 19 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1970-03-16.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 PLD 217?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 PLD 217 were: RIAZ KAYANI FOR APPELLANT.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD IQBALAND MUHAMMAD AFZAL ZULLAH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 PLD 217?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 PLD 217 were: CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE— APPELLANTVERSUS MUHAMMAD DIN AND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 PLD 217.
Answer: Vardar Muhammad Iqbal, J.—A reference under subsection (3) of section of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, was made by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board, West Pakistan, through the Chairman, District Evacuee Trust Committee, Jhelum, to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, seeking a declaration that the property in dispute was attached to a religious trust. The case was heard by Mr. M. A. A. Waste, Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Rawalpindi, with the delegated powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner and he buy his order dated the 16th of December 1969, held that the property in dispute was not an evacuee trust property. This is an appeal under subsection (4) of section of the' Act aforesaid. 2. An appeal under subsection (4) of section of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, lies to the High Court if it is presented within thirty days of the order. In the start case the order was passed on the 16th of December 1969. The application for obtain copy was made on the 2nd of January 1970 and the copy was delivered on the 8th of January 1970. The appellant became entitled to the exclusion of six days which were spent in getting the copy of the impugned order. The appeal should have been filed by or before the 22nd of January 1970, but the same has been preferred on the 9th of March 1970. The appeal is barred by more than a month and a half. 3. Learned counsel relies on subsection (3) of section 19 of the Act TP contend that the provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act apply in computing the period of limitation and that the delay for the remaining one month and a half be condoned on the ground that the Clerk of the Department who was handling the case acted negligently which resulted in the delay in filing, the appeal. Subsection (3) of section 19 lays down : “The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 1908, shall apply in computing the aforesaid period of fifteen days.” Section 19 deals with appeals against the orders of the Assistant Settlement Commissioners ; Deputy Settlement Commissioners, and Additional Settlement Commissioners, to their respective appellate authorities. Subsection (2) of the said section provides that an ‘appeal shall be presented within fifteen days of the date of the order appealed against”. Section 5 has, m our option been made applicable only to appeals which an aggrieved person may have the right to file under section 19. IFA question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or institution, the matter, under subsection (3) of section of the Act, has to be referred to the Chief Settlement Commissioner whose decision thereon, it is provided in subsection (3) ibid, “shall be final and shall not, except as provided in subsection be called in question in any Court’. Subsection (4) lays down : “Any person aggrieved by an order under subsection (3), within thirty days of the order, prefer an appeal to the High Court.” Subsections (3) and (4) were added to section by the Displaced Persons Law A Amendment Ordinance XIII of 1964, The provision of appeal in subsection (4) of section 4 Is quite independent of section 19 thereunder the period of limitation is 15 days as against 30 days under the former. If the Legislature had provided in the main Act that section 5 would be applicable to all proceedings under the Act, then even if subsections (3) and (4) were added subsequently, the appeal under section (4) from the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner to the High Court would have been governed by the provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act. This, however, is not the case here. Sections 5 and 12 have specifically been made applicable to the appeals competent under section 19 alone. The intention of the Legislature to exclude the application of the Limitation Act with regard to the appeals under subsection (4) of section is clear inasmuch as if they had tended that it should apply, there was no limitation on their power to make a provision similar to that of subsection (3) of section 19. No maxim of law is of more general and uniform application than expression until est exclusion alerts, or which is shortly put expression units alters exclusion—a. maxim meaning “express mention of one thing implies the exclusion of another’. It is B never more applicable than in the construction and Interpretation of statutes (Broom Leg. Max.) Whenever a statute limits a thing to be done in a particular form, it necessarily includes in itself a negative, viz. that the thing shall not be done otherwise. The expression of a condition excludes the doing of the act authorized, under other circumstances than those so defined. It is, indeed, a principle of logic and of common sense, and not merely a technical rule of construction. We are,]| therefore, clear m our mind that the provisions of section 5' of the Limitation Act do not reach subsection (4) of section 4 of the Act. 4. The appeal being barred by limitation, we would dismiss it in Image. 5. Copy of this order shall be sent to the Law Department of the Government, and also to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, for consideration whether they would like to extend the application of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act to the appeals under section (4) of the 1958-Act. Appeal dismissed in liming.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 217?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 217 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-03-16): Vardar Muhammad Iqbal, J.—A reference under subsection (3) of section of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, was made by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Board, West Pakistan, through the Chairman, District Evacuee Trust Committee, Jhelum, to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, seeking a declaration that the property in dispute was attached to a religious trust. The case was heard by Mr. M. A. A. Waste, Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Rawalpindi, with the delegated powers of the Chief Settlement Commissioner and he buy his order dated the 16th of December 1969, held that the property in dispute was not an evacuee trust property. This is an appeal under subsection (4) of section of the' Act aforesaid. 2. An appeal under subsection (4) of section of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, lies to the High Court if it is presented within thirty days of the order. In the start case the order was passed on the 16th of December 1969. The application for obtain copy was made on the 2nd of January 1970 and the copy was delivered on the 8th of January 1970. The appellant became entitled to the exclusion of six days which were spent in getting the copy of the impugned order. The appeal should have been filed by or before the 22nd of January 1970, but the same has been preferred on the 9th of March 1970. The appeal is barred by more than a month and a half. 3. Learned counsel relies on subsection (3) of section 19 of the Act TP contend that the provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act apply in computing the period of limitation and that the delay for the remaining one month and a half be condoned on the ground that the Clerk of the Department who was handling the case acted negligently which resulted in the delay in filing, the appeal. Subsection (3) of section 19 lays down : “The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 1908, shall apply in computing the aforesaid period of fifteen days.” Section 19 deals with appeals against the orders of the Assistant Settlement Commissioners ; Deputy Settlement Commissioners, and Additional Settlement Commissioners, to their respective appellate authorities. Subsection (2) of the said section provides that an ‘appeal shall be presented within fifteen days of the date of the order appealed against”. Section 5 has, m our option been made applicable only to appeals which an aggrieved person may have the right to file under section 19. IFA question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or institution, the matter, under subsection (3) of section of the Act, has to be referred to the Chief Settlement Commissioner whose decision thereon, it is provided in subsection (3) ibid, “shall be final and shall not, except as provided in subsection be called in question in any Court’. Subsection (4) lays down : “Any person aggrieved by an order under subsection (3),

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 217?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 217 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1970-03-16): to be referred to the Chief Settlement Commissioner whose decision thereon, it is provided in subsection (3) ibid, “shall be final and shall not, except as provided in subsection be called in question in any Court’. Subsection (4) lays down : “Any person aggrieved by an order under subsection (3), within thirty days of the order, prefer an appeal to the High Court.” Subsections (3) and (4) were added to section by the Displaced Persons Law A Amendment Ordinance XIII of 1964, The provision of appeal in subsection (4) of section 4 Is quite independent of section 19 thereunder the period of limitation is 15 days as against 30 days under the former. If the Legislature had provided in the main Act that section 5 would be applicable to all proceedings under the Act, then even if subsections (3) and (4) were added subsequently, the appeal under section (4) from the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner to the High Court would have been governed by the provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act. This, however, is not the case here. Sections 5 and 12 have specifically been made applicable to the appeals competent under section 19 alone. The intention of the Legislature to exclude the application of the Limitation Act with regard to the appeals under subsection (4) of section is clear inasmuch as if they had tended that it should apply, there was no limitation on their power to make a provision similar to that of subsection (3) of section 19. No maxim of law is of more general and uniform application than expression until est exclusion alerts, or which is shortly put expression units alters exclusion—a. maxim meaning “express mention of one thing implies the exclusion of another’. It is B never more applicable than in the construction and Interpretation of statutes (Broom Leg. Max.) Whenever a statute limits a thing to be done in a particular form, it necessarily includes in itself a negative, viz. that the thing shall not be done otherwise. The expression of a condition excludes the doing of the act authorized, under other circumstances than those so defined. It is, indeed, a principle of logic and of common sense, and not merely a technical rule of construction. We are,]| therefore, clear m our mind that the provisions of section 5' of the Limitation Act do not reach subsection (4) of section 4 of the Act. 4. The appeal being barred by limitation, we would dismiss it in Image. 5. Copy of this order shall be sent to the Law Department of the Government, and also to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, for consideration whether they would like to extend the application of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act to the appeals under section (4) of the 1958-Act. Appeal dismissed in liming.

Question: What is case 1970 PLD 7 about?
Answer: Case 1970 PLD 7 was decided by AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR HIGH COURT on 1969-07-01. The case involved MST. TAJ BEGUM (PETITIONER) VERSUS FAQIR SHAH AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 115. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD SHARIFC J.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1970 PLD 7?
Answer: In case 1970 PLD 7, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 115. This case was heard in AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR HIGH COURT and decided on 1969-07-01.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1970 PLD 7?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1970 PLD 7 were: T. H. TARIQ FOR PETITIONER. M. A. HAFEEZ FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 2.RESPONDENT NO. IN PERSON.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD SHARIFC J.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1970 PLD 7?
Answer: The parties in case 1970 PLD 7 were: MST. TAJ BEGUM (PETITIONER) VERSUS FAQIR SHAH AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1970 PLD 7.
Answer: This is a revision petition against the judgment and decree of the Additional Sub-Judge, Muzaffarabad, dated 13-8-1968 by which a compromise decree for possession of the suit land by way of redemption was passed in favor of Fair Shah and All Shah against MST. Bibi Khanum. WW. The facts giving rise to this revision petition are that Fair Shah and All Shah brought a suit for possession of land Kara No. 58 measuring canals and 19 Marley situate in village Dome Sedan Thesis Muzaffarabad after redemption against MST. Bibi Khanum widow of Fate Muhammad resident of Dome Sedan. The suit, was instituted on 12-8-68 and on 13-8-1968 the parties having presented a compromise deed before the Court, a decree for possession by way of redemption was passed in favor of the plaintiff against MST. Bibi Khanum, the only defendant. MST. TAJ Begum has come up m revision against the said compromise decree claiming to be a person interested in the suit land because she is the daughter of Misery Fate Muhammad and MST. Bibi Khanum defendant, the widow of Fate Muhammad, alleging that the plaintiffs-respondents had fraudulently and wrongfully obtained a compromise decree to the detriment of her share in the suit land which had. been mortgaged for consideration with her deceased father. Learned counsel for Fair Shah and All Shah respondents has taken a preliminary objection that MST. TAJ Begum not being a party to the suit in which the compromise decree was passed-has no locus standi to come, up in revision. He has also pointed out that her remedy was to bring a separate suit to set aside the compromise decree; and that she had already filed a declaratory suit to that effect in the subordinate Court which suit is still pending. Learned counsel for the petitioner argues that in a redemption suit under Order XXXIV, rule 1, C, P. C. all the heirs of the deceased mortgagees were necessary parties and the compromise decree had been passed without imp leading all the heirs. MST. TAJ Begum has stated in open Court that her deceased father Misery Fate Muhammad was survived by MST. Bibi Khanum, the widow, Muhammad Bashir, the son, now. deceased, the petitioner herself and her sister MST. Marina now deceased. She also states that her brother Muhammad Bashir also died leaving a widow and a Moor daughter; and that MST. Karma her sister also left behind three children who would all be heirs and interested in the suit land. Learned counsel for the petitioner also argues that under Order XXXIV, rule 7, C. P. C. TT was incumbent on the Court to pass a preliminary decree which is necessary in all redemption cases and then a final decree was to follow. In cases in which section 115, C. P. C. applies the High Court has a discretion to interfere or not according to the circumstances of the case. The general rule, however, is that the WW. special and extraordinary powers under this section will, not be exercised in favor of interference where the applicant has another remedy open to him. Where the aggrieved party could bring a separate suit to challenge the orders sought to be revised, the High Court will not, as a rule, interfere in revision. There is a long string of case-law in support of this proposition. MST. TAJ Begum, the aggrieved party, not only could bring a separate suit but has already brought a separate suit to challenge the compromise decree, therefore, I don’t want to prejudice the trial of her suit by giving any opinion the revision petition. The revision petition is rejected as competent. No order isl made as to costs. a. E. Petition rejected

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 7?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 7 (AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR HIGH COURT, 1969-07-01): This is a revision petition against the judgment and decree of the Additional Sub-Judge, Muzaffarabad, dated 13-8-1968 by which a compromise decree for possession of the suit land by way of redemption was passed in favor of Fair Shah and All Shah against MST. Bibi Khanum. WW. The facts giving rise to this revision petition are that Fair Shah and All Shah brought a suit for possession of land Kara No. 58 measuring canals and 19 Marley situate in village Dome Sedan Thesis Muzaffarabad after redemption against MST. Bibi Khanum widow of Fate Muhammad resident of Dome Sedan. The suit, was instituted on 12-8-68 and on 13-8-1968 the parties having presented a compromise deed before the Court, a decree for possession by way of redemption was passed in favor of the plaintiff against MST. Bibi Khanum, the only defendant. MST. TAJ Begum has come up m revision against the said compromise decree claiming to be a person interested in the suit land because she is the daughter of Misery Fate Muhammad and MST. Bibi Khanum defendant, the widow of Fate Muhammad, alleging that the plaintiffs-respondents had fraudulently and wrongfully obtained a compromise decree to the detriment of her share in the suit land which had. been mortgaged for consideration with her deceased father. Learned counsel for Fair Shah and All Shah respondents has taken a preliminary objection that MST. TAJ Begum not being a party to the suit in which the compromise decree was passed-has no locus standi to come, up in revision. He has also pointed out that her remedy was to bring a separate suit to set aside the compromise decree; and that she had already filed a declaratory suit to that effect in the subordinate Court which suit is still pending. Learned counsel for the petitioner argues that in a redemption suit under Order XXXIV, rule 1, C, P. C. all the heirs of the deceased mortgagees were necessary parties and the compromise decree had been passed without imp leading all the heirs. MST. TAJ Begum has stated in open Court that her deceased father Misery Fate Muhammad was survived by MST. Bibi Khanum, the widow, Muhammad Bashir, the son, now. deceased, the petitioner herself and her sister MST. Marina now deceased. She also states that her brother Muhammad Bashir also died leaving a widow and a Moor daughter; and that MST. Karma her sister also left behind three children who would all be heirs and interested in the suit land. Learned counsel for the petitioner also argues that under Order XXXIV, rule 7, C. P. C. TT was incumbent on the Court to pass a preliminary decree which is necessary in all redemption cases and then a final decree was to follow. In cases in which section 115, C. P. C. applies the High Court has a discretion to interfere or not according to the circumstances of the case. The general rule, however, is that the WW. special and extraordinary powers under this section will, not

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 7?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 7 (AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR HIGH COURT, 1969-07-01): a final decree was to follow. In cases in which section 115, C. P. C. applies the High Court has a discretion to interfere or not according to the circumstances of the case. The general rule, however, is that the WW. special and extraordinary powers under this section will, not be exercised in favor of interference where the applicant has another remedy open to him. Where the aggrieved party could bring a separate suit to challenge the orders sought to be revised, the High Court will not, as a rule, interfere in revision. There is a long string of case-law in support of this proposition. MST. TAJ Begum, the aggrieved party, not only could bring a separate suit but has already brought a separate suit to challenge the compromise decree, therefore, I don’t want to prejudice the trial of her suit by giving any opinion the revision petition. The revision petition is rejected as competent. No order isl made as to costs. a. E. Petition rejected

Question: What is case 1970 PLD 257 about?
Answer: Case 1970 PLD 257 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1969-05-26. The case involved LAHORE IMPROVEMENT TRUST—PETITIONER VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - S. 33 LAND ACQUISITION ACT (I OF 1894) - SS. 9, 17 AND 50 PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - SS. 24(3), 28 AND 36 PUNJAB TPWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - S. 42(2) READ WITH S. 24(3) PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - SS. 36, 41 AND 42 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 12 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1970/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1970_257.html 1/28 28/10/2025, 00:40 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1970/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1970_257.html. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD IQBALAND KARAM ELAHEE CHAUHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: In case 1970 PLD 257, the court applied the following statutes: PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - S. 33 LAND ACQUISITION ACT (I OF 1894) - SS. 9, 17 AND 50 PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - SS. 24(3), 28 AND 36 PUNJAB TPWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - S. 42(2) READ WITH S. 24(3) PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - SS. 36, 41 AND 42 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ORDINANCE (XV OF 1949) - S. 12 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1970/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1970_257.html 1/28 28/10/2025, 00:40 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1970/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1970_257.html. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1969-05-26.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1970 PLD 257 were: MAHMOOD ZAMAN FOR PETITIONER. SH. GHIAS MUHAMMAD AND MAJOR ISHAQ MUHAMMAD KHAN FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD IQBALAND KARAM ELAHEE CHAUHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: The parties in case 1970 PLD 257 were: LAHORE IMPROVEMENT TRUST—PETITIONER VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1970 PLD 257.
Answer: Vardar Muhammad Iqbal, J—The Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, sold land measuring 2509 canals and 7 Marley comprised MN Kara Nos. 1388 to 1622 situate in village Bipedal, to Masses Rican Co-operative Society Ltd. Lahore, in consideration of a sum of Rs. 6,27,087.50 on the IST of May 1964. The Lahore Improvement Trust has filed the present petition under Article 98 of the Constitution praying that the sale be declared as illegal, void and ineffective. 2. The averments made in the writ petition were not clear, and, therefore, Mr. Mahmood Haman who was engaged subsequently placed the facts before us as: The Lahore Improvement Trust by a resolution dated the 23rd of March 1954 (Annex. D) resolved that the University Campus, a Development Scheme, may be framed by the Trust under the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922. The notice under section 36 of the Act was published in the official Gazette dated the 16th of April, 23rd of April and the 30th of April 1954 (Annex. E). The Scheme comprised an area of about 3100 acres situate on both sides of Lahore Branch of the Bari Drab Canal, and bounded by the line projecting on the North of Bipedal village and passing along with the Rowan village on the south, meeting straight with the Ferozepur Road near Rehmanpura on the North-West, Ferozepur on the East, the limits of the Model Town on the South, the limits of the Trust local area on the West. Objections were invited from the owners and the occupiers of the land to be so included in the Scheme. The Trust considered the objections in a meeting held on the 14th of July 1955, and consequently forwarded the Scheme to the Provincial Government through the Commissioner, Lahore Division, Lahore, on the 7th of December 1955. All the enclosures (sent with the Scheme) except the one where the names of the objectors were given, contained no particulars and. only the word “NIL” was written. It was stated by the Commissioner in paragraph 3 of his forwarding letter: “The object of the scheme is to provide site for the Arab University for the construction of their buildings and institutes etc. and to convert the area in excess of their requirements into residential sites to be made available for sale to the public and residential accommodation to the One Unit Staff’ The Government was also asked to give permission for the acquisition of the land under section 50 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, read with clause (1) of section 28 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922. A further request was made for a direction under section 17 of 1894 Act to the Land Acquisition Collector for delivery of possession before the acquisition proceedings were finalized. The notice under section 40 of 1922 Act was published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the newspapers. The Provincial Government sanctioned the Scheme through Notification No. 5174-C T-, dated the 24th of January 1957. It authorized the petitioner herein, to acquire, either under the 1894 Act as modified by the Schedule attached to 1922 Act, or by purchase, lease, exchange or otherwise, the whole or any part of the land or any merest m the land comprised in the Scheme. In paragraph 3 of the notification a condition was placed that the acquisition of evacuee property shall take place after permission is obtained of the Pakistan Government under section 12 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (-X-V of 949). - The Governor also, in the exercise of the powers-conferred on_him by _ section~17 of 1894 Act, read with section 59 of 1922 Act and clauses 5 and 6 of the Schedule attached therewith, directed “that the Collector may on the expiration of 5 days from the publication of the notice under subsection (1) of section 9 of the said Land Acquisition Act, take possession of all waste and arable land and any area certified to be unhealthy by Magistrate of the First Class comprised in the aforesaid Scheme save evacuee property of which possession shall only be taken after obtaining Pakistan Government’s permission under section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949.”’. 3. The Chairman of the petitioner Trust had, meanwhile, written on the 14th of November 1956, a letter (Annex. L) to the Commissioner to obtain the approval of the Central Government to the acquisition of the evacuee property included in the Scheme. He also wrote on the 21st of January 1957 a letter (Annex. M) to the Secretary to Government of West Pakistan, Social Welfare and Local Government Department, Lahore, informing him that the area of the scheme had been reduced from 3100 acres to. 2478.6 acres, and the area of the evacuee land worked out to 11924 canals, 18 Marley and 55 Sq. Ft. (1231.91 acres). The Secretary to Government of West Pakistan Refugees and Rehabilitation Department wrote on the 2nd of April 1957 to the Secretary to Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Rehabilitation, Karachi, requesting for the approval to the proposed acquisition. It was stated that the land was to be acquired “/or implementing a Development Scheme known as University Campus Scheme. The same will be developed by the University Authorities The Central Government by their letter dated the 24th of April 1957 accorded approval to the acquisition by the Government of West Pakistan under the provisions of the. Land Acquisition Act as modified by the. Punjab Town Improvement Act. of evacuee land for University Campus Scheme. The Collector, for the purpose of determining compensation, gave. Notices under sections 9 and. 10 of the Act. The land was comprised in village Bighead, Diana Sinhala, Devisable and Chara. The petition in hand concerns only to the land m village Bighead. The Collector gave his award on the 20th of July 1957. and the possession, it is contended, was taken of the land in dispute on the 25th of May, 1957 and 26th of June 1958, and handed over to the Trust. The learned counsel contended that the property in dispute having been validly acquired by the Trust, the Custodian was divested of it and, therefore, could not pass any title in the said property to the respondent-Society by the sale deed dated the 1st of May 1964. ' 4. Sh. Goiás Muhammad, learned counsel for the respondent-Society contended (a) that the land was not validly acquired by the Trust or the University, and, therefore, the Custodian was not divested of the property till he sold it to the Society in 1964, (b) that the ‘No-objection Certificate’ for sale of the land to the Society was issued on behalf of the Lahore Improvement Trust and that being so the petitioner is stopped in law to challenge the sale ; (c) that the Central Government had vide their letter No. F. 16(43)/58-P-II, dated the 13th of July 1959 decided to sell the land to the respondent-Society ; and (d) that the petition was filed after six years of the order passed by the Government in favor of the respondent-Society on the 13th of July 1959. In order to show that the writ petition was not competent, the respondent-Society detailed the history of - the case, in somewhat following terms — The respondent-Society was registered on the 27th of February 1953 under the Co- operative Societies Act, 1912. It applied to the Provincial Government for the acquisition of land to construct residential houses for its members. The Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner (Lands), Lahore issued a certificate on the 18th of August 1954 that the Department had no objection to the acquisition of the evacuee land comprised in Kara Nos. 1388 to 1628 measuring 2459 canals and 13 Marley, and Kara Nos. 1320, 1329, 1344, 1348, 1352, 1363, 1373, 1378 and 1385 measuring 138 canal and 19 Marley. There is no dispute in respect of land other than the land comprised in Kara Nos. 1388 to 1622. The Rehabilitation Commissioner in his memorandum No. 7672-II-Reh-3-RF/55, dated the 9th of February 1955 addressed to the Secretary TJ the Government, Punjab, Agricultural Department, raised a number of questions relevant to the acquisition of the land for the respondent, and particularly asked for “a certificate from the Lahore Improvement Trust that it has no objection to the proposed acquisition." Mr. Abdul Hamid, the then Post- Master Genera], who was the President of the Society, was informed through a D. O. letter No. 4172 dated the 1st of September 1955 by the Town Planner, Lahore Improvement Trust, that although the area required by the Society fell with the area of University Campus Scheme, the Trust had “no objection to the allotment of this land to Rican Co- operative Society Ltd.” It was further posted out by the Town Planner that the Urban Development Department had also included these Kara numbers for their Satellite Town, and he suggested that the concurrence of that Department should also be obtained for the use of the land in dispute by the respondent-Society. On a reference by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, West Pakistan, the Member, Board of Revenue (Rehabilitation) Urban Rehabilitation Department, Lahore vide his Memorandum No. 7993-UDD-, dated the 27th of December 1955, intimated that “a part of the land falls in proposed Lahore Satellite Town Scheme and is being acquired for this purpose. However, the Urban Rehabilitation Department pan agree to issue a no- objection certificate provided the Society undertakes to fulfil’ certain conditions which he laid down in the memorandum aforesaid, in regard to the Society agreeing to the planning of their Scheme by the Provincial Town Planner so as to be consistent with the neighboring Satellite Town Scheme etc. In its letter No. 1104/R/56, dated the 6th of February 1956, the Society undertook to have the general "lay-out of its roads planned by the Provincial Town Planner as also to develop its roads and drainage in accordance with the' standard desired by the Urban Rehabilitation Department within a reasonable time. No-objection certificate was thereafter issued by the Urban Development Department on the 7th of April 1956 (Annex. R/8). It was on the completion of these formalities that the Provincial Government decided to recommend to the Central Government for obtaining their approval for the acquisition of the land comprised in Kara Nos. 1388 to 1622 for the benefit of the Society. The decision of the Government is contamed in Memorandum Nos. 3076-R&R- IR-58, dated the 10th of May 1958 (Annex. R/9) from the Secretary to Government of West Pakistan, Revenue and Rehabilitation Department, addressed to the Secretary to Government of West Pakistan, Social Welfare Local Government Department, Lahore. The Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Rehabilitation, by their letter No. F. 16 (43)/58-P II, dated the 16th of February 1959 conveyed their decision to the Secretary to Government of West Pakistan Revenue Rehabilitation Department, Lahore “that the evacuee land in question can be sold to the Social Welfare and Local Government Department on the prevailing market value as assessed by the Custodian’. The Society by a resolution of 12th of April 1959 decided to purchase the land on the prevailing market value. Consequently, the Government of Pakistan by their letter No. F. 16(43)/58-P-II, dated the 13th of July 1959 conveyed their permission to the sale of evacuee property measuring 2508 canals and 7 Marley in village Bipedal, Thesis and District Lahore, on payment of its current market price. The letter was addressed to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, relevant part of which was in the following terms — ““. that in exercise of the powers conferred by section 25(2)(s) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII of 1957) the Central Government are pleased to accord permission for the outright sale of the evacuee land measuring 2508 canals and 7 Marley situated in village Bipedal, Thesis and District Lahore in favor of the Social Welfare Local Government Department, Government of West Pakistan, for construction of houses, educational institution, play grounds, etc. by the Rican Co- operative Society Limited, Lahore, at the current market value to be determined by you on the condition that displaced persons, if any, settled thereon will be provided with alternative accommodation...” The Custodian then took steps to have the price of the land determined. The Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, in his Memo. I'Jg, LAC/M/24488, dated the 5th of November 1960 (Annex. R/17) by making reference to the different sale stated that the market value of the land was Rs. 250.00 per canal. The Custodian of Evacuee property by his memorandum dated the 30th of October 1962 (Annex. R/18) addressed to the Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, accorded approval to the proposed rate, viz. Rs. 250.00 per canal. The Custodian asked the Deputy Commissioner to recover and deposit with the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore, the compensation due for the land involved in the case, under intimation to him, together with a statement showing the pro rata share of each evacuee owner whose land was being acquired. The Deputy Commissioner intimated the approval of the Custodian to the Society vide Memo. No. LAC/M/17097, died the 8th of November 1962, and asked it to deposit the amount with the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore. By means of Memo. No. DS&RC/St. 7951, dated the 24th of December 1963, the Deputy Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore, informed the Custodian of Evacuee Property, that the respondent-Society had made full payment of Rs. 6,27,087.50 towards the satisfaction of the compensation of the land in dispute, the last payment, in post of time, having been made on the 18th of December 1963. The Custodian of Evacuee Property then by his Memo. No. CEP/Sales/LHR(42)/ 2543, dated the 22nd of February 1964, asked the Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, to deliver the possession of the evacuee land involved in the case to the Rican Co-operative Society Ltd. Lahore. The sale deed was executed the 1964. 5. There are three parties to the dispute, viz:. the Lahore Improvement Trust, the University of the Punjab, and the Rican Co-operative Society Limited, Lahore. The Trust maintains that it framed a Development Scheme under the Act and has acquired the property in accordance with the provisions of the Town Improvement Act read with Land Acquisition Act as amended by the provisions contained in the Schedule attached to the Town Improvement Act, and the property vested in it SME 1059 when it was handed over the possession, and the subsequent sale by the Custodian to the respondent-Society of the land which was covered by the Development Scheme was void ab initio. Learned counsel for the University stated in express terms before us that the property was acquired by the Trust, and it is through the Trust that the University will ask for the transfer of the property. According to him, the Trust framed the Development Scheme, and it is in pursuance of that Scheme that the property was acquired. One of the purposes of the Development scheme was also the New University Campus, and some property included in the said land was earmarked for the University. The University, it was admitted by the learned counsel, surrendered the area in excess of its requirements in the year 1962 and the land in dispute falls with that area. But the University has, on reappraisal and reconsideration of its demands, asked the Trust to transfer the land which the University at one time surrendered to TT. The case of the respondent-Society is that it has become owner of the land by a valid transfer made in its favor by the Custodian after the Central Government had accorded permission, and that the sale was made in its favor at a time when the property had not been acquired by the Trust. The Trust, - according to - the Society, could acquire the property only for one of the purposes specified" in the Town—Improvement' Act of 1922, and since the Trust did not frame any scheme under the Act nor did it submit it to the Government for their sanction with the necessary documents as required under section 41, the sanction accorded by the Government under the said section was a nullity, and all the proceedings which were taken in pursuance thereof including the notification under section 42 and other proceedings under sections 9 and 17 of the Land Acquisition Act were null and void. It was also maintained that the property in dispute was an evacuee property, and since the Central Government accorded sanction for the acquisition of the property only in September 1957 the entire proceedings which were taken before that under sections 36 and 42 of the Town Improvement Act, 1922, and section 9 of the Land Acquisition Act were a nullity, being in violation of the provisions contained in section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 (now section 16 of Act XII of 1957). Mr. Iraq Muhammad, learned counsel for the Custodian, joins issue with the Trust and the University in the position taken up by them and contends that the Custodian had rightly transferred the property to the Society. 6. The position which emerges is that the University does not claim any right or title in the property in dispute. The title, according to the University and the Trust, vests in the latter. The Society, on the other hand, considers that the entire proceedings taken by the Trust for the acquisition of the property were a nullity and no title had passed on to the Trust when the property was sold by a registered deed by the Custodian to the Society. The position boils down to this that if the property had vested in the Trust by the acquisition, the sale made in favor of the Society will be a nullity. 7. Learned counsel for the Trust contended that the Trust had framed a Development Scheme which made a provision for the New Campus of the University and aimed at converting the area in excess of their requirement into residential sites for the public. Under section 24, the Trust can for the purposes of any locality, prepare a Development Scheme. The Development Scheme may provide “for the lay-out of the locality is to be developed, the purposes for which particular portions of such locality are to be utilized the prescribed street alignment and the building line on each side of the streets proposed in such locality, the drainage of insanitary localities and such other details as may appear desirable.” Under section 28, the scheme may inter alia provide for the acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act 1894, as modified by the Town Improvement Act, of any land or any interest in land necessary for or affected by the execution Of the scheme, or adjoining any street, thoroughfare, open space to be improved or formed under the scheme. Under section 33, the scheme under the Act can be framed also upon an official representation by the municipal Committee, and the committee may make such a representation on its own motion, or on a written complaint by the medical officer of health, or in respect of any area comprised in a Union within the jurisdiction of a municipality, on a written request signed by twenty-live or more inhabitants of such Union. If the Trust does not agree to the framing of a scheme, the Committee can move the Government who, if satisfied as to the propriety of the project, can force the Trust to frame the proposed scheme, because under subsection (5) of section 34 the Trust is bound to comply with every direction given by the Provincial Government. There is, however, no provision that any of the statutory corporations can initiate a scheme, nor is there any provision that on their move the Government can ask the Trust to frame scheme for the purposes of that statutory corporation. It is exclusively within the domain of a Trust to conceive of a scheme and then to steer it through the various formalities as would be seen from clause (c) of subsection (2) of section 33 of the Act. It is only after a scheme is framed under the Act that the Trust acts under section 36 and prepares a notice stating (1) the fact that the scheme has been framed ; (ii) the boundaries of the locality comprised in the scheme ; and (I'm) the place at which details of the scheme including a statement of the land proposed to be acquired and a general map of the locality comprised in the scheme may be inspected at reasonable hours. Thus, before eight notice under section 36 can be given in the case of a development scheme, there should be as contemplated by subsection (3) of section 24 a “lay-out of the locality to be developed, the purposes for which particular portions of such locality are to be utilized, the prescribed street alignment and the building line on each side of the streets proposed in such locality, the drainage of insanitary localities and such other details as may appear desirable.” The notice under section 36 is to be published weekly in the official Gazette for three consecutive weeks, and under subsection (3) the Chairman is to cause copies of all documents to be delivered to any applicant on payment of such fees as may be prescribed by rules. The learned counsel for the Trust frankly conceded that nothing had been done as was required under subsection (3) of section 24. The Lay-out of the locality had not been prepared, and it was also not shown that any particular portion of the locality was to be utilized for any purpose. In the absence of a lay-out, the street alignment and the building lines could not be provided for and consequently nothing in this respect was done. Under section 38, the Trust is under an obligation to serve a notice, during the thirty days next following the first day on which the notice under section 36 is published in respect of any scheme, on the owners of the property which is proposed to be acquired (in executing the scheme). Section 38 also presupposes the existence of a scheme. The Trust, after harem the objections or representations received from any person may buy acting under section 40 either abandon the scheme or “apply to the Provincial Government for sanction to the scheme with such modifications (if any) as the Trust may deem necessary.” Subsection (2) of section 40 is in the following terms:— “(2) Every application submitted under subsection (1) shall be accompanied by— "G)_completepians-and- details, of “the scheme: and _:a Estimate: of the cost of executing it ;, (») a statement of the reasons for modification (if any) made in the scheme as originally framed ; (i) a statement of objections (if any) received under section 37 (TV) the representation (if.any) received under section 37 ; (v) a list of the names of all persons (if any) who have objected under clause (6) of subsection (2) of section 38, to the proposed acquisition of their property and a statement v of the reais given for such objection ; and (vi) a statement of the arrangements made or proposed by the trust for the re-housing of persons who are likely to be displaced by the execution of the scheme and for whose rehousing provision is required.” It is a fact ; it is also admitted by the learned counsel for ' the Trust, and we have also satisfied ourselves by the perusal of the record that documents (except a list giving the names of objections) referred to in subsection (2) of section 40 extracted above, were:not sent to >the Government, and that in fact it was only a blueprint which had the boundary] line marked on it which was submitted. It is also admitted that the sanction'was given by the: Government with reference to billy the blueprint which was so submitted, because no plans whatsoever had'been prepared, by the Trust and that NO scheme with any lay-out had been framed. Under section 41, the Provincial Government; may sanction, either with or without modification, or may refuse to sanction, or may return for reconsideration, any scheme submitted to it under section 40. This provision also points out to the fact that the scheme : submitted under section 40 for the consideration of the Provincial Government is not, a mere formality, but a reality and the Government is not to act mechanically but has to pass the order either accepting or refusing the scheme which TT can do; only if a scheme as required by law had been prepared and then submitted to it after complying with the provisions of section 36. In the circumstances,’ when no Development Scheme land.1 been prepared -MN accordance with the provisions contained in section'24, it is not understandable as to how a'notice' under section 36 could be' given, or objections cited ; the notice and objections BMG relatable to the scheme itself? When there was no scheme - what was it which was submitted to the Government under section; 40 of the'Act, and in the absence of the scheme what was that which was sanctioned by the Government and notified on the 24th of January 1957? Learned counsel for the Trust, relying on subsection (2) of section 42, contended that a notification is a “conclusive evidence that the scheme has been duly framed and sanctioned.” To apply subsection (2; ibid, it has to be established as a fact that the scheme had been made, and then if'a question arises whether it had been duly framed the notification will operate as a conclusive evidence of that fact. However, if it is established as a fact that the scheme had not been framed all all then the question that it had been duly framed will not arise. In the present case, only a blueprint delineating the boundaries had been submitted. It was by no means a scheme. In the circumstances, when the such;me was not. there, the provisions of subsection (2) of section 42 cannot be evoked to plead that the scheme had been “duly framed and sanctioned”. It was, however, argued that the fact that the provisions of subsection (2) of section 24 were not complied with and the plans with lay-out or street alignment were not prepared, should not make any difference, because the Government, when it gave sanction, knew that the land was genuinely needed for the New Campus of the University and also far providing accommodation to the public. The precise contention is that the Government was satisfied about the gentleness of the Development Scheme, and, therefore, sanctioned TT. There would have been some force in what was contended if the Trust had subsequently framed a Development Scheme providing for the Campus and also for the residential sites. We, therefore, asked the learned counsel appear mg on behalf of the Trust if any Development Scheme had been prepared by the Trust at all even after the notification, and he candidly stated that it had not prepared any scheme. What happened was that the Trust handed over the area to the University which prepared its own plans and executed them without any reference or approval by the Trust. It was also admitted that the Trust had not taken any part m the development of that area nor had it taken the responsibility of providing any amenities to the University. In fact, the Trust did not perform any function, whatsoever, in respect of that area. It did not work out any development charges and, therefore, raised no claim for the same from the University, and it has no intention to make any such clam. It was also admitted that the sanction of the Government as was notified on the 24th of January 1957 was for 2478.91 acres. The University surrendered the land in excess of 800 acres. The land in excess should have been, in terms of the sanction, utilized for residential sites. It was not done. The Trust, instead framed two new schemes for a part of the land surrendered by the University. The schemes are known as New Muslim Town Scheme and New Garden Town Scheme (No scheme like those schemes has been prepared for the land in dispute). They were made strictly in accordance with the provisions of section 24 of the Act ; lay-out was prepared, the street and housing alignment etc. was done, and the Schemes with all the documents mentioned in subsection (2) of section 40 were sent to Government for sanction. The Government sanctioned the two Schemes under section 41, and they were duly notified on the 9th of August 1962 and the 6th of March 1967 under section 42. Now, if a Development Scheme for an area of 2478.91 acres providing for a site of New Campus of the Naivety—and-residential sites- had been_ sanctioned, - why-: new Schemes, viz. New Garden Town Scheme and New Muslim Town Scheme were framed in respect of the same area ; and in the presence of a sanction already given on the 27th of January 1954 why a necessity was felt to obtain a fresh sanction? It is manifest that there was no scheme in existence before it was submitted to the Government for its sanction, nor was one prepared subsequently in terms of the sanction. The Government gave sanction to a plan which had only the boundary lines marked on TT. This being not a scheme at all, the sanction given by the Government for this was not a sanction of a scheme and that being so any proceeding taken or done in pursuance of such a sanction was invalid. In the absence of valid scheme and its sanction by the Government the land cannot be acquired under the Town Improvement Act. It is now well established that where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way the thing must be done in that way or not at all. It was so held in Nazi Ahmad v. King-Emperor Their Lordships of the Judicial Committee even went to the extent of observing that “other methods of performance are necessarily for bidden’’. Thus the entire proceedings taken by the Trust for the acquisition of the land in dispute are valid. 8. TW acquisition of the land by the Trust was challenged before us also on the ground that it was not for any purpose Contemplated by the Act. The primary object of the Trust in the acquisition of the land in dispute was to take as much land as was medicated by the University for its new Campus. The Legislature had invested the Trust with the power to acquire land'for the purposes which were to be achieved by the Act, 1e. to execute one or the other scheme contemplated in the Act. If the Trust was acting bona fide there could be no objection to the framing of a Development Scheme, making a provision also for the construction of the New Campus of the University. In that case the Trust could meet the requirements of the University by asking. Them to submit their own plans, and if the plans had not been violative of any provision of’the Act or the rules made thereunder, they, could have been given effect, to in the scheme itself’ The scheme in that case would have provided for the lay-out of locality to be developed the purposes for which particular parts of such locality-were to be utilized. It would have provided for alignment and the build mg line on each side of the. streets proposed m such locality. The University itself may have suggested the street alignment and the building ' lines in their plans, and the Trust could accept the suggestion and may have provided the same street alignments and the building lines as was proposed by the University. The difference would have been obvious that whereas now it is the University which itself has constructed its buildings and roads according to its own plans, in the case of the Development Scheme, the construction though in accordance with desires of the University would have been mm the execution of the Development Scheme. Under the Act, the Trust can make a scheme of TTS own, or it may make a scheme at the instance of the Municipal Committee or at the instance of members of the Union Committee within the Municipal Committee, and if it refuses to do so, the Government may ask the Trust to do so. There is no provision that any of the statutory bodies like the Pan jab University or any other University or the WPIDC or the WAPDA or the State Bank of Pakistan can also ask the Trust to frame a scheme. The incorporation of the provisions in the Act for £ making the scheme at the instance of the Municipal Committee and the non-corporation of the provisions for making the schemes at the stance of other statutory bodies is, we think strong evidence to show that the powers contamed in the Improvement Act of 1922 were not intended to be exercised at the stance of such bodies. That it was not so intended 1s, we think more evident from the CI'circumstance that if such statutory bodies needed the land for their own benefit they could acquire it compulsorily by resorting to the provisions under the Land Acquisition Act. We are bound, therefore, to consider that the Legislature did not mean directly to give statutory bodies the right to ask the Trust to acquire land for the construction of their works. Can we then suppose that the Legislature intended indirectly to give this power by enabling such statutory bodies to approach the Trust to acquire land colorably in the name of a Development Scheme. The power(r of the Trust depends upon the Act. The Trust has no right to exercise its compulsory power to take the land and hand over to the University. The undeniable position is that the acquisition under the Town Improvement Act of 1922 has many advantages for those who acquire the property and has corresponding disadvantages to the owners whose property is acquired. An owner, under subsection (2) of section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act is, besides compensation, entitled to the payment of 15% on the market value of his property. He is paid this amount for being deprived of a right to deal with the property mm such manner as he may consider it to be in his interest. It is provided in section 59 of 1922 Act that “for the purposes of acquiring land under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, for the Trust. (ft) the said Act shall be subject to the further modifications indicated in the Schedule to this Act.” In paragraph 10 of the Schedule, it is provided that subsection (2) of section 23 providing for acquisition “shall not apply to any land acquired under the Town Improvement Act, 1922.” In Province of West Pakistan v. Salem Allah it was held that this provision BMG a “confiscatory measure” “to that extent the Punjab Town Improvement (Amendment) Act (II of 1953) was equally ultra vires of subsection (2) of section 299 of the Government of India Act” but was saved as an existing law. By sub-para. (3) of paragraph 10 of the Schedule another subsection (3) was added to section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, under which, “for the purposes of clause first of subsection (1) of that section “the market-value of the land shall be the market-value according to the use to which the land was put at the date-with reference to which the market-value is to be determined" under that clause”. In dealing with this provision it was observed in Province of West Pakistan v. Salem Allah, that “introducing a new definition of market-value, has the effect of reducing it invariably by superseding the advantage of situation’. It has the effect of completely ignoring potential value of the land acquired. In interpreting this clause in Salem Allah v. Province of West Pakistan (it was in appeal against this judgment that the above-mentioned judgment was delivered by their Lordships of the Supreme Court) it was observed by M. R. Kalyan, C. J. that “under section 23, Land Acquisition Act, the Court, in determining the amount of compensation takes into consideration ‘the market value of the land at the date of publication of the notice under section 4’, and that under clause 1C(3) of the Schedule attached to the Punjab Town Improvement Act, market-value assumes an artificial definition as ‘the market-value according to the use to which the land is put at the date with reference to which the market-value is to be determined’. In other words, if the land is actually used for agriculture, but with twenty yards of its fashionable buildings are springing up, and in open market its potentiality as a building site has increased its value, then although for the purposes of the Land Acquisition Act the value of the land will be that which it will fetch in the market, for the purposes of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, TT will be treated as ordinary agricultural land and naturally fetch less price. For the market value of land is not determined merely by the use to which it is put, nor even by the quality of the land alone, but also by the situation it enjoys, which may confer upon it an additional advantage over other land. Generally speaking, it may be possible to determine market value by a consideration of the prices that have been obtained in the past for similar land. ‘But sometimes it happens’, said their Lordships of the Privy Council in Gajapatiraju v. Divisional Officer Vizagapatam “that the land to be valued possesses some unusual, and it may be, unique features as regards its position or its potentialities In such a case, the arbitrator, in determining its value, will have no market-value to guide him, and he will have to ascertain as best he may from the materials before him, what a will mg vendor might reasonably, expect to OCTAM, from a willing purchaser, for the land in that particular position and with those particular potentialities. For it has been, established by numerous authorities that the land is not to be valued merely by reference to the use to which it is being put at the time at which its value has to be determined, but also by reference to the use to which TT is reasonably capable of being put-in the future. No authority indeed is required for this proposition; ‘and we may be forgiven for citing this authority’ it is a self-evident one. No one can suppose in the case of land which is certain, or even likely, to be used in the immediate or reasonably near future for building purposes but which at the valuation date is wasteland or is being used for agricultural purposes: that the owner, however willing a vendor, will be content to sell the land for its value as waste or agricultural land, as the case may be. It 1s play that IA ascertain its value, the possibility of its BMG used for building purposes would have to be taken into account’.” It is a basic and fundamental right of an owner to hold the property and to deal with it in such manner as he may deem it to be in his interest. The owner doubtless suffers a great jury by a compulsory acquisition. The law of compulsory acquisition, therefore, calls for a strict interpretation, and it is to be interpreted as far as the language of the Statute permits, in favor of the owner rather than the State. If there is any doubt in the matter, the Statute has to be construed in favor of the landowners. The act gave the Trust the power to acquire the land only if it was required for executing one of the schemes under the Act. Their willingness to exercise the power at the request of the Government for the benefit of the University is ultra vires the intent of the Act itself It will be most dangerous to allow a corporate body like the Trust to use the provisions of the Act for private purposes. The Trust is authorized to take land compulsorily for definite purposes. It cannot exercise its power for different purposes and if it does so the Courts can interfere. Mack Hand Mahatma v. Corporation of Calcutta is a case on all fours. Manic Hand in that case received a notice from the Land Acquisition Collector that the premises in his occupation were to be acquired by the Government for the widening of a street. The Corporation of Calcutta sanctioned the proposal to acquire the property under the Land Acquisition Act at the cost of the Trust. The action was challenged by Manic Hand on the ground that the Corporation was acquiring the property not for any of its own purposes, and that the special powers given to the Corporation for acquiring land for CERTAM purposes named in the Act where beg used to enable another body to acquire land through the medium of the Corporation, however estimable the purpose. On behalf of the Corporation an affidavit was submitted that the Board of Trustees had in contemplation a scheme for a proposed public street under section 63 of the Calcutta Improvement Act affecting that property and that they requested the Corporation to take steps to acquire. Those premises to keep down the expenses of acquiring the same later on and that accordingly the resolution of the Corporation was passed, and it was arranged with the Board of Trustees that the Board should pay the cost of acquisition to the Corporation, which had been done. It was held that “‘the powers of acquisition of land under the Act are limited to cases in which the Corporation itself is gong to widen a street or effect an improvement” and that the action taken by the Corporation to acquire the property for the purpose was invalid. It was further observed: “Again I do not( think that the Legislature when under the-Calcutta Improvement Trust-Act, it conferred powers of acquisition of land with certain well-defined safeguards ever intended that the Trust should abrogate those safeguards and acquire land m this manner through the medium of the Corporation for the purpose of street widen mg and street "improvement’”. Again, in Calcutta Improvement Trust v. MST. Meherunisa it was held: “It is quite true that if an acquisition of certain premises is not justified by the provisions of the Act, the trustees, a statutory body, cannot notify their mention to make the acquisition and under color of proceedings taken under the Act enter into a transaction either for their benefit or to their, prejudice”. In Municipal Council of Sydney v. Campbell (2) their Lordships of, the. Judicial Committee restarted the Municipal Council 6f Sydney from acquiring the land on the ground that they were exercising their power of acquisition for a purpose different, from those specified in the statute. The Municipal Council had a statutory power in that case to acquire compulsorily the land required for the purpose of making or extending streets, also land required for ‘carrying out improvements in or remodelling any portion of the city’. In connection with the extension of a street, they resolved to acquire the respondents’ land for the latter purpose. It; was provided. in the statute, applicable to that case, that with the approval of the Governor the Council’ may cause a notice of the ‘resumption’ of any land* to be, published in the Government Gazette and in each of the daily papers : and that a plan showing the separate parcels may be: deposited at the Town Hall, Sydney, and at the Department of Lands, Sydney, for public: inspection : and that, on the publication of the notice and description, the land to which TT relates is to become vested in the council in fee simple, while the owner acquires a title to be compensated-in the manner provided by the statute;, The Municipal. Council maintained that it had a right to resume the land as it was acquired for the purpose of remodelling and improving the city “within the sense of section 16 of the Sydney Corporation Amendment Act’!; The. Judicial Committee by observing that “no plan 'for improvement or remodelling was at any time decided upon; and, indeed, no such plan was ever considered-by. or proposed to the Council” held : “Their Lordships think it not reasonably disputable that at the time of the passing of the resolution in June, the Council conceived it to be within its powers to resume lands not needed for the extension itself but solely for the purpose of appropriating the betterments arising ' from the extension ; and that, as Street C. J. E. found, the Council had’, not at that time applied itself to the consideration of any other object in connection with the resumption of the residual lands. It is not at all inconsistent with this that individual members of the counsel may have been actuated by some more or less definite expectation that the lands so ‘resumed’ would be dealt with not by re-sale to purchasers, but by leasing them and that some advantage, arising from that mode of dealing with them, would lie in the fact that the Council would thereby retain control over the use to which the resumed lands might be put.” It was further held that the lands were not really required for any purpose-of the Act and that “a body such as the Municipal Council of Sydney, authorised to take land compulsorily for specified purposes, will not.be permitted to exercise its powers for different purposes, and if it attempts to do so, the Courts. will. interfere”. The Commissioners of Sewers in Lynch v. Commissioners of Sewers of the City of London gave a notice to the owner for compulsory purchase of his four houses on the ground that they were needed - for widening the' street. The owner examined the plans and found that only a part “of Butler’s Alley which lay at the back of the four; houses in G. Place was” “to be widened by a strip tapering from the.’width of twelve inches to a point”. He, therefore, moved for a junction on the ground that the purpose, of widening the street for which the Commissioner could exercise the power to purchase compulsorily was only colorable and the. real purpose was to alter the levels of the adjoint properties. It was observed by Cotton, L. J. in appeal that there was no power ALALL to take, against the will of the owners, houses which were required only for the purpose of raising or lowering the streets, and not for the purpose of otherwise altering them. 9. We have no doubt that the Trust was exercising its power not for statutory purpose of executing a scheme, but that the land should be handed over to the University for building’the new Campus. The Trust, it appears, was conscious of this position. They had been asked by the Government to acquire the land for the University. They could not legally do so, but to carry on the wishes of the Government which they thought, though wrongly, they could not ignore, they, by giving the transaction an ostensible name of Development Scheme, proceeded to acquire the land under the Act. The Trust did not act bona fide. They have, through this petition, only persevered in their intention merely under color of acquiring the land for a Development scheme, although the fact is that the scheme has never been prepared, and it does not exist in post of fact even today. This is the device to benefit the University at *he expenses of the owners. The acquisition was not done within the powers granted by the Act. 10. It is also contended on behalf of the respondent-Society that "even ' if 'the scheme had been validly sanctioned by the Government under section 41 then to the entire proceedings, WMCH took'place before the sanction was accorded by the Central Government in April 1957 for the acquisition of the property, (1) (1885) 32 Ch. D 72 were a nullity. Reliance was placed on section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 which reads as follows — “12. Exemption from legal process——(1) Property which has vested in, or of which possession has been taken by,; the Custodian shall be exempt from all legal process, including seizure, distress,'ejectment, attachment or sale by any officer of Court or- any-other] authority and no injunction or other order of whatever kind in respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court or any other authority. ; (2) Upon the commencement of this Ordinance any: such legal process as'aforesaid subsisting immediately* before'such commencement shall cease to have effect and Fair evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian or other officer or person appointed by it, shall, upon delivery'Of the same being called for by the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian. ! (3) Nothing contained in the foregoing subsections shall— (a) prevent the Registering Officer from ordering registration of a deed of sale or exchange relating to evacuee movable property, or a Civil Court from ordering specific performance of contract of sale or exchange of any such property where the sale or exchange or the contract of the same has been duly confirmed or approved by the Custodian and their required certificate has been granted by him ; or (b) affect any power conferred on the Central Government by or under any law for the time BMG in force to requisition or acquire property, and it is hereby declared that if by or under such law or any other law for the time being in force a like power is conferred upon or delegated to a Provincial Government the Provincial Government may, exercise the same in relation to evacuee property with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government and subject to such direction as the Central Government may at any time seem fit to give. \ Clause (b) of this subsection shall be deemed to have taken effect on the day this Ordinance came into force.” It was not disputed by the learned counsel for the Trust and the University that without the previous approval of the Central Government the property could not be. acquired. They, however, contended that the preparation of a scheme, the notices under sections 36 and 38, the sanction by the Government under section 41 and the notification under section 42 were all steps prior to the acquisition and that being so they were not hit by section 12 aforementioned. Preparation of a scheme under section 24 may be a step prior to the acquisition, but the moment the notice under section 36 is issued, the acquisition proceedings commence. To understand the scope of a notice under section 36 and notification under section 42, it is necessary to refer to clauses 2(1) and (2) of the Schedule to the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922, the same BMG — "2. Notification under section and declaration under section 6 to be replaced by Notification under sections 36 and 42 of this Act—(\) The first publication of a notice of any improvement scheme under section 36 of this act shall be substituted for and have the same effect as publication in the official Gazette and in the locality of a notification under subsection (1) of section of the said Act, except where a declaration under section of section 6 of the said Act has previously been made and is still in force. (2) Subject to the provisions of clauses 10 and 11 of the Schedule, the issue of a notice under subsection (1) of section 32 in the case of land acquired under that subsection and in any other case the publication of notification under section 42 shall be substituted for and have the same effect as a declaration by the Provincial Government under section 6 of the Said Act, unless a declaration under the last mentioned section had previously been made, and is still in force.” Thus, it Wi-Fi.be abundantly clear that the preparation of a scheme under section 24 may be a step prior to the acquisition, but the same is not the case when a notice under section 36 is issued. The first publication of notice of an Improvement Scheme under section 36 is deemed to be a publication of a notification under subsection (1) of section of the Land Acquisition Act. A notification under section of the Land Acquisition Act is the basis of the acquisition proceedings. It is a public announcement that the land is needed for acquisition, it further authorizes CERTAM persons an entry upon the land to make its survey and to carry’ out other preparatory work. In Romes war Singh v. Secretary OJ State for India it was held that “in order to give validity to the proceedings and finality to the award in which they terminate, the power of acquisition with all statutory limitations, and directions for its use, must be strictly pursued ; every essential prerequisite to the jurisdiction called for by the Statute, must be strictly complied with. It is an elementary proposition that statutory provisions in respect of acquisition of lands must be strictly complied with, and the burden of proof of compliance rests upon those, who claim statutory powers or base their title upon the exercise of statutory provisions”. Moreover, the compensation had to be determined according to the market value of the property as was on the date of such notice. Notice under section is like a “Notice to treat” in the English Law. It is stated at page 63, Volume X, 3rd Edition by Lord Hals bury in his Laws of England that the effect of serving a notice to treat is to establish a relation analogous in some respects to that of a purchaser and vendor, a relation which binds the undertakers to take the land and binds the land-owner to give up the land subject to his being paid compensation. In Mercer v. Liverpool, St. Helen's, and South Lancashire Rail Co. it was held that the rights and obligations created by the service of the notice are legal as distinct from equitable, and they bind all persons claiming under the owner, whether with notice of the service or not. In the same case it was held by House of Lords {vide Report in 1901 AC 461, at page 465) that a land-owner who has received a notice to treat in respect of his land held therewith, cannot deal With the land or with land so__ as to increase the burdens of the undertake ERS"as regards the compensation- to be made-in respect: of the land or any of it. In Associated Hotels of India Ltd. etc. v. ODHA Mai Thalia the precise question as to what! is the effect of notice under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act came up for consideration, and it was held that it constituted a material defect in title of the property and that the title of a vendor becomes imperfect. Cornelius, J. (as he then was) observed at page.71 of the Report: ’ Once the notice was issued under the Punjab Town Improvement Act, declaring that a scheme had been framed and that the intention of the. scheme was no other than the compulsory acquisition of titles in a large area of land including this suit,property, a proceeding was set on foot which, in the eye of law, reduced the title-holders to the position of mere spectators, whilst it was decided between/ the authorities whether a proposal, presumably framed by the Improvement Trust after mature consideration, that their titles should be compulsorily acquired, would or would not be carried out. Certainly, the threat to those titles would become more acute as the proceedings matured to the stage at which acquisition was in. fact directed by the competent, authorities, but the liability to be compulsorily acquired commenced from!’ the time when the notice under section 36, was issued,; and that lability, was. nonetheless real on account,pf its BMG at that stage contingent upon the conclusion of certain further formalities. I say ‘real’ from the post of, view of the title-holders, for as 1 have, observed already, the title-holders did not m law possess the slightest locus stand}, much less, any right, to assert their titles against the expressed intention of the. Improvement Trust that they should be taken away. It was,; of course, still open to the Improvement Trust not,to proceed with the scheme or even to exclude from, the scheme, properties;- belonging to particular persons, but this was dependent entirely, upon the arbitrary will of the Trust, itself and. the title-holders, were in law, completely devoid of resource whereby to influence the Trust to act in this particular way. The initial notice' under section 36 being clearly SME qua non, eventual,acquisition,; and therefore, the ability'to acquisition might, clearly, be traced, to it, and though the passage of time and,the taking of further, proceedings might have. Had the effect, of rendering enforcement of the lability more' imminent. the fact of the lability would not thereby became traceable to these, later, incidents, but would, I'm my option, still derive its orig from the issue of the original notice. From that time onwards, the title-holder’s right to retain his property against the world, suffered a material derogation. It became a matter« of conjecture. a precarious prospect'whether he would or would not be preserved in his (1) PLD 1954 FC 35. proprietorship of the property, because circumstances had arisen which tended to render his title terminable, and were wholly outside any power of resistance vested m himself’. It was further observed that by the issuance of a notice under section 35 “material imperfection had appeared, and the title had become defective’’. It is, therefore, wrong to contend that a notice under section 36 is a proceeding prior to the acquisition! proceedings. In Froze Dm v. Government of West Pakistan it was observed by S. Unwarily Had, J. that “the machinery of the Land Acquisition Act is set into motion by publishing a- notification under section of the Act” and that the “notification is the foundation of the basis of the proceedings which have to follow’ under the Land Acquisition Act. His Lordship in that case found that the notice under section of the Land Acquisition Act was defective, and, therefore, held that “all the subsequent proceedings would also stand vitiated as there will be no valid foundation for them”. 11. Under clause (b) of subsection (3) of section 12 the Provincial Government could exercise the power of acquisition “TN relation to evacuee property with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government”. Thus, the notification under section which being “a foundation of the basis of the proceedings which have to follow’ under the Land Acquisition Act, could not be issued without the previous approval of the Central Government. The provision as to previous approval according to the tenor of clause (b) ibid which is couched in an emphatic language, viz ; “with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government” leaves no manner of doubt that the Provincial Government could not initiate proceedings for the acquisition before the approval was accorded by the Central Government. - IRR ' The Central Government gave its approval for the acquisition of the evacuee property on the 18th of April 1957, but before that notice under section 36 had been issued on -the 23rd of March 1954. The Scheme was sanctioned by the Provincial Government on the 24th of January 1957. It means, all the proceedings for acquisition except. the proceedings for the determination of compensation had been completed before the approval of the Central 'Government was obtained. The notice under section 36, the sanction of the Government under section 41 and its publication in the official Gazette under section 42 are all prior to the approval which the Central Government gave for the acquisition of the evacuee properly under subsection (3) of section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949, and they, therefore, were invalid. ' 12. Learned counsel for the Trust, however, contended that the sanction given by the Central Government to the acquisition of the property ratified all the steps or the action taken in respect of the property. In support of his this contention. he relied on Firth v. Staines in which case the notice given by a committee was challenged as bad by reason or this vestry’s approval not having been given till after its issue. Hawkins, J. observed:*’. what the vestry are, under the proviso, required to approve is the ‘acts’ of the committee ; and until the committee have acted there is nothing for the vestry to approve. What J think the proviso means is that, if the committee are called upon to justify their acts, they will be unable to do so unless they shew an approvalofthe _ vestry given -at some time- or other’. Wright,- J. the other member of the Bench observed : “To constitute a valid ratification three conditions must be satisfied : first, the agent whose act is sought to be ratified must have purported to act for the principal ; secondly, at the time the act was done the agent must have had a competent principal ; and thirdly, at the time of the ratification the principal must be legally capable of doing the act himself I THM that all those conditions were satisfied here. Therefore, upon the approval of the vestry being given, the acts of the committee became valid as from the time when they were done”. It is obvious that the dictum laid down in that case is not applicable to the present case. In that case the vestry were competent to appoint a committee for dog certain things. The committee so appointed were, therefore, competent to do those acts. The committee had to submit their acts to the vestry for approval which meant that the committee could act and there could be no objection to their so doing, but in order that their actions should be valid the approval was necessary. So the approval could be given by the vestry even afterward, and on the approval the acts of the committee became valid. So far as the evacuee property is concerned, the power for acquisition could not be exercised at all unless the previous approval had been obtained. It means that the steps necessary for acquisition could be done only after the approval had been given. If s JME acts are done for acquisition before the approval, the same shall be without lawful authority and they would be void ab initio. There is no provision for ratification of the void acts. The sanction given by the Central Government after those acts, in the absence of any provision for ratification of earlier actions, in our view, could not validate an action which was void. In this view of the matter, the entire proceedings of acquisition which were based on invalid proceedings under sections 36 and 42 are a nullity in the eye of law. It was held in Yousuf Ali v. Muhammad Islam Via that "where the Legislature clothes an order with finality, it always assumes that the order which it declares to be final is within the powers of the authority making it, and no party can plead as final an order made in excess of the powers of the authority making TT; in the eye of the law such order being void and non-existent. And if on the basis of a void order subsequent orders have been passed either by the same authority or by other authorities, the whole series of such orders, together with the superstructure of nights and obligations built upon them, must, unless some statute or principle of law recognizing as legal the changed position of the parties is in operation, fall to the ground because such orders have as (1) PLD 1958 S C (PK.) 104 « little legal foundation as the void order on which they are founded”. 12. Under section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 no order of whatever kind in respect fan evacuee property could be made by any Court or any other authority. In view of the statutory bar so created and the protection so afforded to the evacuee property, it could not be requisitioned or even compulsorily acquired. It was for this reason that a special provision in this behalf was made in clause (6) of subsection (3) of section 12 that notwithstanding this provision the Central Government could requisition or acquire property and if the Provincial Government wanted to exercise the like power in relation to an evacuee property, it could do so “with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government’. If we accept the contention of the learned counsel appear mg on behalf of the Trust that the acquisition proceedings commence only after notifications under sections and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act or a notice under section 36 and a notification under section 42 of the Town Improvement Act are issued (which position is not correct) then to the proceedings so taken will be hit by the provisions of subsection (1) of section 12. It was held in Associated Hotel's case that a notice under section 36 constitutes a material defect in the title of the owner and that a material imperfection is set into it as a result of the notice. The notice under section 36 in respect of an evacuee property shall be hit by the provisions of subsection (1) of section 12 because, if valid, it would affect the evacuee property which is otherwise vested in the Custodian. It will also be bad, for it will’t fetter the power of the Custodian to deal with the property. By virtue of subsection (2) of section of the Land Acquisition Act, it becomes lawful for a person authorized by the Government or the Trust, as the case may be, MN this behalf to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such locality ; to dig or bore MTO the subsoil; to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land is adopted for such purpose ; to set out the boundaries of the land proposed to be taken and the tended line of the work (if any) proposed to be made thereon ; to mark such levels, boundaries and INE by placing marks and cutting trenches ; and, where otherwise the survey cannot be completed and the levels taken and the boundaries and line marked, to cut down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle. In doing any of the acts authorized by section 4, if anybody willfully obstructs any person or willfully fills up, destroys, damages or displaces any trench or Mark made, he shall on conviction before a. Magistrate be liable to imprisonment. If it is held that it is competent for the Government or the Trust to issue notice under section or 36 m respect of an evacuee property the exercise of power by them will come into direct conflict with section 24 of the Ordinance which provides that “any person who willfully causes damage or allows damage to be caused to any evacuee property or unlawfully converts it to his own use, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both’. It is obvious that whereas the Punjab Town Improvement, Act, authorizes the causing of damage to the evacuee property for the purpose of carrying out the acts mentioned above, the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance makes such acts as an offense. If we refer to section 46 of the Land Acquisition Act, it makes obstruction to the acts mentioned in. Its section 4(2) as an offense, whereas section 43 of Ordinance XV “of 1949- makes the-Custodian- immune -from-prosecution ‘for anything done or in good faith tended to be done in pursuance of this Ordinance or any rules or orders made thereunder or for any damage caused or likely to be caused by any such thing as aforesaid’. It is also provided in section 20(2)(w) of the Ordinance that the Custodian can sell any evacuee property notwithstanding anything contamed in any law or agreement to the contrary relating thereto with the previous approval of the Central Government. Thus, if a notification under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act can be issued in respect of an evacuee property it will have the effect of restraining the Custodian from carrying on any one of the above functions. To this extent, since the provisions of section of the Land Acquisition Act and section 36 of the Town Improvement Act are quite inconsistent with the provisions of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance XV of 1949, the latter Ordinance shall have to prevail. In Clyde Engineering Company Limped v. Colburn it was observed: “. things are inconsistent when they cannot stand together at the same time and one law is inconsistent with another law when the command or power or other provision in one law conflicts directly with the command or provision the other’. In section of 1949 Ordinance, it is provided that the “provisions of this Ordinance and any rule or order made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law”. The provisions of section of the Land Acquisition Act and section 36 of the Town Improvement Act, if they are applied also in respect of an evacuee property, they being inconsistent with the provisions of the Evacuee Law, will have no effect. In this view of the matter also, notice issued under section 36 in respect of the evacuee property will be invalid. It will, at any rate, be hit by the provisions of subsection (1) of section 12, 13. Learned counsel for the Trust and the University next contended that even if the Trust had not acquired any title in the property, the sale in favor of the Society was invalid. They based their contention on section 25 of Act XII of 1957 which provided that the Custodian could transfer any immovable evacuee property with the previous approval of the Central Government, and that the Central Government had given approval to the Department of Social and Welfare to purchase property and not to the Rican Co-operative Society Limited, Lahore, It is clear from the correspondence to which we have already referred to that the West Pakistan Government had been dealing with the Central Government for the sale of the property to the Society, and the Ministry of Social Welfare had unmistakably stated that it was needed for Rican Society. The documents on record leave no doubt, whatsoever, that the Central Government was aware of the fact that it was giving sanction for the sale of the property to the Society. The Custodian had, after obtain sanction, concluded the sale deed MN favor of the Society, and we find the transaction unquestionable. Furthermore, the Government in its letter dated the 13th of July 1959 addressed to the Custodian had given approval for the sale of the land “TN favor of the Social Welfare and Local Government Department, Government of West Pakistan, for construction of houses, education institutions, play grounds, etc. by the Rican Co-operative Society Limited, Lahore”. This leaves no doubt that the Central Government knew that it was according approval for the sale of the land to the Society through the Social Welfare and Local Government Department. 14. For the forego mg reasons, we are of the opinion that the land in dispute has not vested in the Lahore Improvement Trust at any time and the sale made by the Custodian in favor of Rican Co-operative Society Limited, Lahore, was valid. The petition fails and is hereby dismissed with costs. a. e./k. b. a. Petition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): Vardar Muhammad Iqbal, J—The Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, sold land measuring 2509 canals and 7 Marley comprised MN Kara Nos. 1388 to 1622 situate in village Bipedal, to Masses Rican Co-operative Society Ltd. Lahore, in consideration of a sum of Rs. 6,27,087.50 on the IST of May 1964. The Lahore Improvement Trust has filed the present petition under Article 98 of the Constitution praying that the sale be declared as illegal, void and ineffective. 2. The averments made in the writ petition were not clear, and, therefore, Mr. Mahmood Haman who was engaged subsequently placed the facts before us as: The Lahore Improvement Trust by a resolution dated the 23rd of March 1954 (Annex. D) resolved that the University Campus, a Development Scheme, may be framed by the Trust under the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922. The notice under section 36 of the Act was published in the official Gazette dated the 16th of April, 23rd of April and the 30th of April 1954 (Annex. E). The Scheme comprised an area of about 3100 acres situate on both sides of Lahore Branch of the Bari Drab Canal, and bounded by the line projecting on the North of Bipedal village and passing along with the Rowan village on the south, meeting straight with the Ferozepur Road near Rehmanpura on the North-West, Ferozepur on the East, the limits of the Model Town on the South, the limits of the Trust local area on the West. Objections were invited from the owners and the occupiers of the land to be so included in the Scheme. The Trust considered the objections in a meeting held on the 14th of July 1955, and consequently forwarded the Scheme to the Provincial Government through the Commissioner, Lahore Division, Lahore, on the 7th of December 1955. All the enclosures (sent with the Scheme) except the one where the names of the objectors were given, contained no particulars and. only the word “NIL” was written. It was stated by the Commissioner in paragraph 3 of his forwarding letter: “The object of the scheme is to provide site for the Arab University for the construction of their buildings and institutes etc. and to convert the area in excess of their requirements into residential sites to be made available for sale to the public and residential accommodation to the One Unit Staff’ The Government was also asked to give permission for the acquisition of the land under section 50 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, read with clause (1) of section 28 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922. A further request was made for a direction under section 17 of 1894 Act to the Land Acquisition Collector for delivery of possession before the acquisition proceedings were finalized. The notice under section 40 of 1922 Act was published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the newspapers. The Provincial Government sanctioned the Scheme through Notification No. 5174-C T-, dated the 24th of January 1957. It authorized the petitioner herein,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): of possession before the acquisition proceedings were finalized. The notice under section 40 of 1922 Act was published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the newspapers. The Provincial Government sanctioned the Scheme through Notification No. 5174-C T-, dated the 24th of January 1957. It authorized the petitioner herein, to acquire, either under the 1894 Act as modified by the Schedule attached to 1922 Act, or by purchase, lease, exchange or otherwise, the whole or any part of the land or any merest m the land comprised in the Scheme. In paragraph 3 of the notification a condition was placed that the acquisition of evacuee property shall take place after permission is obtained of the Pakistan Government under section 12 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance (-X-V of 949). - The Governor also, in the exercise of the powers-conferred on_him by _ section~17 of 1894 Act, read with section 59 of 1922 Act and clauses 5 and 6 of the Schedule attached therewith, directed “that the Collector may on the expiration of 5 days from the publication of the notice under subsection (1) of section 9 of the said Land Acquisition Act, take possession of all waste and arable land and any area certified to be unhealthy by Magistrate of the First Class comprised in the aforesaid Scheme save evacuee property of which possession shall only be taken after obtaining Pakistan Government’s permission under section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949.”’. 3. The Chairman of the petitioner Trust had, meanwhile, written on the 14th of November 1956, a letter (Annex. L) to the Commissioner to obtain the approval of the Central Government to the acquisition of the evacuee property included in the Scheme. He also wrote on the 21st of January 1957 a letter (Annex. M) to the Secretary to Government of West Pakistan, Social Welfare and Local Government Department, Lahore, informing him that the area of the scheme had been reduced from 3100 acres to. 2478.6 acres, and the area of the evacuee land worked out to 11924 canals, 18 Marley and 55 Sq. Ft. (1231.91 acres). The Secretary to Government of West Pakistan Refugees and Rehabilitation Department wrote on the 2nd of April 1957 to the Secretary to Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Rehabilitation, Karachi, requesting for the approval to the proposed acquisition. It was stated that the land was to be acquired “/or implementing a Development Scheme known as University Campus Scheme. The same will be developed by the University Authorities The Central Government by their letter dated the 24th of April 1957 accorded approval to the acquisition by the Government of West Pakistan under the provisions of the. Land Acquisition Act as modified by the. Punjab Town Improvement Act. of evacuee land for University Campus Scheme. The Collector, for the purpose of determining compensation, gave. Notices under sections 9 and. 10 of the Act. The land was comprised in village Bighead, Diana Sinhala, Devisable and Chara. The petition in hand concerns only to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): by the. Punjab Town Improvement Act. of evacuee land for University Campus Scheme. The Collector, for the purpose of determining compensation, gave. Notices under sections 9 and. 10 of the Act. The land was comprised in village Bighead, Diana Sinhala, Devisable and Chara. The petition in hand concerns only to the land m village Bighead. The Collector gave his award on the 20th of July 1957. and the possession, it is contended, was taken of the land in dispute on the 25th of May, 1957 and 26th of June 1958, and handed over to the Trust. The learned counsel contended that the property in dispute having been validly acquired by the Trust, the Custodian was divested of it and, therefore, could not pass any title in the said property to the respondent-Society by the sale deed dated the 1st of May 1964. ' 4. Sh. Goiás Muhammad, learned counsel for the respondent-Society contended (a) that the land was not validly acquired by the Trust or the University, and, therefore, the Custodian was not divested of the property till he sold it to the Society in 1964, (b) that the ‘No-objection Certificate’ for sale of the land to the Society was issued on behalf of the Lahore Improvement Trust and that being so the petitioner is stopped in law to challenge the sale ; (c) that the Central Government had vide their letter No. F. 16(43)/58-P-II, dated the 13th of July 1959 decided to sell the land to the respondent-Society ; and (d) that the petition was filed after six years of the order passed by the Government in favor of the respondent-Society on the 13th of July 1959. In order to show that the writ petition was not competent, the respondent-Society detailed the history of - the case, in somewhat following terms — The respondent-Society was registered on the 27th of February 1953 under the Co- operative Societies Act, 1912. It applied to the Provincial Government for the acquisition of land to construct residential houses for its members. The Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner (Lands), Lahore issued a certificate on the 18th of August 1954 that the Department had no objection to the acquisition of the evacuee land comprised in Kara Nos. 1388 to 1628 measuring 2459 canals and 13 Marley, and Kara Nos. 1320, 1329, 1344, 1348, 1352, 1363, 1373, 1378 and 1385 measuring 138 canal and 19 Marley. There is no dispute in respect of land other than the land comprised in Kara Nos. 1388 to 1622. The Rehabilitation Commissioner in his memorandum No. 7672-II-Reh-3-RF/55, dated the 9th of February 1955 addressed to the Secretary TJ the Government, Punjab, Agricultural Department, raised a number of questions relevant to the acquisition of the land for the respondent, and particularly asked for “a certificate from the Lahore Improvement Trust that it has no objection to the proposed acquisition." Mr. Abdul Hamid, the then Post- Master Genera], who was the President of the Society, was informed through a D. O. letter No. 4172

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): of the land for the respondent, and particularly asked for “a certificate from the Lahore Improvement Trust that it has no objection to the proposed acquisition." Mr. Abdul Hamid, the then Post- Master Genera], who was the President of the Society, was informed through a D. O. letter No. 4172 dated the 1st of September 1955 by the Town Planner, Lahore Improvement Trust, that although the area required by the Society fell with the area of University Campus Scheme, the Trust had “no objection to the allotment of this land to Rican Co- operative Society Ltd.” It was further posted out by the Town Planner that the Urban Development Department had also included these Kara numbers for their Satellite Town, and he suggested that the concurrence of that Department should also be obtained for the use of the land in dispute by the respondent-Society. On a reference by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, West Pakistan, the Member, Board of Revenue (Rehabilitation) Urban Rehabilitation Department, Lahore vide his Memorandum No. 7993-UDD-, dated the 27th of December 1955, intimated that “a part of the land falls in proposed Lahore Satellite Town Scheme and is being acquired for this purpose. However, the Urban Rehabilitation Department pan agree to issue a no- objection certificate provided the Society undertakes to fulfil’ certain conditions which he laid down in the memorandum aforesaid, in regard to the Society agreeing to the planning of their Scheme by the Provincial Town Planner so as to be consistent with the neighboring Satellite Town Scheme etc. In its letter No. 1104/R/56, dated the 6th of February 1956, the Society undertook to have the general "lay-out of its roads planned by the Provincial Town Planner as also to develop its roads and drainage in accordance with the' standard desired by the Urban Rehabilitation Department within a reasonable time. No-objection certificate was thereafter issued by the Urban Development Department on the 7th of April 1956 (Annex. R/8). It was on the completion of these formalities that the Provincial Government decided to recommend to the Central Government for obtaining their approval for the acquisition of the land comprised in Kara Nos. 1388 to 1622 for the benefit of the Society. The decision of the Government is contamed in Memorandum Nos. 3076-R&R- IR-58, dated the 10th of May 1958 (Annex. R/9) from the Secretary to Government of West Pakistan, Revenue and Rehabilitation Department, addressed to the Secretary to Government of West Pakistan, Social Welfare Local Government Department, Lahore. The Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Rehabilitation, by their letter No. F. 16 (43)/58-P II, dated the 16th of February 1959 conveyed their decision to the Secretary to Government of West Pakistan Revenue Rehabilitation Department, Lahore “that the evacuee land in question can be sold to the Social Welfare and Local Government Department on the prevailing market value as assessed by the Custodian’. The Society by a resolution of 12th of April 1959 decided to purchase the land on the prevailing market value. Consequently, the Government of Pakistan

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): evacuee land in question can be sold to the Social Welfare and Local Government Department on the prevailing market value as assessed by the Custodian’. The Society by a resolution of 12th of April 1959 decided to purchase the land on the prevailing market value. Consequently, the Government of Pakistan by their letter No. F. 16(43)/58-P-II, dated the 13th of July 1959 conveyed their permission to the sale of evacuee property measuring 2508 canals and 7 Marley in village Bipedal, Thesis and District Lahore, on payment of its current market price. The letter was addressed to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, relevant part of which was in the following terms — ““. that in exercise of the powers conferred by section 25(2)(s) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII of 1957) the Central Government are pleased to accord permission for the outright sale of the evacuee land measuring 2508 canals and 7 Marley situated in village Bipedal, Thesis and District Lahore in favor of the Social Welfare Local Government Department, Government of West Pakistan, for construction of houses, educational institution, play grounds, etc. by the Rican Co- operative Society Limited, Lahore, at the current market value to be determined by you on the condition that displaced persons, if any, settled thereon will be provided with alternative accommodation...” The Custodian then took steps to have the price of the land determined. The Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, in his Memo. I'Jg, LAC/M/24488, dated the 5th of November 1960 (Annex. R/17) by making reference to the different sale stated that the market value of the land was Rs. 250.00 per canal. The Custodian of Evacuee property by his memorandum dated the 30th of October 1962 (Annex. R/18) addressed to the Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, accorded approval to the proposed rate, viz. Rs. 250.00 per canal. The Custodian asked the Deputy Commissioner to recover and deposit with the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore, the compensation due for the land involved in the case, under intimation to him, together with a statement showing the pro rata share of each evacuee owner whose land was being acquired. The Deputy Commissioner intimated the approval of the Custodian to the Society vide Memo. No. LAC/M/17097, died the 8th of November 1962, and asked it to deposit the amount with the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore. By means of Memo. No. DS&RC/St. 7951, dated the 24th of December 1963, the Deputy Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore, informed the Custodian of Evacuee Property, that the respondent-Society had made full payment of Rs. 6,27,087.50 towards the satisfaction of the compensation of the land in dispute, the last payment, in post of time, having been made on the 18th of December 1963. The Custodian of Evacuee Property then by his Memo. No. CEP/Sales/LHR(42)/ 2543, dated the 22nd of February 1964, asked the Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, to deliver the possession of the evacuee land involved in the case to the Rican Co-operative Society Ltd. Lahore. The sale deed was executed the 1964. 5.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): The Custodian of Evacuee Property then by his Memo. No. CEP/Sales/LHR(42)/ 2543, dated the 22nd of February 1964, asked the Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, to deliver the possession of the evacuee land involved in the case to the Rican Co-operative Society Ltd. Lahore. The sale deed was executed the 1964. 5. There are three parties to the dispute, viz:. the Lahore Improvement Trust, the University of the Punjab, and the Rican Co-operative Society Limited, Lahore. The Trust maintains that it framed a Development Scheme under the Act and has acquired the property in accordance with the provisions of the Town Improvement Act read with Land Acquisition Act as amended by the provisions contained in the Schedule attached to the Town Improvement Act, and the property vested in it SME 1059 when it was handed over the possession, and the subsequent sale by the Custodian to the respondent-Society of the land which was covered by the Development Scheme was void ab initio. Learned counsel for the University stated in express terms before us that the property was acquired by the Trust, and it is through the Trust that the University will ask for the transfer of the property. According to him, the Trust framed the Development Scheme, and it is in pursuance of that Scheme that the property was acquired. One of the purposes of the Development scheme was also the New University Campus, and some property included in the said land was earmarked for the University. The University, it was admitted by the learned counsel, surrendered the area in excess of its requirements in the year 1962 and the land in dispute falls with that area. But the University has, on reappraisal and reconsideration of its demands, asked the Trust to transfer the land which the University at one time surrendered to TT. The case of the respondent-Society is that it has become owner of the land by a valid transfer made in its favor by the Custodian after the Central Government had accorded permission, and that the sale was made in its favor at a time when the property had not been acquired by the Trust. The Trust, - according to - the Society, could acquire the property only for one of the purposes specified" in the Town—Improvement' Act of 1922, and since the Trust did not frame any scheme under the Act nor did it submit it to the Government for their sanction with the necessary documents as required under section 41, the sanction accorded by the Government under the said section was a nullity, and all the proceedings which were taken in pursuance thereof including the notification under section 42 and other proceedings under sections 9 and 17 of the Land Acquisition Act were null and void. It was also maintained that the property in dispute was an evacuee property, and since the Central Government accorded sanction for the acquisition of the property only in September 1957 the entire proceedings which were taken before that under sections 36

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): of the Land Acquisition Act were null and void. It was also maintained that the property in dispute was an evacuee property, and since the Central Government accorded sanction for the acquisition of the property only in September 1957 the entire proceedings which were taken before that under sections 36 and 42 of the Town Improvement Act, 1922, and section 9 of the Land Acquisition Act were a nullity, being in violation of the provisions contained in section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 (now section 16 of Act XII of 1957). Mr. Iraq Muhammad, learned counsel for the Custodian, joins issue with the Trust and the University in the position taken up by them and contends that the Custodian had rightly transferred the property to the Society. 6. The position which emerges is that the University does not claim any right or title in the property in dispute. The title, according to the University and the Trust, vests in the latter. The Society, on the other hand, considers that the entire proceedings taken by the Trust for the acquisition of the property were a nullity and no title had passed on to the Trust when the property was sold by a registered deed by the Custodian to the Society. The position boils down to this that if the property had vested in the Trust by the acquisition, the sale made in favor of the Society will be a nullity. 7. Learned counsel for the Trust contended that the Trust had framed a Development Scheme which made a provision for the New Campus of the University and aimed at converting the area in excess of their requirement into residential sites for the public. Under section 24, the Trust can for the purposes of any locality, prepare a Development Scheme. The Development Scheme may provide “for the lay-out of the locality is to be developed, the purposes for which particular portions of such locality are to be utilized the prescribed street alignment and the building line on each side of the streets proposed in such locality, the drainage of insanitary localities and such other details as may appear desirable.” Under section 28, the scheme may inter alia provide for the acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act 1894, as modified by the Town Improvement Act, of any land or any interest in land necessary for or affected by the execution Of the scheme, or adjoining any street, thoroughfare, open space to be improved or formed under the scheme. Under section 33, the scheme under the Act can be framed also upon an official representation by the municipal Committee, and the committee may make such a representation on its own motion, or on a written complaint by the medical officer of health, or in respect of any area comprised in a Union within the jurisdiction of a municipality, on a written request signed by twenty-live or more inhabitants of such Union. If the Trust does not agree to the framing of a scheme,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): a written complaint by the medical officer of health, or in respect of any area comprised in a Union within the jurisdiction of a municipality, on a written request signed by twenty-live or more inhabitants of such Union. If the Trust does not agree to the framing of a scheme, the Committee can move the Government who, if satisfied as to the propriety of the project, can force the Trust to frame the proposed scheme, because under subsection (5) of section 34 the Trust is bound to comply with every direction given by the Provincial Government. There is, however, no provision that any of the statutory corporations can initiate a scheme, nor is there any provision that on their move the Government can ask the Trust to frame scheme for the purposes of that statutory corporation. It is exclusively within the domain of a Trust to conceive of a scheme and then to steer it through the various formalities as would be seen from clause (c) of subsection (2) of section 33 of the Act. It is only after a scheme is framed under the Act that the Trust acts under section 36 and prepares a notice stating (1) the fact that the scheme has been framed ; (ii) the boundaries of the locality comprised in the scheme ; and (I'm) the place at which details of the scheme including a statement of the land proposed to be acquired and a general map of the locality comprised in the scheme may be inspected at reasonable hours. Thus, before eight notice under section 36 can be given in the case of a development scheme, there should be as contemplated by subsection (3) of section 24 a “lay-out of the locality to be developed, the purposes for which particular portions of such locality are to be utilized, the prescribed street alignment and the building line on each side of the streets proposed in such locality, the drainage of insanitary localities and such other details as may appear desirable.” The notice under section 36 is to be published weekly in the official Gazette for three consecutive weeks, and under subsection (3) the Chairman is to cause copies of all documents to be delivered to any applicant on payment of such fees as may be prescribed by rules. The learned counsel for the Trust frankly conceded that nothing had been done as was required under subsection (3) of section 24. The Lay-out of the locality had not been prepared, and it was also not shown that any particular portion of the locality was to be utilized for any purpose. In the absence of a lay-out, the street alignment and the building lines could not be provided for and consequently nothing in this respect was done. Under section 38, the Trust is under an obligation to serve a notice, during the thirty days next following the first day on which the notice under section 36 is published in respect of any scheme, on the owners

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): be provided for and consequently nothing in this respect was done. Under section 38, the Trust is under an obligation to serve a notice, during the thirty days next following the first day on which the notice under section 36 is published in respect of any scheme, on the owners of the property which is proposed to be acquired (in executing the scheme). Section 38 also presupposes the existence of a scheme. The Trust, after harem the objections or representations received from any person may buy acting under section 40 either abandon the scheme or “apply to the Provincial Government for sanction to the scheme with such modifications (if any) as the Trust may deem necessary.” Subsection (2) of section 40 is in the following terms:— “(2) Every application submitted under subsection (1) shall be accompanied by— "G)_completepians-and- details, of “the scheme: and _:a Estimate: of the cost of executing it ;, (») a statement of the reasons for modification (if any) made in the scheme as originally framed ; (i) a statement of objections (if any) received under section 37 (TV) the representation (if.any) received under section 37 ; (v) a list of the names of all persons (if any) who have objected under clause (6) of subsection (2) of section 38, to the proposed acquisition of their property and a statement v of the reais given for such objection ; and (vi) a statement of the arrangements made or proposed by the trust for the re-housing of persons who are likely to be displaced by the execution of the scheme and for whose rehousing provision is required.” It is a fact ; it is also admitted by the learned counsel for ' the Trust, and we have also satisfied ourselves by the perusal of the record that documents (except a list giving the names of objections) referred to in subsection (2) of section 40 extracted above, were:not sent to >the Government, and that in fact it was only a blueprint which had the boundary] line marked on it which was submitted. It is also admitted that the sanction'was given by the: Government with reference to billy the blueprint which was so submitted, because no plans whatsoever had'been prepared, by the Trust and that NO scheme with any lay-out had been framed. Under section 41, the Provincial Government; may sanction, either with or without modification, or may refuse to sanction, or may return for reconsideration, any scheme submitted to it under section 40. This provision also points out to the fact that the scheme : submitted under section 40 for the consideration of the Provincial Government is not, a mere formality, but a reality and the Government is not to act mechanically but has to pass the order either accepting or refusing the scheme which TT can do; only if a scheme as required by law had been prepared and then submitted to it after complying with the provisions of section 36. In the circumstances,’ when no Development Scheme

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): to act mechanically but has to pass the order either accepting or refusing the scheme which TT can do; only if a scheme as required by law had been prepared and then submitted to it after complying with the provisions of section 36. In the circumstances,’ when no Development Scheme land.1 been prepared -MN accordance with the provisions contained in section'24, it is not understandable as to how a'notice' under section 36 could be' given, or objections cited ; the notice and objections BMG relatable to the scheme itself? When there was no scheme - what was it which was submitted to the Government under section; 40 of the'Act, and in the absence of the scheme what was that which was sanctioned by the Government and notified on the 24th of January 1957? Learned counsel for the Trust, relying on subsection (2) of section 42, contended that a notification is a “conclusive evidence that the scheme has been duly framed and sanctioned.” To apply subsection (2; ibid, it has to be established as a fact that the scheme had been made, and then if'a question arises whether it had been duly framed the notification will operate as a conclusive evidence of that fact. However, if it is established as a fact that the scheme had not been framed all all then the question that it had been duly framed will not arise. In the present case, only a blueprint delineating the boundaries had been submitted. It was by no means a scheme. In the circumstances, when the such;me was not. there, the provisions of subsection (2) of section 42 cannot be evoked to plead that the scheme had been “duly framed and sanctioned”. It was, however, argued that the fact that the provisions of subsection (2) of section 24 were not complied with and the plans with lay-out or street alignment were not prepared, should not make any difference, because the Government, when it gave sanction, knew that the land was genuinely needed for the New Campus of the University and also far providing accommodation to the public. The precise contention is that the Government was satisfied about the gentleness of the Development Scheme, and, therefore, sanctioned TT. There would have been some force in what was contended if the Trust had subsequently framed a Development Scheme providing for the Campus and also for the residential sites. We, therefore, asked the learned counsel appear mg on behalf of the Trust if any Development Scheme had been prepared by the Trust at all even after the notification, and he candidly stated that it had not prepared any scheme. What happened was that the Trust handed over the area to the University which prepared its own plans and executed them without any reference or approval by the Trust. It was also admitted that the Trust had not taken any part m the development of that area nor had it taken the responsibility of providing any amenities to the University. In fact, the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): which prepared its own plans and executed them without any reference or approval by the Trust. It was also admitted that the Trust had not taken any part m the development of that area nor had it taken the responsibility of providing any amenities to the University. In fact, the Trust did not perform any function, whatsoever, in respect of that area. It did not work out any development charges and, therefore, raised no claim for the same from the University, and it has no intention to make any such clam. It was also admitted that the sanction of the Government as was notified on the 24th of January 1957 was for 2478.91 acres. The University surrendered the land in excess of 800 acres. The land in excess should have been, in terms of the sanction, utilized for residential sites. It was not done. The Trust, instead framed two new schemes for a part of the land surrendered by the University. The schemes are known as New Muslim Town Scheme and New Garden Town Scheme (No scheme like those schemes has been prepared for the land in dispute). They were made strictly in accordance with the provisions of section 24 of the Act ; lay-out was prepared, the street and housing alignment etc. was done, and the Schemes with all the documents mentioned in subsection (2) of section 40 were sent to Government for sanction. The Government sanctioned the two Schemes under section 41, and they were duly notified on the 9th of August 1962 and the 6th of March 1967 under section 42. Now, if a Development Scheme for an area of 2478.91 acres providing for a site of New Campus of the Naivety—and-residential sites- had been_ sanctioned, - why-: new Schemes, viz. New Garden Town Scheme and New Muslim Town Scheme were framed in respect of the same area ; and in the presence of a sanction already given on the 27th of January 1954 why a necessity was felt to obtain a fresh sanction? It is manifest that there was no scheme in existence before it was submitted to the Government for its sanction, nor was one prepared subsequently in terms of the sanction. The Government gave sanction to a plan which had only the boundary lines marked on TT. This being not a scheme at all, the sanction given by the Government for this was not a sanction of a scheme and that being so any proceeding taken or done in pursuance of such a sanction was invalid. In the absence of valid scheme and its sanction by the Government the land cannot be acquired under the Town Improvement Act. It is now well established that where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way the thing must be done in that way or not at all. It was so held in Nazi Ahmad v. King-Emperor Their Lordships of the Judicial Committee even went to the extent of observing that “other

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way the thing must be done in that way or not at all. It was so held in Nazi Ahmad v. King-Emperor Their Lordships of the Judicial Committee even went to the extent of observing that “other methods of performance are necessarily for bidden’’. Thus the entire proceedings taken by the Trust for the acquisition of the land in dispute are valid. 8. TW acquisition of the land by the Trust was challenged before us also on the ground that it was not for any purpose Contemplated by the Act. The primary object of the Trust in the acquisition of the land in dispute was to take as much land as was medicated by the University for its new Campus. The Legislature had invested the Trust with the power to acquire land'for the purposes which were to be achieved by the Act, 1e. to execute one or the other scheme contemplated in the Act. If the Trust was acting bona fide there could be no objection to the framing of a Development Scheme, making a provision also for the construction of the New Campus of the University. In that case the Trust could meet the requirements of the University by asking. Them to submit their own plans, and if the plans had not been violative of any provision of’the Act or the rules made thereunder, they, could have been given effect, to in the scheme itself’ The scheme in that case would have provided for the lay-out of locality to be developed the purposes for which particular parts of such locality-were to be utilized. It would have provided for alignment and the build mg line on each side of the. streets proposed m such locality. The University itself may have suggested the street alignment and the building ' lines in their plans, and the Trust could accept the suggestion and may have provided the same street alignments and the building lines as was proposed by the University. The difference would have been obvious that whereas now it is the University which itself has constructed its buildings and roads according to its own plans, in the case of the Development Scheme, the construction though in accordance with desires of the University would have been mm the execution of the Development Scheme. Under the Act, the Trust can make a scheme of TTS own, or it may make a scheme at the instance of the Municipal Committee or at the instance of members of the Union Committee within the Municipal Committee, and if it refuses to do so, the Government may ask the Trust to do so. There is no provision that any of the statutory bodies like the Pan jab University or any other University or the WPIDC or the WAPDA or the State Bank of Pakistan can also ask the Trust to frame a scheme. The incorporation of the provisions in the Act for £ making the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): no provision that any of the statutory bodies like the Pan jab University or any other University or the WPIDC or the WAPDA or the State Bank of Pakistan can also ask the Trust to frame a scheme. The incorporation of the provisions in the Act for £ making the scheme at the instance of the Municipal Committee and the non-corporation of the provisions for making the schemes at the stance of other statutory bodies is, we think strong evidence to show that the powers contamed in the Improvement Act of 1922 were not intended to be exercised at the stance of such bodies. That it was not so intended 1s, we think more evident from the CI'circumstance that if such statutory bodies needed the land for their own benefit they could acquire it compulsorily by resorting to the provisions under the Land Acquisition Act. We are bound, therefore, to consider that the Legislature did not mean directly to give statutory bodies the right to ask the Trust to acquire land for the construction of their works. Can we then suppose that the Legislature intended indirectly to give this power by enabling such statutory bodies to approach the Trust to acquire land colorably in the name of a Development Scheme. The power(r of the Trust depends upon the Act. The Trust has no right to exercise its compulsory power to take the land and hand over to the University. The undeniable position is that the acquisition under the Town Improvement Act of 1922 has many advantages for those who acquire the property and has corresponding disadvantages to the owners whose property is acquired. An owner, under subsection (2) of section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act is, besides compensation, entitled to the payment of 15% on the market value of his property. He is paid this amount for being deprived of a right to deal with the property mm such manner as he may consider it to be in his interest. It is provided in section 59 of 1922 Act that “for the purposes of acquiring land under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, for the Trust. (ft) the said Act shall be subject to the further modifications indicated in the Schedule to this Act.” In paragraph 10 of the Schedule, it is provided that subsection (2) of section 23 providing for acquisition “shall not apply to any land acquired under the Town Improvement Act, 1922.” In Province of West Pakistan v. Salem Allah it was held that this provision BMG a “confiscatory measure” “to that extent the Punjab Town Improvement (Amendment) Act (II of 1953) was equally ultra vires of subsection (2) of section 299 of the Government of India Act” but was saved as an existing law. By sub-para. (3) of paragraph 10 of the Schedule another subsection (3) was added to section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, under which, “for the purposes of clause first of subsection (1) of that section “the market-value of the land shall

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): Act” but was saved as an existing law. By sub-para. (3) of paragraph 10 of the Schedule another subsection (3) was added to section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, under which, “for the purposes of clause first of subsection (1) of that section “the market-value of the land shall be the market-value according to the use to which the land was put at the date-with reference to which the market-value is to be determined" under that clause”. In dealing with this provision it was observed in Province of West Pakistan v. Salem Allah, that “introducing a new definition of market-value, has the effect of reducing it invariably by superseding the advantage of situation’. It has the effect of completely ignoring potential value of the land acquired. In interpreting this clause in Salem Allah v. Province of West Pakistan (it was in appeal against this judgment that the above-mentioned judgment was delivered by their Lordships of the Supreme Court) it was observed by M. R. Kalyan, C. J. that “under section 23, Land Acquisition Act, the Court, in determining the amount of compensation takes into consideration ‘the market value of the land at the date of publication of the notice under section 4’, and that under clause 1C(3) of the Schedule attached to the Punjab Town Improvement Act, market-value assumes an artificial definition as ‘the market-value according to the use to which the land is put at the date with reference to which the market-value is to be determined’. In other words, if the land is actually used for agriculture, but with twenty yards of its fashionable buildings are springing up, and in open market its potentiality as a building site has increased its value, then although for the purposes of the Land Acquisition Act the value of the land will be that which it will fetch in the market, for the purposes of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, TT will be treated as ordinary agricultural land and naturally fetch less price. For the market value of land is not determined merely by the use to which it is put, nor even by the quality of the land alone, but also by the situation it enjoys, which may confer upon it an additional advantage over other land. Generally speaking, it may be possible to determine market value by a consideration of the prices that have been obtained in the past for similar land. ‘But sometimes it happens’, said their Lordships of the Privy Council in Gajapatiraju v. Divisional Officer Vizagapatam “that the land to be valued possesses some unusual, and it may be, unique features as regards its position or its potentialities In such a case, the arbitrator, in determining its value, will have no market-value to guide him, and he will have to ascertain as best he may from the materials before him, what a will mg vendor might reasonably, expect to OCTAM, from a willing purchaser, for the land in that particular position and with those particular potentialities.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): its value, will have no market-value to guide him, and he will have to ascertain as best he may from the materials before him, what a will mg vendor might reasonably, expect to OCTAM, from a willing purchaser, for the land in that particular position and with those particular potentialities. For it has been, established by numerous authorities that the land is not to be valued merely by reference to the use to which it is being put at the time at which its value has to be determined, but also by reference to the use to which TT is reasonably capable of being put-in the future. No authority indeed is required for this proposition; ‘and we may be forgiven for citing this authority’ it is a self-evident one. No one can suppose in the case of land which is certain, or even likely, to be used in the immediate or reasonably near future for building purposes but which at the valuation date is wasteland or is being used for agricultural purposes: that the owner, however willing a vendor, will be content to sell the land for its value as waste or agricultural land, as the case may be. It 1s play that IA ascertain its value, the possibility of its BMG used for building purposes would have to be taken into account’.” It is a basic and fundamental right of an owner to hold the property and to deal with it in such manner as he may deem it to be in his interest. The owner doubtless suffers a great jury by a compulsory acquisition. The law of compulsory acquisition, therefore, calls for a strict interpretation, and it is to be interpreted as far as the language of the Statute permits, in favor of the owner rather than the State. If there is any doubt in the matter, the Statute has to be construed in favor of the landowners. The act gave the Trust the power to acquire the land only if it was required for executing one of the schemes under the Act. Their willingness to exercise the power at the request of the Government for the benefit of the University is ultra vires the intent of the Act itself It will be most dangerous to allow a corporate body like the Trust to use the provisions of the Act for private purposes. The Trust is authorized to take land compulsorily for definite purposes. It cannot exercise its power for different purposes and if it does so the Courts can interfere. Mack Hand Mahatma v. Corporation of Calcutta is a case on all fours. Manic Hand in that case received a notice from the Land Acquisition Collector that the premises in his occupation were to be acquired by the Government for the widening of a street. The Corporation of Calcutta sanctioned the proposal to acquire the property under the Land Acquisition Act at the cost of the Trust. The action was challenged by Manic Hand on the ground

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): the premises in his occupation were to be acquired by the Government for the widening of a street. The Corporation of Calcutta sanctioned the proposal to acquire the property under the Land Acquisition Act at the cost of the Trust. The action was challenged by Manic Hand on the ground that the Corporation was acquiring the property not for any of its own purposes, and that the special powers given to the Corporation for acquiring land for CERTAM purposes named in the Act where beg used to enable another body to acquire land through the medium of the Corporation, however estimable the purpose. On behalf of the Corporation an affidavit was submitted that the Board of Trustees had in contemplation a scheme for a proposed public street under section 63 of the Calcutta Improvement Act affecting that property and that they requested the Corporation to take steps to acquire. Those premises to keep down the expenses of acquiring the same later on and that accordingly the resolution of the Corporation was passed, and it was arranged with the Board of Trustees that the Board should pay the cost of acquisition to the Corporation, which had been done. It was held that “‘the powers of acquisition of land under the Act are limited to cases in which the Corporation itself is gong to widen a street or effect an improvement” and that the action taken by the Corporation to acquire the property for the purpose was invalid. It was further observed: “Again I do not( think that the Legislature when under the-Calcutta Improvement Trust-Act, it conferred powers of acquisition of land with certain well-defined safeguards ever intended that the Trust should abrogate those safeguards and acquire land m this manner through the medium of the Corporation for the purpose of street widen mg and street "improvement’”. Again, in Calcutta Improvement Trust v. MST. Meherunisa it was held: “It is quite true that if an acquisition of certain premises is not justified by the provisions of the Act, the trustees, a statutory body, cannot notify their mention to make the acquisition and under color of proceedings taken under the Act enter into a transaction either for their benefit or to their, prejudice”. In Municipal Council of Sydney v. Campbell (2) their Lordships of, the. Judicial Committee restarted the Municipal Council 6f Sydney from acquiring the land on the ground that they were exercising their power of acquisition for a purpose different, from those specified in the statute. The Municipal Council had a statutory power in that case to acquire compulsorily the land required for the purpose of making or extending streets, also land required for ‘carrying out improvements in or remodelling any portion of the city’. In connection with the extension of a street, they resolved to acquire the respondents’ land for the latter purpose. It; was provided. in the statute, applicable to that case, that with the approval of the Governor the Council’ may cause a notice of the ‘resumption’ of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): portion of the city’. In connection with the extension of a street, they resolved to acquire the respondents’ land for the latter purpose. It; was provided. in the statute, applicable to that case, that with the approval of the Governor the Council’ may cause a notice of the ‘resumption’ of any land* to be, published in the Government Gazette and in each of the daily papers : and that a plan showing the separate parcels may be: deposited at the Town Hall, Sydney, and at the Department of Lands, Sydney, for public: inspection : and that, on the publication of the notice and description, the land to which TT relates is to become vested in the council in fee simple, while the owner acquires a title to be compensated-in the manner provided by the statute;, The Municipal. Council maintained that it had a right to resume the land as it was acquired for the purpose of remodelling and improving the city “within the sense of section 16 of the Sydney Corporation Amendment Act’!; The. Judicial Committee by observing that “no plan 'for improvement or remodelling was at any time decided upon; and, indeed, no such plan was ever considered-by. or proposed to the Council” held : “Their Lordships think it not reasonably disputable that at the time of the passing of the resolution in June, the Council conceived it to be within its powers to resume lands not needed for the extension itself but solely for the purpose of appropriating the betterments arising ' from the extension ; and that, as Street C. J. E. found, the Council had’, not at that time applied itself to the consideration of any other object in connection with the resumption of the residual lands. It is not at all inconsistent with this that individual members of the counsel may have been actuated by some more or less definite expectation that the lands so ‘resumed’ would be dealt with not by re-sale to purchasers, but by leasing them and that some advantage, arising from that mode of dealing with them, would lie in the fact that the Council would thereby retain control over the use to which the resumed lands might be put.” It was further held that the lands were not really required for any purpose-of the Act and that “a body such as the Municipal Council of Sydney, authorised to take land compulsorily for specified purposes, will not.be permitted to exercise its powers for different purposes, and if it attempts to do so, the Courts. will. interfere”. The Commissioners of Sewers in Lynch v. Commissioners of Sewers of the City of London gave a notice to the owner for compulsory purchase of his four houses on the ground that they were needed - for widening the' street. The owner examined the plans and found that only a part “of Butler’s Alley which lay at the back of the four; houses in G. Place was” “to be widened by a strip tapering from

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): his four houses on the ground that they were needed - for widening the' street. The owner examined the plans and found that only a part “of Butler’s Alley which lay at the back of the four; houses in G. Place was” “to be widened by a strip tapering from the.’width of twelve inches to a point”. He, therefore, moved for a junction on the ground that the purpose, of widening the street for which the Commissioner could exercise the power to purchase compulsorily was only colorable and the. real purpose was to alter the levels of the adjoint properties. It was observed by Cotton, L. J. in appeal that there was no power ALALL to take, against the will of the owners, houses which were required only for the purpose of raising or lowering the streets, and not for the purpose of otherwise altering them. 9. We have no doubt that the Trust was exercising its power not for statutory purpose of executing a scheme, but that the land should be handed over to the University for building’the new Campus. The Trust, it appears, was conscious of this position. They had been asked by the Government to acquire the land for the University. They could not legally do so, but to carry on the wishes of the Government which they thought, though wrongly, they could not ignore, they, by giving the transaction an ostensible name of Development Scheme, proceeded to acquire the land under the Act. The Trust did not act bona fide. They have, through this petition, only persevered in their intention merely under color of acquiring the land for a Development scheme, although the fact is that the scheme has never been prepared, and it does not exist in post of fact even today. This is the device to benefit the University at *he expenses of the owners. The acquisition was not done within the powers granted by the Act. 10. It is also contended on behalf of the respondent-Society that "even ' if 'the scheme had been validly sanctioned by the Government under section 41 then to the entire proceedings, WMCH took'place before the sanction was accorded by the Central Government in April 1957 for the acquisition of the property, (1) (1885) 32 Ch. D 72 were a nullity. Reliance was placed on section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 which reads as follows — “12. Exemption from legal process——(1) Property which has vested in, or of which possession has been taken by,; the Custodian shall be exempt from all legal process, including seizure, distress,'ejectment, attachment or sale by any officer of Court or- any-other] authority and no injunction or other order of whatever kind in respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court or any other authority. ; (2) Upon the commencement of this Ordinance any: such legal process as'aforesaid subsisting immediately* before'such commencement shall cease to have effect and Fair evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court or any other authority. ; (2) Upon the commencement of this Ordinance any: such legal process as'aforesaid subsisting immediately* before'such commencement shall cease to have effect and Fair evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian or other officer or person appointed by it, shall, upon delivery'Of the same being called for by the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian. ! (3) Nothing contained in the foregoing subsections shall— (a) prevent the Registering Officer from ordering registration of a deed of sale or exchange relating to evacuee movable property, or a Civil Court from ordering specific performance of contract of sale or exchange of any such property where the sale or exchange or the contract of the same has been duly confirmed or approved by the Custodian and their required certificate has been granted by him ; or (b) affect any power conferred on the Central Government by or under any law for the time BMG in force to requisition or acquire property, and it is hereby declared that if by or under such law or any other law for the time being in force a like power is conferred upon or delegated to a Provincial Government the Provincial Government may, exercise the same in relation to evacuee property with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government and subject to such direction as the Central Government may at any time seem fit to give. \ Clause (b) of this subsection shall be deemed to have taken effect on the day this Ordinance came into force.” It was not disputed by the learned counsel for the Trust and the University that without the previous approval of the Central Government the property could not be. acquired. They, however, contended that the preparation of a scheme, the notices under sections 36 and 38, the sanction by the Government under section 41 and the notification under section 42 were all steps prior to the acquisition and that being so they were not hit by section 12 aforementioned. Preparation of a scheme under section 24 may be a step prior to the acquisition, but the moment the notice under section 36 is issued, the acquisition proceedings commence. To understand the scope of a notice under section 36 and notification under section 42, it is necessary to refer to clauses 2(1) and (2) of the Schedule to the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922, the same BMG — "2. Notification under section and declaration under section 6 to be replaced by Notification under sections 36 and 42 of this Act—(\) The first publication of a notice of any improvement scheme under section 36 of this act shall be substituted for and have the same effect as publication in the official Gazette and in the locality of a notification under subsection (1) of section of the said Act, except where a declaration under section of section 6 of the said Act

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): under section 36 of this act shall be substituted for and have the same effect as publication in the official Gazette and in the locality of a notification under subsection (1) of section of the said Act, except where a declaration under section of section 6 of the said Act has previously been made and is still in force. (2) Subject to the provisions of clauses 10 and 11 of the Schedule, the issue of a notice under subsection (1) of section 32 in the case of land acquired under that subsection and in any other case the publication of notification under section 42 shall be substituted for and have the same effect as a declaration by the Provincial Government under section 6 of the Said Act, unless a declaration under the last mentioned section had previously been made, and is still in force.” Thus, it Wi-Fi.be abundantly clear that the preparation of a scheme under section 24 may be a step prior to the acquisition, but the same is not the case when a notice under section 36 is issued. The first publication of notice of an Improvement Scheme under section 36 is deemed to be a publication of a notification under subsection (1) of section of the Land Acquisition Act. A notification under section of the Land Acquisition Act is the basis of the acquisition proceedings. It is a public announcement that the land is needed for acquisition, it further authorizes CERTAM persons an entry upon the land to make its survey and to carry’ out other preparatory work. In Romes war Singh v. Secretary OJ State for India it was held that “in order to give validity to the proceedings and finality to the award in which they terminate, the power of acquisition with all statutory limitations, and directions for its use, must be strictly pursued ; every essential prerequisite to the jurisdiction called for by the Statute, must be strictly complied with. It is an elementary proposition that statutory provisions in respect of acquisition of lands must be strictly complied with, and the burden of proof of compliance rests upon those, who claim statutory powers or base their title upon the exercise of statutory provisions”. Moreover, the compensation had to be determined according to the market value of the property as was on the date of such notice. Notice under section is like a “Notice to treat” in the English Law. It is stated at page 63, Volume X, 3rd Edition by Lord Hals bury in his Laws of England that the effect of serving a notice to treat is to establish a relation analogous in some respects to that of a purchaser and vendor, a relation which binds the undertakers to take the land and binds the land-owner to give up the land subject to his being paid compensation. In Mercer v. Liverpool, St. Helen's, and South Lancashire Rail Co. it was held that the rights and obligations created by the service of the notice

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): relation which binds the undertakers to take the land and binds the land-owner to give up the land subject to his being paid compensation. In Mercer v. Liverpool, St. Helen's, and South Lancashire Rail Co. it was held that the rights and obligations created by the service of the notice are legal as distinct from equitable, and they bind all persons claiming under the owner, whether with notice of the service or not. In the same case it was held by House of Lords {vide Report in 1901 AC 461, at page 465) that a land-owner who has received a notice to treat in respect of his land held therewith, cannot deal With the land or with land so__ as to increase the burdens of the undertake ERS"as regards the compensation- to be made-in respect: of the land or any of it. In Associated Hotels of India Ltd. etc. v. ODHA Mai Thalia the precise question as to what! is the effect of notice under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act came up for consideration, and it was held that it constituted a material defect in title of the property and that the title of a vendor becomes imperfect. Cornelius, J. (as he then was) observed at page.71 of the Report: ’ Once the notice was issued under the Punjab Town Improvement Act, declaring that a scheme had been framed and that the intention of the. scheme was no other than the compulsory acquisition of titles in a large area of land including this suit,property, a proceeding was set on foot which, in the eye of law, reduced the title-holders to the position of mere spectators, whilst it was decided between/ the authorities whether a proposal, presumably framed by the Improvement Trust after mature consideration, that their titles should be compulsorily acquired, would or would not be carried out. Certainly, the threat to those titles would become more acute as the proceedings matured to the stage at which acquisition was in. fact directed by the competent, authorities, but the liability to be compulsorily acquired commenced from!’ the time when the notice under section 36, was issued,; and that lability, was. nonetheless real on account,pf its BMG at that stage contingent upon the conclusion of certain further formalities. I say ‘real’ from the post of, view of the title-holders, for as 1 have, observed already, the title-holders did not m law possess the slightest locus stand}, much less, any right, to assert their titles against the expressed intention of the. Improvement Trust that they should be taken away. It was,; of course, still open to the Improvement Trust not,to proceed with the scheme or even to exclude from, the scheme, properties;- belonging to particular persons, but this was dependent entirely, upon the arbitrary will of the Trust, itself and. the title-holders, were in law, completely devoid of resource whereby to influence the Trust to act in this particular way. The initial notice' under section 36 being clearly SME qua non,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): properties;- belonging to particular persons, but this was dependent entirely, upon the arbitrary will of the Trust, itself and. the title-holders, were in law, completely devoid of resource whereby to influence the Trust to act in this particular way. The initial notice' under section 36 being clearly SME qua non, eventual,acquisition,; and therefore, the ability'to acquisition might, clearly, be traced, to it, and though the passage of time and,the taking of further, proceedings might have. Had the effect, of rendering enforcement of the lability more' imminent. the fact of the lability would not thereby became traceable to these, later, incidents, but would, I'm my option, still derive its orig from the issue of the original notice. From that time onwards, the title-holder’s right to retain his property against the world, suffered a material derogation. It became a matter« of conjecture. a precarious prospect'whether he would or would not be preserved in his (1) PLD 1954 FC 35. proprietorship of the property, because circumstances had arisen which tended to render his title terminable, and were wholly outside any power of resistance vested m himself’. It was further observed that by the issuance of a notice under section 35 “material imperfection had appeared, and the title had become defective’’. It is, therefore, wrong to contend that a notice under section 36 is a proceeding prior to the acquisition! proceedings. In Froze Dm v. Government of West Pakistan it was observed by S. Unwarily Had, J. that “the machinery of the Land Acquisition Act is set into motion by publishing a- notification under section of the Act” and that the “notification is the foundation of the basis of the proceedings which have to follow’ under the Land Acquisition Act. His Lordship in that case found that the notice under section of the Land Acquisition Act was defective, and, therefore, held that “all the subsequent proceedings would also stand vitiated as there will be no valid foundation for them”. 11. Under clause (b) of subsection (3) of section 12 the Provincial Government could exercise the power of acquisition “TN relation to evacuee property with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government”. Thus, the notification under section which being “a foundation of the basis of the proceedings which have to follow’ under the Land Acquisition Act, could not be issued without the previous approval of the Central Government. The provision as to previous approval according to the tenor of clause (b) ibid which is couched in an emphatic language, viz ; “with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government” leaves no manner of doubt that the Provincial Government could not initiate proceedings for the acquisition before the approval was accorded by the Central Government. - IRR ' The Central Government gave its approval for the acquisition of the evacuee property on the 18th of April 1957, but before that notice under section 36 had been issued on -the 23rd of March 1954. The Scheme was sanctioned by the Provincial

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): accorded by the Central Government. - IRR ' The Central Government gave its approval for the acquisition of the evacuee property on the 18th of April 1957, but before that notice under section 36 had been issued on -the 23rd of March 1954. The Scheme was sanctioned by the Provincial Government on the 24th of January 1957. It means, all the proceedings for acquisition except. the proceedings for the determination of compensation had been completed before the approval of the Central 'Government was obtained. The notice under section 36, the sanction of the Government under section 41 and its publication in the official Gazette under section 42 are all prior to the approval which the Central Government gave for the acquisition of the evacuee properly under subsection (3) of section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949, and they, therefore, were invalid. ' 12. Learned counsel for the Trust, however, contended that the sanction given by the Central Government to the acquisition of the property ratified all the steps or the action taken in respect of the property. In support of his this contention. he relied on Firth v. Staines in which case the notice given by a committee was challenged as bad by reason or this vestry’s approval not having been given till after its issue. Hawkins, J. observed:*’. what the vestry are, under the proviso, required to approve is the ‘acts’ of the committee ; and until the committee have acted there is nothing for the vestry to approve. What J think the proviso means is that, if the committee are called upon to justify their acts, they will be unable to do so unless they shew an approvalofthe _ vestry given -at some time- or other’. Wright,- J. the other member of the Bench observed : “To constitute a valid ratification three conditions must be satisfied : first, the agent whose act is sought to be ratified must have purported to act for the principal ; secondly, at the time the act was done the agent must have had a competent principal ; and thirdly, at the time of the ratification the principal must be legally capable of doing the act himself I THM that all those conditions were satisfied here. Therefore, upon the approval of the vestry being given, the acts of the committee became valid as from the time when they were done”. It is obvious that the dictum laid down in that case is not applicable to the present case. In that case the vestry were competent to appoint a committee for dog certain things. The committee so appointed were, therefore, competent to do those acts. The committee had to submit their acts to the vestry for approval which meant that the committee could act and there could be no objection to their so doing, but in order that their actions should be valid the approval was necessary. So the approval could be given by the vestry even afterward, and on the approval the acts

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): vestry for approval which meant that the committee could act and there could be no objection to their so doing, but in order that their actions should be valid the approval was necessary. So the approval could be given by the vestry even afterward, and on the approval the acts of the committee became valid. So far as the evacuee property is concerned, the power for acquisition could not be exercised at all unless the previous approval had been obtained. It means that the steps necessary for acquisition could be done only after the approval had been given. If s JME acts are done for acquisition before the approval, the same shall be without lawful authority and they would be void ab initio. There is no provision for ratification of the void acts. The sanction given by the Central Government after those acts, in the absence of any provision for ratification of earlier actions, in our view, could not validate an action which was void. In this view of the matter, the entire proceedings of acquisition which were based on invalid proceedings under sections 36 and 42 are a nullity in the eye of law. It was held in Yousuf Ali v. Muhammad Islam Via that "where the Legislature clothes an order with finality, it always assumes that the order which it declares to be final is within the powers of the authority making it, and no party can plead as final an order made in excess of the powers of the authority making TT; in the eye of the law such order being void and non-existent. And if on the basis of a void order subsequent orders have been passed either by the same authority or by other authorities, the whole series of such orders, together with the superstructure of nights and obligations built upon them, must, unless some statute or principle of law recognizing as legal the changed position of the parties is in operation, fall to the ground because such orders have as (1) PLD 1958 S C (PK.) 104 « little legal foundation as the void order on which they are founded”. 12. Under section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 no order of whatever kind in respect fan evacuee property could be made by any Court or any other authority. In view of the statutory bar so created and the protection so afforded to the evacuee property, it could not be requisitioned or even compulsorily acquired. It was for this reason that a special provision in this behalf was made in clause (6) of subsection (3) of section 12 that notwithstanding this provision the Central Government could requisition or acquire property and if the Provincial Government wanted to exercise the like power in relation to an evacuee property, it could do so “with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government’. If we accept the contention of the learned counsel appear mg on behalf of the Trust that the acquisition proceedings commence only

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): Government wanted to exercise the like power in relation to an evacuee property, it could do so “with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government’. If we accept the contention of the learned counsel appear mg on behalf of the Trust that the acquisition proceedings commence only after notifications under sections and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act or a notice under section 36 and a notification under section 42 of the Town Improvement Act are issued (which position is not correct) then to the proceedings so taken will be hit by the provisions of subsection (1) of section 12. It was held in Associated Hotel's case that a notice under section 36 constitutes a material defect in the title of the owner and that a material imperfection is set into it as a result of the notice. The notice under section 36 in respect of an evacuee property shall be hit by the provisions of subsection (1) of section 12 because, if valid, it would affect the evacuee property which is otherwise vested in the Custodian. It will also be bad, for it will’t fetter the power of the Custodian to deal with the property. By virtue of subsection (2) of section of the Land Acquisition Act, it becomes lawful for a person authorized by the Government or the Trust, as the case may be, MN this behalf to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such locality ; to dig or bore MTO the subsoil; to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land is adopted for such purpose ; to set out the boundaries of the land proposed to be taken and the tended line of the work (if any) proposed to be made thereon ; to mark such levels, boundaries and INE by placing marks and cutting trenches ; and, where otherwise the survey cannot be completed and the levels taken and the boundaries and line marked, to cut down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle. In doing any of the acts authorized by section 4, if anybody willfully obstructs any person or willfully fills up, destroys, damages or displaces any trench or Mark made, he shall on conviction before a. Magistrate be liable to imprisonment. If it is held that it is competent for the Government or the Trust to issue notice under section or 36 m respect of an evacuee property the exercise of power by them will come into direct conflict with section 24 of the Ordinance which provides that “any person who willfully causes damage or allows damage to be caused to any evacuee property or unlawfully converts it to his own use, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both’. It is obvious that whereas the Punjab Town Improvement, Act, authorizes the causing of damage to the evacuee property for the purpose of carrying

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): converts it to his own use, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both’. It is obvious that whereas the Punjab Town Improvement, Act, authorizes the causing of damage to the evacuee property for the purpose of carrying out the acts mentioned above, the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance makes such acts as an offense. If we refer to section 46 of the Land Acquisition Act, it makes obstruction to the acts mentioned in. Its section 4(2) as an offense, whereas section 43 of Ordinance XV “of 1949- makes the-Custodian- immune -from-prosecution ‘for anything done or in good faith tended to be done in pursuance of this Ordinance or any rules or orders made thereunder or for any damage caused or likely to be caused by any such thing as aforesaid’. It is also provided in section 20(2)(w) of the Ordinance that the Custodian can sell any evacuee property notwithstanding anything contamed in any law or agreement to the contrary relating thereto with the previous approval of the Central Government. Thus, if a notification under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act can be issued in respect of an evacuee property it will have the effect of restraining the Custodian from carrying on any one of the above functions. To this extent, since the provisions of section of the Land Acquisition Act and section 36 of the Town Improvement Act are quite inconsistent with the provisions of the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance XV of 1949, the latter Ordinance shall have to prevail. In Clyde Engineering Company Limped v. Colburn it was observed: “. things are inconsistent when they cannot stand together at the same time and one law is inconsistent with another law when the command or power or other provision in one law conflicts directly with the command or provision the other’. In section of 1949 Ordinance, it is provided that the “provisions of this Ordinance and any rule or order made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law”. The provisions of section of the Land Acquisition Act and section 36 of the Town Improvement Act, if they are applied also in respect of an evacuee property, they being inconsistent with the provisions of the Evacuee Law, will have no effect. In this view of the matter also, notice issued under section 36 in respect of the evacuee property will be invalid. It will, at any rate, be hit by the provisions of subsection (1) of section 12, 13. Learned counsel for the Trust and the University next contended that even if the Trust had not acquired any title in the property, the sale in favor of the Society was invalid. They based their contention on section 25 of Act XII of 1957 which provided that the Custodian could transfer

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1970 PLD 257?
Answer: From case 1970 PLD 257 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1969-05-26): counsel for the Trust and the University next contended that even if the Trust had not acquired any title in the property, the sale in favor of the Society was invalid. They based their contention on section 25 of Act XII of 1957 which provided that the Custodian could transfer any immovable evacuee property with the previous approval of the Central Government, and that the Central Government had given approval to the Department of Social and Welfare to purchase property and not to the Rican Co-operative Society Limited, Lahore, It is clear from the correspondence to which we have already referred to that the West Pakistan Government had been dealing with the Central Government for the sale of the property to the Society, and the Ministry of Social Welfare had unmistakably stated that it was needed for Rican Society. The documents on record leave no doubt, whatsoever, that the Central Government was aware of the fact that it was giving sanction for the sale of the property to the Society. The Custodian had, after obtain sanction, concluded the sale deed MN favor of the Society, and we find the transaction unquestionable. Furthermore, the Government in its letter dated the 13th of July 1959 addressed to the Custodian had given approval for the sale of the land “TN favor of the Social Welfare and Local Government Department, Government of West Pakistan, for construction of houses, education institutions, play grounds, etc. by the Rican Co-operative Society Limited, Lahore”. This leaves no doubt that the Central Government knew that it was according approval for the sale of the land to the Society through the Social Welfare and Local Government Department. 14. For the forego mg reasons, we are of the opinion that the land in dispute has not vested in the Lahore Improvement Trust at any time and the sale made by the Custodian in favor of Rican Co-operative Society Limited, Lahore, was valid. The petition fails and is hereby dismissed with costs. a. e./k. b. a. Petition dismissed

Question: What is case 1984 CLC 487 about?
Answer: Case 1984 CLC 487 was decided by SC(AJ BK) on 1983-12-14. The case involved FAZAL DAD—APPELLANTVERSUS |CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY AND ORHBRS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 42. The case was heard by RAJA MUHAMMAD KHURSHID KHAN, C. J. AND.SHER ZAMAN CHAUDHRY.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 CLC 487?
Answer: In case 1984 CLC 487, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 42. This case was heard in SC(AJ BK) and decided on 1983-12-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 CLC 487?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 CLC 487 were: QAZI ABDUL GHAFOOR FOR APPELLANT.CH. SHAHWALI FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 3.*MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI FOR RESPONDENT NO. 4.VNEMO FOR RESPONDENT NO. 2.. The judges presiding were: RAJA MUHAMMAD KHURSHID KHAN, C. J. AND.SHER ZAMAN CHAUDHRY.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 CLC 487?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 CLC 487 were: FAZAL DAD—APPELLANTVERSUS |CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY AND ORHBRS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SC(AJ BK).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 CLC 487.
Answer: Judgment Raja Muhammad Hushed Khan, C. J—This appeal, by leave, is meant to discredit the judgment passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court on 29th May, 1979 whereby refusing to interfere with the finding of the learned Custodian, recorded on 29th October, 1978 the learned Judge disallowed the writ petition moved by the appellant in imine. W & 2. The circumstances, in brief, which we have given rise to the controversy are as under: O. The appellant sought a declaration in the Court of learned Deputy Custodian to the effect that the land in dispute under field Nos. 2351, 2364, 2695 and 2563, measuring 19 canals and Marley, situate m the area of village Kubrick, Thesis Mirror, has lost the character of the evacuee property. The claim was based on a document, Ex. P. C. which purported to have transferred the title of the land to the forefathers of the appellant. r 3. The learned Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian found no evidence to support the title for the appellant in the document and proceeded to dismiss his claim. The learned Judge.in the High Court also found no exception to these findings, while dismissing the writ petition. J 4. Leave was granted to consider whether document Ex. P. C. was correctly excluded out of the evidence by all the Courts below. F 5. Nazi Abdul Harbor, the learned counsel for the appellant, in support of the appeal reagitated the same ports on which he sought to challenge the order of the Custodian in the High Court. He submitted that the finding given by the Custodian with regard to the nature of the property, in view of the document Ex P. C. was not correct and the orders of the Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian. Having been passed without evidence, were. Liable to be quashed by the High Court in exercise of the extraordinary writ jurisdiction, 6. The argument is misconceived. On going through the record we find that the learned Custodian has advanced cogent reasons Io bold, that the document, Ex. P. C. does not transfer any title in the end to the appellant. The appellant's case was that the suit land was purchased by Noor Adam, his father, from Ram Bahia Shah, a non-Muslim evacuee, in Dogma Regime vide agreement Ex. P. C. In the first instance he claimed title on the basis, of this document and in alternate claimed adverse possession. Both the pleas have been correctly overruled by the learned Custodian. The Kara) Girafarig pertaining to the Dogma Regime entered Ram Baja Shah, non-. Muslim, as owner and Noor Adam is shown as a tenant.’ Similarly, Kara Girafarig pertaining to the year 1996 Bk. carries the entry of the suit land in the name of Noor Adam on the basis of an oral sale. Obviously this entry is in departure to the plea of the appellant. The above would show that the conclusion drawn by the learned Custodian can safely be derived from the state of evidence. 7. The oral evidence in support of the claim does not inspire confidence for the reasons stated in the Custodian's order. The lacuna in the Revenue Record with regard to the title of the appellant has rightly been taken by all ’ the Courts as to have created no title for the appellant. 8. Besides, whether this evidence should have been believed or not is. entirely a different matter. The CustodianTiaving disbelieved the evidence the High Court could not go beyond the -finding of fact in a Constitutional petition unless it could be shown that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the matter. -De Smith on the concept of jurisdiction in Judicial Review of Administrative. Action, at: pages 66 and 67 beautifully says. ' ‘Jurisdiction means authority to decide. Whenever a judicial Tribunal is empowered or required to inquire into a question of law or fact for the purpose of giving a decision on TT, its findings thereon cannot be impeached collaterally or on an application for certiorari but are binding until reversed on appeal. Where a Court has jurisdiction to entertain an application, it does not lose its jurisdiction by coming to a wrong conclusion, whether it was wrong in law or in fact. It does not lose its jurisdiction even if its conclusion on any aspect of its proper field of inquiry is entirely without evidential support. The question whether Tribunal has jurisdiction depends not on the truth or falsehood of the facts into which it has to enquire, or upon the correctness of its findings on these facts, but upon their nature, and TT is determinable at the commencement, not at the conclusion of the equity. Thus a Tribunal empowered to determine claims for compensation for loss of office has jurisdiction to determine all questions of law and fact relating to the measure of compensation and the tenure of the office, and it does not exceed its jurisdiction by determine any of those questions incorrectly ; but it has no jurisdiction to entertain a. claim for re-instatement or damages for. wrongful dismissal, and it will exceed its jurisdiction if it makes an order in such terms, for it has no legal power to give any decision whatsoever on those matters. A Tribunal may also lack jurisdiction if it is improperly constituted, or (possibly) if it fails to observe certain essential preliminaries to the inquiry. But it does not exceed its jurisdiction by basing its decision upon an incorrect determination of any question that it is empowered or required. e. has jurisdiction)* Here in this case it is nobody's case that the Custodian had no juridical ton to enter tam the matter. The learned counsel also failed to post out that the finding recorded by the learned Custodian is based on no evidence. The ports canvassed by the learned counsel, therefore, have no substance. The appeal, therefore, stands dismissed with costs. Ap peal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 487?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 487 (SC(AJ BK), 1983-12-14): Judgment Raja Muhammad Hushed Khan, C. J—This appeal, by leave, is meant to discredit the judgment passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court on 29th May, 1979 whereby refusing to interfere with the finding of the learned Custodian, recorded on 29th October, 1978 the learned Judge disallowed the writ petition moved by the appellant in imine. W & 2. The circumstances, in brief, which we have given rise to the controversy are as under: O. The appellant sought a declaration in the Court of learned Deputy Custodian to the effect that the land in dispute under field Nos. 2351, 2364, 2695 and 2563, measuring 19 canals and Marley, situate m the area of village Kubrick, Thesis Mirror, has lost the character of the evacuee property. The claim was based on a document, Ex. P. C. which purported to have transferred the title of the land to the forefathers of the appellant. r 3. The learned Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian found no evidence to support the title for the appellant in the document and proceeded to dismiss his claim. The learned Judge.in the High Court also found no exception to these findings, while dismissing the writ petition. J 4. Leave was granted to consider whether document Ex. P. C. was correctly excluded out of the evidence by all the Courts below. F 5. Nazi Abdul Harbor, the learned counsel for the appellant, in support of the appeal reagitated the same ports on which he sought to challenge the order of the Custodian in the High Court. He submitted that the finding given by the Custodian with regard to the nature of the property, in view of the document Ex P. C. was not correct and the orders of the Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian. Having been passed without evidence, were. Liable to be quashed by the High Court in exercise of the extraordinary writ jurisdiction, 6. The argument is misconceived. On going through the record we find that the learned Custodian has advanced cogent reasons Io bold, that the document, Ex. P. C. does not transfer any title in the end to the appellant. The appellant's case was that the suit land was purchased by Noor Adam, his father, from Ram Bahia Shah, a non-Muslim evacuee, in Dogma Regime vide agreement Ex. P. C. In the first instance he claimed title on the basis, of this document and in alternate claimed adverse possession. Both the pleas have been correctly overruled by the learned Custodian. The Kara) Girafarig pertaining to the Dogma Regime entered Ram Baja Shah, non-. Muslim, as owner and Noor Adam is shown as a tenant.’ Similarly, Kara Girafarig pertaining to the year 1996 Bk. carries the entry of the suit land in the name of Noor Adam on the basis of an oral sale. Obviously this entry is in departure to the plea of the appellant. The above would show that the conclusion drawn by the learned Custodian can safely be derived

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 487?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 487 (SC(AJ BK), 1983-12-14): 1996 Bk. carries the entry of the suit land in the name of Noor Adam on the basis of an oral sale. Obviously this entry is in departure to the plea of the appellant. The above would show that the conclusion drawn by the learned Custodian can safely be derived from the state of evidence. 7. The oral evidence in support of the claim does not inspire confidence for the reasons stated in the Custodian's order. The lacuna in the Revenue Record with regard to the title of the appellant has rightly been taken by all ’ the Courts as to have created no title for the appellant. 8. Besides, whether this evidence should have been believed or not is. entirely a different matter. The CustodianTiaving disbelieved the evidence the High Court could not go beyond the -finding of fact in a Constitutional petition unless it could be shown that the Custodian had no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the matter. -De Smith on the concept of jurisdiction in Judicial Review of Administrative. Action, at: pages 66 and 67 beautifully says. ' ‘Jurisdiction means authority to decide. Whenever a judicial Tribunal is empowered or required to inquire into a question of law or fact for the purpose of giving a decision on TT, its findings thereon cannot be impeached collaterally or on an application for certiorari but are binding until reversed on appeal. Where a Court has jurisdiction to entertain an application, it does not lose its jurisdiction by coming to a wrong conclusion, whether it was wrong in law or in fact. It does not lose its jurisdiction even if its conclusion on any aspect of its proper field of inquiry is entirely without evidential support. The question whether Tribunal has jurisdiction depends not on the truth or falsehood of the facts into which it has to enquire, or upon the correctness of its findings on these facts, but upon their nature, and TT is determinable at the commencement, not at the conclusion of the equity. Thus a Tribunal empowered to determine claims for compensation for loss of office has jurisdiction to determine all questions of law and fact relating to the measure of compensation and the tenure of the office, and it does not exceed its jurisdiction by determine any of those questions incorrectly ; but it has no jurisdiction to entertain a. claim for re-instatement or damages for. wrongful dismissal, and it will exceed its jurisdiction if it makes an order in such terms, for it has no legal power to give any decision whatsoever on those matters. A Tribunal may also lack jurisdiction if it is improperly constituted, or (possibly) if it fails to observe certain essential preliminaries to the inquiry. But it does not exceed its jurisdiction by basing its decision upon an incorrect determination of any question that it is empowered or required. e. has jurisdiction)* Here in this case it is nobody's case that the Custodian had no juridical ton to enter tam the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 487?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 487 (SC(AJ BK), 1983-12-14): preliminaries to the inquiry. But it does not exceed its jurisdiction by basing its decision upon an incorrect determination of any question that it is empowered or required. e. has jurisdiction)* Here in this case it is nobody's case that the Custodian had no juridical ton to enter tam the matter. The learned counsel also failed to post out that the finding recorded by the learned Custodian is based on no evidence. The ports canvassed by the learned counsel, therefore, have no substance. The appeal, therefore, stands dismissed with costs. Ap peal dismissed.

Question: What is case 1984 CLC 526 about?
Answer: Case 1984 CLC 526 was decided by SCAJ&K on 1983-04-05. The case involved SAKHI MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER—APPELLANTSIS VERSUS MREHABILITATION DEPARTMENT THROUGH CUSTODIAN,EVACUEE PROPERTY—RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 22 AND 41 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. The case was heard by SHER ZAMAN CHAUDHRY.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: In case 1984 CLC 526, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 22 AND 41 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. This case was heard in SCAJ&K and decided on 1983-04-05.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 CLC 526 were: T. H. TARIQ FOR APPELLANTS. SH. ABDULAZIZ FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: SHER ZAMAN CHAUDHRY.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 CLC 526 were: SAKHI MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER—APPELLANTSIS VERSUS MREHABILITATION DEPARTMENT THROUGH CUSTODIAN,EVACUEE PROPERTY—RESPONDENT. This case was heard in SCAJ&K.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 CLC 526.
Answer: J UDGMBNT A V Appellants Height Muhammad and Muhammad Sharif through this appeal by leave seek to challenge the legality of the judgment and decree passed by the Division Bench of the High Court on 25th December, 1975. The circa instances giving rise to the controversy are that a declaratory suit with respect to the land in dispute measuring 18 canals, 18 mar las, situated in village Opera Hannah, was instituted in the Court of Deputy Custodian Kohl wherein the appellants claimed that they purchased occupancy rights of this land through an oral sale against a consideration of Rs. 265 from the non-Muslims in 1942; and as such they were the owners of the property in dispute. It was further claimed that their right had ripened into title. on account of adverse possession and that they have effected’ improvements to the tune of Rs. 2,045. After recording the evidence the claim was allowed by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment dated 6th June, 1967. The file, when submitted for confirmation, the learned Custodian after harem the parties reversed the findings arrived at by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment, dated 28th December, 1968. The review petition filed by the appellant- plaintiffs before the Custodian was also dismissed by the learned Custodian vide his order, dated 22nd July, 1969. ' m2. A civil suit was then filed by the appellants in the High Court based on identical ground to those taken by them in the proceedings before the Deputy Custodian and the learned-Custodian. The suit was resisted by the respondent. The learned Single Judge in the High Court after recording evidence however decreed the. suit of the appellants vide his judgment and decree, dated 12th February, 1973. On appeal by the respondents before the Division Bench of the High Court the judgment and decree passed by the learned Single Judge was set aside by the High Court vide its judgment, dated 25th December, 1975. Feeling aggrieved by this judgment and decree passed by the learned High Court on 25th December, 1975, a petition for leave to appeal was filed by the appellants. Leave was granted by this Court for the consideration whether the civil Court had the jurisdiction to hear the case and. allow the relief claimed by the appellants or was it within the competence of the Custodian alone to hear and decide the matter. 3. While arguing on the point of jurisdiction Mr. T. H. Tariq, the learned counsel for the appellants, submitted that although to decide. And adjudicate Upon question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person Is or is not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Custodian, yet in a case where the Custodian is found to have acted in excess of the jurisdiction vested in him or in a case of failure of exercise of the jurisdiction, the civil Court had the competence to enter tam and allow the relief’ Besides, with respect to the claim of a local relating to a property shown as an evacuee it was the civil Court alone which had the jurisdiction to hear and decide the matter. This aspect of the case, argued the learned. counsel, was not taken into consideration by the Division Bench of the learned High Court. The impugned judgment and decree, therefore, was contrary to law and could not be sustained. -1p 4. Sh. Abdul Aziz, the learned counsel for the respondent, in reply argued that under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, it was the Custodian alone who could determine whether any property was evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee had in any such property. The jurisdiction of the civil Courts has been expressly barred to adjudicate upon such matter. The grounds taken in the suit filed by the appellant in the High Court had already been taken by them in the proceedings before the Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian. The finding of the Custodian in this respect was final and conclusive. Enter taming the suit of the appellant-plaintiffs by the learned Single Judge of the High Court and then hearing and deciding it was an assumption of the jurisdiction not vested in him under law. The learned Single Judge in the High Court, argued the learned counsel, had, by hearing a civil suit and deciding it, converted the Court as a Court of appeal against the judgment and finding of the Custodian. The judgment and decree passed by the learned Single Judge was, therefore, contrary to law and the reversal of it by the Division Bench of the learned High Court was perfectly legal and open to no exception. 5. I will now proceed to examine the proposition in the light of the reason mg advanced by the learned Advocates for the parties. On careful examination of the relevant provisions contained in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, J find that any claim with respect to the right on interest in any property treated by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Author*) cities as an evacuee property is to be adjudicated upon by the Custodian and jurisdiction of the civil Courts in this respect has expressly been barred. Any person claiming any right or interest in any property shown as an evacuee property is to approach the Custodian for the relief: The relevant! provision on the subject is section 22 of the Act which reads —— A “Any person claiming any right or interest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian." In the' present case the appellants moved the Deputy Custodian for the determination of their claim with respect to the land in dispute- The findings arrived at by the learned Deputy Custodian, on examination, having been found erroneous, were set aside by the learned Custodian and the suit of the appellant-plamtifis was rejected. It was entirely with the competence of the learned Custodian to confirm or set aside the order of the I Deputy Custodian. It is well settled that where a Court or a Tribunal has the jurisdiction to determine the question it has got the jurisdiction to, decide it rightly or wrongly. Assumption of the jurisdiction by the learned Single Judge of the High Court as a civil Court merely on- the ground that] conclusions, in his estimation, arrived at by the learned Custodian were long was unwarranted and not permissible under law. The jurisdiction of any civil Court to adjudicate upon such matter has clearly been barred under the provisions of section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. For the proper appreciation of the point involved section 41 is reproduced. It reads -— (1) Save as expressly provided in this Act no civil or Revenue Court or any other authority shall have jurisdiction -—— \\7 TT (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person is or not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or merest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property ; (IB) to question the legality of anything done under this Act by or at the instance of the Custodian ; or (c) in respect of any matter which the Custodian is empowered by or under this Act to determine/1 Powers and jurisdiction conferred on the High Court under the Code of Civil Procedure or under the provisions of Constitution are not to be used as vehicle to intervene with the decision of a Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction merely because the decision of the Tribunal, in its opinion, was wrong. The High Court will not, even in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction conferred on it under the Constitutional provisions, interfere in any finding arrived at by any Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction except in exceptional cases and where it is found that the Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction passed an order in excess of the jurisdiction so vested in it. The High Court will not take upon itself and convert itself to a Court of regular appeal for the simple reason that the findings arrived at by the Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction, in its estimation, are wrong. C 6. I have. Carefully gone through the relevant record. Going carefully ( through the impugned judgment I find '{hat the reasoning advanced by the learned Judges of the High Court reflects the correct legal approach to the proposition evolved and I find no justification to interfere with the judge meet and decree under appeal. On careful examination of the judgment passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court I find that justifications shown for assumption of the jurisdiction by the civil Court are merely academic in nature and not relevant to the present case. Nowhere in the D judgment is there any mention the learned Custodian haying acted in excess of its jurisdiction“or that it was a case of illegal exercise of the jurisdiction by the Custodian. The suit instituted by the appellant-plaintiffs in the High Court, under the provisions of section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, was not maintainable. The learned Single Judge in the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The impugned judgment passed by the High Court on 25th December, 1975, is perfectly in accordance with law and [ find no fault in it. The appeal having no force is dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 526 (SCAJ&K, 1983-04-05): J UDGMBNT A V Appellants Height Muhammad and Muhammad Sharif through this appeal by leave seek to challenge the legality of the judgment and decree passed by the Division Bench of the High Court on 25th December, 1975. The circa instances giving rise to the controversy are that a declaratory suit with respect to the land in dispute measuring 18 canals, 18 mar las, situated in village Opera Hannah, was instituted in the Court of Deputy Custodian Kohl wherein the appellants claimed that they purchased occupancy rights of this land through an oral sale against a consideration of Rs. 265 from the non-Muslims in 1942; and as such they were the owners of the property in dispute. It was further claimed that their right had ripened into title. on account of adverse possession and that they have effected’ improvements to the tune of Rs. 2,045. After recording the evidence the claim was allowed by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment dated 6th June, 1967. The file, when submitted for confirmation, the learned Custodian after harem the parties reversed the findings arrived at by the Deputy Custodian vide his judgment, dated 28th December, 1968. The review petition filed by the appellant- plaintiffs before the Custodian was also dismissed by the learned Custodian vide his order, dated 22nd July, 1969. ' m2. A civil suit was then filed by the appellants in the High Court based on identical ground to those taken by them in the proceedings before the Deputy Custodian and the learned-Custodian. The suit was resisted by the respondent. The learned Single Judge in the High Court after recording evidence however decreed the. suit of the appellants vide his judgment and decree, dated 12th February, 1973. On appeal by the respondents before the Division Bench of the High Court the judgment and decree passed by the learned Single Judge was set aside by the High Court vide its judgment, dated 25th December, 1975. Feeling aggrieved by this judgment and decree passed by the learned High Court on 25th December, 1975, a petition for leave to appeal was filed by the appellants. Leave was granted by this Court for the consideration whether the civil Court had the jurisdiction to hear the case and. allow the relief claimed by the appellants or was it within the competence of the Custodian alone to hear and decide the matter. 3. While arguing on the point of jurisdiction Mr. T. H. Tariq, the learned counsel for the appellants, submitted that although to decide. And adjudicate Upon question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person Is or is not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Custodian, yet in a case where the Custodian is found to have acted in excess of the jurisdiction vested in him or in a case of failure of exercise of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 526 (SCAJ&K, 1983-04-05): what right or interest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Custodian, yet in a case where the Custodian is found to have acted in excess of the jurisdiction vested in him or in a case of failure of exercise of the jurisdiction, the civil Court had the competence to enter tam and allow the relief’ Besides, with respect to the claim of a local relating to a property shown as an evacuee it was the civil Court alone which had the jurisdiction to hear and decide the matter. This aspect of the case, argued the learned. counsel, was not taken into consideration by the Division Bench of the learned High Court. The impugned judgment and decree, therefore, was contrary to law and could not be sustained. -1p 4. Sh. Abdul Aziz, the learned counsel for the respondent, in reply argued that under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, it was the Custodian alone who could determine whether any property was evacuee property or what right or interest, if any, an evacuee had in any such property. The jurisdiction of the civil Courts has been expressly barred to adjudicate upon such matter. The grounds taken in the suit filed by the appellant in the High Court had already been taken by them in the proceedings before the Deputy Custodian and the learned Custodian. The finding of the Custodian in this respect was final and conclusive. Enter taming the suit of the appellant-plaintiffs by the learned Single Judge of the High Court and then hearing and deciding it was an assumption of the jurisdiction not vested in him under law. The learned Single Judge in the High Court, argued the learned counsel, had, by hearing a civil suit and deciding it, converted the Court as a Court of appeal against the judgment and finding of the Custodian. The judgment and decree passed by the learned Single Judge was, therefore, contrary to law and the reversal of it by the Division Bench of the learned High Court was perfectly legal and open to no exception. 5. I will now proceed to examine the proposition in the light of the reason mg advanced by the learned Advocates for the parties. On careful examination of the relevant provisions contained in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, J find that any claim with respect to the right on interest in any property treated by the Custodian or Rehabilitation Author*) cities as an evacuee property is to be adjudicated upon by the Custodian and jurisdiction of the civil Courts in this respect has expressly been barred. Any person claiming any right or interest in any property shown as an evacuee property is to approach the Custodian for the relief: The relevant! provision on the subject is section 22 of the Act which reads —— A “Any person claiming any right or interest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 526 (SCAJ&K, 1983-04-05): any property shown as an evacuee property is to approach the Custodian for the relief: The relevant! provision on the subject is section 22 of the Act which reads —— A “Any person claiming any right or interest in any property treated by the Custodian or a Rehabilitation Authority as evacuee property may prefer a claim to the Custodian." In the' present case the appellants moved the Deputy Custodian for the determination of their claim with respect to the land in dispute- The findings arrived at by the learned Deputy Custodian, on examination, having been found erroneous, were set aside by the learned Custodian and the suit of the appellant-plamtifis was rejected. It was entirely with the competence of the learned Custodian to confirm or set aside the order of the I Deputy Custodian. It is well settled that where a Court or a Tribunal has the jurisdiction to determine the question it has got the jurisdiction to, decide it rightly or wrongly. Assumption of the jurisdiction by the learned Single Judge of the High Court as a civil Court merely on- the ground that] conclusions, in his estimation, arrived at by the learned Custodian were long was unwarranted and not permissible under law. The jurisdiction of any civil Court to adjudicate upon such matter has clearly been barred under the provisions of section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. For the proper appreciation of the point involved section 41 is reproduced. It reads -— (1) Save as expressly provided in this Act no civil or Revenue Court or any other authority shall have jurisdiction -—— \\7 TT (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question arising in any suit, appeal, application or other proceedings whether any person is or not evacuee or whether any property is or is not evacuee property or what right or merest, if any, an evacuee has in any such property ; (IB) to question the legality of anything done under this Act by or at the instance of the Custodian ; or (c) in respect of any matter which the Custodian is empowered by or under this Act to determine/1 Powers and jurisdiction conferred on the High Court under the Code of Civil Procedure or under the provisions of Constitution are not to be used as vehicle to intervene with the decision of a Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction merely because the decision of the Tribunal, in its opinion, was wrong. The High Court will not, even in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction conferred on it under the Constitutional provisions, interfere in any finding arrived at by any Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction except in exceptional cases and where it is found that the Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction passed an order in excess of the jurisdiction so vested in it. The High Court will not take upon itself and convert itself to a Court of regular appeal for the simple reason that the findings arrived at by the Court or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 526?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 526 (SCAJ&K, 1983-04-05): is found that the Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction passed an order in excess of the jurisdiction so vested in it. The High Court will not take upon itself and convert itself to a Court of regular appeal for the simple reason that the findings arrived at by the Court or Tribunal having exclusive jurisdiction, in its estimation, are wrong. C 6. I have. Carefully gone through the relevant record. Going carefully ( through the impugned judgment I find '{hat the reasoning advanced by the learned Judges of the High Court reflects the correct legal approach to the proposition evolved and I find no justification to interfere with the judge meet and decree under appeal. On careful examination of the judgment passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court I find that justifications shown for assumption of the jurisdiction by the civil Court are merely academic in nature and not relevant to the present case. Nowhere in the D judgment is there any mention the learned Custodian haying acted in excess of its jurisdiction“or that it was a case of illegal exercise of the jurisdiction by the Custodian. The suit instituted by the appellant-plaintiffs in the High Court, under the provisions of section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, was not maintainable. The learned Single Judge in the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The impugned judgment passed by the High Court on 25th December, 1975, is perfectly in accordance with law and [ find no fault in it. The appeal having no force is dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 1984 CLC 204 about?
Answer: Case 1984 CLC 204 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1982-11-21. The case involved HAJI GHULAM QADIR THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS ’ AND ANOTHER— PETITIONERS.' VERSUS ; ;CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY. AND OTHERS—REPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - §. (2)' AND (6) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 DISPLACED PERSONS.(LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVII OF 1958) - S. PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 3(2) (5) AND 22 DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVIT OF 1958) - S. OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1984/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1984_204.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 00:42 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1984/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1984_204.htm!. The case was heard by Z. C. VALIANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: In case 1984 CLC 204, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - §. (2)' AND (6) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 DISPLACED PERSONS.(LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVII OF 1958) - S. PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 3(2) (5) AND 22 DISPLACED PERSONS (LAND SETTLEMENT) ACT (XLVIT OF 1958) - S. OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1984/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1984_204.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 00:42 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1984/CLC/html_txt/CLC_1984_204.htm!. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1982-11-21.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 CLC 204 were: S. NASIRUDDIN AND S. KAR AM ALI SHAH FOR APPELLANTS. ALI ASLAM JAFREE, HABIBULLAH AND ABBAS FAROOQIFOT RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: Z. C. VALIANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 CLC 204 were: HAJI GHULAM QADIR THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS ’ AND ANOTHER— PETITIONERS.' VERSUS ; ;CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY. AND OTHERS—REPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 CLC 204.
Answer: Judgment P Petitioners above-named, being aggrieved by order, dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, passed in Revision Petition No. 47 of 1969, by which he set aside the order dated Sth June, 1969 of the learned Additional Custodian E.P. passed in Appeal No. S/69, have preferred the above petition, on the following facts and grounds : 2. That the petitioners’ common ancestor Waders Air BUX Bhutto was an owner of the agricultural land bearing Survey Nos. (0*25), (0-18), (0-38), 486 (1-14), 487 (1-12), (0-18), (0-16) 488-3 (0-35) admeasuring 6–18 acres, situated in Del Visor Wuhan, Talk and District Khairpur Mir’s, by virtue of Registered'Sale Deed between the common ancestor of the petitioners and Tillman, Jhummromal and Chandoomal sons of Galangal, for a consideration of Rs. 2,500 registered before the Sub-Registrar, Khairpur on 24th March, 1938. The S. No. 496 in same Del was obtained vide registered Exchange Deed dated 21st September, 1936. 3. That the above said land after registration was duly mutated in the name of the common ancestor of the petitioners in all the Revenue Records and the same still continues as such, vide order No. 17750, dated 27th April, 1938. 4. That the said property has been all along in continuous and actual enjoyment of the petitioners, and it is the petitioners, who have all along been paying the land assessment etc. to the Government, 5. That the entire record of rights viz. Form No. VIII for the years 1945-46 and 1946*47 onwards also shows the name of the common ancestor of the petitioners, as its owner and possessor. 6. That m the year 1964, the respondent late Soon Muhammad Obtain moved the then Deputy Commissioner and Additional Settlement Commissioner (Lands) Khairpur, (Mr. Parve Ahmed Butt) that he has been allotted the above said disputed land and some other, land bearing S. Nos. 490, 492 and 491 admeasuring 3–37 acres, situated in the same Del. 7. That the then Deputy Commissioner and Additional Settlement Commissioner (Mr. Parve Ahmed Butt) by his order dated 11th August, 1964 decided, that the petitioners were the owners of the disputed. pro* party and of the other property bear mg Nos. 490, 491 and 492 admeasuring 3*37 acres, was purchased by the petitioner’s common ancestor by a Registered Sale Deed No. 1163, dated 19th Decade ?r, 1947 for which the confirmation order has already been passed by TNE Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property. Khairpur State. He further held, that the property could not be held to be an evacuee property under section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) after January, 1957. However he further observed in the said order, that section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act bars his jurisdiction, he therefore, remitted the file to the Custodian, so far the disputed lands under the above Constitution petition are concerned and further ordered, that the petitioners to continue in possession till the final - disposal by the Custodian. ' 8. That there has been no order so far, m reference to the order of the Deputy Commissioner-cum- Additional Settlement Commissioner Khairpur, so far, but as the petitioners were being harassed by the late Soon Muhammad Sib tam, who was known for his mischievous activities, as he dragged the petitioners in criminal cases etc. they therefore, moved the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Sukkur, for declaration under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 vide application No. 79 of 1964. TO, That the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property (Mr. Aft Ali Answer)), vide his order dated nil, rejected the application of the petitioners and at the same time held, that as the property was acquired by the Central Government under Settlement Act, therefore, the Custodian Department has ceased to have the jurisdiction. 10. That the petitioners, against the order of the learned Deputy Custodian, filed an appeal before the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property (Mr. Muhammad Azar), who, by his order dated 5th June, 1969 was pleased to allow the appeal of the petitioners and made a reference to the Custodian of Evacuee Property. - 11. That against the order of the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property, the late respondent No. Soon Muhammad Obtain also moved the Custodian in Revision. 12. That the learned respondent No. 1, however rejected the ref* Terence of the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property and allowed the Revision filed by late Soon Muhammad Obtain, vide order dated 28th October, 1971. 13. That the petitioners however, filed a review petition before the respondent No. 1, who by his order dated 24th July, 1974 dismissed the same as he could not review the order of his learned predecessor. 14. The learned Advocate for the petitioners in support of the above petition submitted as under :. (a) That the order of the learned Custodian is perverse, inasmuch as the learned respondent No. has not considered the relevant documents, though the same were very much available before him. (b) That the documents which are mostly registered deeds as old as 35 years old, and the genuineness cannot be, suspected as they were executed much before the commencement of the Evacuee laws, clearly show, that it was the late ancestor of the petitioners Heidi Air BUX Bhutto, who acquired the full ownership rights in the disputed properties. (c) That the learned respondent No. 1, it appears has not cared to go through the orders passed by the relevant authorities in the case. The order dated 11th August, 1964 passed by the respondent No. 2, is so clear, which hardly required any interference by the. Custodian Department. The unfortunate thing is. that neither the Deputy Custodian (B.P.) for the respondent No. had. taken notice of it even. The learned Custodian ought- to have considered, that the respondent No. was an authority on the spot and could be well-informed of the entire situation. The respondent No. late Soon Muhammad Obtain was known for his misdeeds. The learned Custodian ought to have considered, that on the contrary a document viz. the death certificate in respect of Diwan Lansing, produced by the late respondent No. was a forged document* as Khairpur Mir’s is not a notified area : but it has a Municipal Committee, from where the petitioners had obtained and produced the death certificate about the actual date of death of Diwan Lansing. (d) That the learned Custodian has seriously erred in holding9 that because the petitioners could not produce the Deal receipts for the years before 1946-47, therefore, they were not the owners. This contention is quite perverse and illegal and ultra vires, when the name of the petitioners is very much available in Form 8 for the year 1946-47, there was no sense in talk mg about the Deal receipts for the year 1946-47. (e) That the learned respondent No. 1, it appears has not cared to - go through the contents of registered documents of the year 1938 ; the land prior to the sale-deed was mortgaged, and this fact too is very much mentioned m the sale-deed. In short there is nothing to suspect the bona fide of the petitioners' cm any way. The ownership of the petitioners was proved in full beyond any reasonable doubt. k y (g) That the partition deed dated 9th July, 1957 is a registered document* showing the partition of the property between the petitioner No. and petitioner No. and that there is clear entry of the disputed survey numbers in the said deed. (A) That the admitted position is, that till July, 1957 the properties in dispute were not declared an Evacuee Property, as such the respondent No. was barred from giving such a finding and bolding the properties to be an evacuee property. That the order passed by the respondent No. is illegal, ultra vires and void and is liable to be quashed. IS. In support of the above contentions, the learned Advocate for. the petitioners relied upon cases reported in PLD 1973 S C ; PLD 1961 Keir. 589 ; PLD 1964 SC 74; PLD 1972 LAH. 798 ; PLD 1978 Quetta 121, PLD 1978 B. J. 1, PLD 1968 Lab. 148, PLD 1958 Keir. 518 ; PLD 1964 Lab. 274 and PLD 1982 S C 330. 16. The learned Advocate for respondent No. on the other hand submitted as under: 1d y (a) That by notification in 1959 all evacuee properties were acquired by the Government of Pakistan and become part of the compensation pool and since in Jacaranda Register these properties stood in the name of the Hindus they were treated as Hidden Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958 and on issue of. above notification these properties become part and parcel of Compensation Pool and as such petitioners' application under section 22 of Pakistan (Administration of. Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957 was not maintainable and was liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. h. (6) That notice dated 20th May, 1958 under section 2 (3) (b) of Act XII of 1957 was issued by Assistant Custodian (Survey) to petitioners to show cause, why the properties in question should not be treated as evacuee properties, but petitioners did not send any reply nor appeared before the said Assistant Custodian and consequently properties in question were rightly treated as Hidden. Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958. (c) That order dated nil of the Deputy Custodian passed on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957, cannot be challenged by way of writ, as the same has been confirmed by Custodian of Evacuee Property, vide his impugned order, dated 28th October, 1971. (d) That petitioners petition suffers from laches, as impugned order of learned Custodian is dated 28th October, 1971 and even petitioners Review Petition was dismissed on 25th July, 1974 whereas above petition was filed on 21st February, 1975 and con* sequently on this ground alone, the above petition is liable to be dismissed. 16. In support of the above petition the learned Advocate for respondent No. relied upon cases reported in P LD 1974 S C 139, PLD 1976 Keir. 514, 1969 SCMR 315; 1975 SCMR PLD 1973 S C 451 and 1973 Law Notes 559. 17. The learned Advocate appearing for respondents Nos. and 2 submitted, that by notice dated 20th May, 1958 of Assistant Custodian (Survey) which was final notice, properties in question were treated as evacuee properties. However, the learned Advocate for respondents Nos. ] and 2 stated, that he was not in position to produce or point out any order prior to IST January, 1957 by which the properties in question were treated as Evacuee Properties and/or-declared. as such. He also admitted, that there is no specific order under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958, by which the properties in question were treated, as Hidden Evacuee Properties. 18. I have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned counsels before me and have gone through R P of this learned Deputy Custodian, Additional Custodian and Custodian of Evacuee Property and their respective orders as well as through the various cases cited by the learned Advocates before me. w 19. Provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 are very clear, that no property could be treated as Evacuee Property after 1st January, 19S7 unless it was covered under two exceptions to the said section. Neither learned Advocate for respondent No. for learned Advocate for respondents Nos. and were able to post out to me anything on record to show, that any pro feedings for treating the properties m question as Evacuee Properties had commenced prior to IST January, 1957. The question of applicability of clause 2(b) of section 3 to the rights claimed by the petitioners and their predecessors-in-title obviously did not arise, as these properties were purchased by registered Sale Deeds in the years 1936 and 1938 and in respect of sale-deed dated 19th December, 1947 confirmation order was passed by Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, Khairpur State, which has not been set aside, nor it is the case of respondents, that the said order was set aside at any time. 20. In view of the above facts, which were not disputed by respondents before me, I am of the opinion, that properties in question were neither declared as evacuee nor treated as such prior to 1st January. 1957 and consequently these properties did not become part and parcel of Compensation Pool, as a result of notification issued in this connection! MN 1959. 21. The only question which now requires consideration is whether properties in question were treated as Hidden/Concealed Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, and as such protection given under section 3 of Act XII of 1957, would not be available to the petitioners. In this connection, I repeatedly asked the learned Advocates of respondents to show me any order under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 in respect of these properties, but they were unable to post -out any such order. In addition to these petitioners acquired these properties much before partition by a registered sale-deeds of 1936 and 1938, genuineness of which cannot be doubted, merely on the basis of the reasoning given by the learned Custodian in his impugned order, in my opinion. The sale-deed dated 19th December, 1947 was duly confirmed by Deputy Custodian and there is nothing in the impugned order by which, any doubt is shown on existence of such order. - Even the learned Advocates of respondents before me have not disputed passing of such order in favor of the petitioners. It may be further noted, that learned Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property in his order dated 5th June, 1969 on the basis of documents on record held, that Heidi Air BUX Bhutto and thereafter petitioners have been in continuance possession of these survey numbers, as this finding was fully supported by Ex. 47, the order of Additional Settlement Commissioner (Land) which was produced before him and as such non-mention of the names of petitioners and/or their predecessors-in-title in Revenue Records cannot by itself deprive the petitioners of their legitimate legal rights acquired by the registered documents, hereinbefore mentioned, as entries in Revenue Record, by itself do not confer rights of ownership, such entries are only corroborative evidence for said purpose. 1] h' 22. In view of my above conclusions and observations, in my opinion it was not necessary for the petitioners to have moved application under section 22 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, consequently dismissal of petitioners said application by impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 does not affect the non-evacuee nature of ownership rights acquired by petitioners, under above-mentioned three registered documents, in respect of the survey numbers in question, as these survey numbers were neither treated as evacuee properties, nor declared as such prior to IST January, 1957, nor it could be considered-] ed as hidden/concealed Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, on any grounds mentioned in the order dated Nil of the learned Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property and/or impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property. 23. The last point which requires consideration is whether above petition is liable to be dismissed on account of laches, as urged by the learned Advocate of the respondents. I am afraid, in view of fact mentioned hereinbefore, this is not a fit case, where the said doctrine BF made applicable. However this is the discretion vested in. this Court, which I am not prepared to exercise in favor of respondents, in view OL the above-mentioned facts, specially as Review Petition filed by petitioner! against the order dated 28th October, 1971 was dismissed on 24th July, 1974 and above petition was filed on 21st February, 1975. In this view of mine, I am fully supported by judgment of Hon’BLE Supreme Court reported in PLD 1982 S C 330 and observations made in para. 10 of the said judgment. 24. Therefore I allow the above petition and declare, that nonevacuee status of the agricultural survey Nos., *586, 487, and admeasuring 6–10 acres, situated in Del Visor Wall an Talk and District Khairpur Mrs, belonging to petitioners, which were acquired by petitioners by means of registered sale-deeds dated 2nd September, 1936, 24th March, 1938 and 19th December, 1947 are not in any way affected by impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian and/or order dated Nil of the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property passed on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957, as the said agricultural survey numbers were neither treated as Evacuee Property and/or declared as such prior to IST January, 1957 nor the said survey numbers could be considered as concealed/Hidden Evacuee Property under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, so as. to automatically become Evacuee Properties and form part of the compensation pool and as such became available for allotments to the original respondent No. 3. 25. In view of the above declaration granted to the petitioners, and in view of my conclusion, that filing of application under section 22 of the Act XII of 1957 was not at all necessary for the petitioners, order dated Nil of the Deputy Custodian on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 and impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property are of no legal consequence and do not in any way affect the ownership of petitioner nor non- evacuees status of the survey numbers in question, which were acquired by three registered sale-deeds, by the petitioners predecessors-in-title. 25. The above petition is disposed of in terms of the above judgment with no order as to costs. T Petition allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): Judgment P Petitioners above-named, being aggrieved by order, dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, passed in Revision Petition No. 47 of 1969, by which he set aside the order dated Sth June, 1969 of the learned Additional Custodian E.P. passed in Appeal No. S/69, have preferred the above petition, on the following facts and grounds : 2. That the petitioners’ common ancestor Waders Air BUX Bhutto was an owner of the agricultural land bearing Survey Nos. (0*25), (0-18), (0-38), 486 (1-14), 487 (1-12), (0-18), (0-16) 488-3 (0-35) admeasuring 6–18 acres, situated in Del Visor Wuhan, Talk and District Khairpur Mir’s, by virtue of Registered'Sale Deed between the common ancestor of the petitioners and Tillman, Jhummromal and Chandoomal sons of Galangal, for a consideration of Rs. 2,500 registered before the Sub-Registrar, Khairpur on 24th March, 1938. The S. No. 496 in same Del was obtained vide registered Exchange Deed dated 21st September, 1936. 3. That the above said land after registration was duly mutated in the name of the common ancestor of the petitioners in all the Revenue Records and the same still continues as such, vide order No. 17750, dated 27th April, 1938. 4. That the said property has been all along in continuous and actual enjoyment of the petitioners, and it is the petitioners, who have all along been paying the land assessment etc. to the Government, 5. That the entire record of rights viz. Form No. VIII for the years 1945-46 and 1946*47 onwards also shows the name of the common ancestor of the petitioners, as its owner and possessor. 6. That m the year 1964, the respondent late Soon Muhammad Obtain moved the then Deputy Commissioner and Additional Settlement Commissioner (Lands) Khairpur, (Mr. Parve Ahmed Butt) that he has been allotted the above said disputed land and some other, land bearing S. Nos. 490, 492 and 491 admeasuring 3–37 acres, situated in the same Del. 7. That the then Deputy Commissioner and Additional Settlement Commissioner (Mr. Parve Ahmed Butt) by his order dated 11th August, 1964 decided, that the petitioners were the owners of the disputed. pro* party and of the other property bear mg Nos. 490, 491 and 492 admeasuring 3*37 acres, was purchased by the petitioner’s common ancestor by a Registered Sale Deed No. 1163, dated 19th Decade ?r, 1947 for which the confirmation order has already been passed by TNE Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property. Khairpur State. He further held, that the property could not be held to be an evacuee property under section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) after January, 1957. However he further observed in the said order, that section 41 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act bars his jurisdiction, he therefore, remitted the file to the Custodian, so far the disputed lands under the above Constitution petition are concerned and further ordered, that the petitioners to continue in possession till the final - disposal by the Custodian. ' 8. That

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act bars his jurisdiction, he therefore, remitted the file to the Custodian, so far the disputed lands under the above Constitution petition are concerned and further ordered, that the petitioners to continue in possession till the final - disposal by the Custodian. ' 8. That there has been no order so far, m reference to the order of the Deputy Commissioner-cum- Additional Settlement Commissioner Khairpur, so far, but as the petitioners were being harassed by the late Soon Muhammad Sib tam, who was known for his mischievous activities, as he dragged the petitioners in criminal cases etc. they therefore, moved the Deputy Custodian, Evacuee Property, Sukkur, for declaration under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 vide application No. 79 of 1964. TO, That the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property (Mr. Aft Ali Answer)), vide his order dated nil, rejected the application of the petitioners and at the same time held, that as the property was acquired by the Central Government under Settlement Act, therefore, the Custodian Department has ceased to have the jurisdiction. 10. That the petitioners, against the order of the learned Deputy Custodian, filed an appeal before the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property (Mr. Muhammad Azar), who, by his order dated 5th June, 1969 was pleased to allow the appeal of the petitioners and made a reference to the Custodian of Evacuee Property. - 11. That against the order of the Additional Custodian Evacuee Property, the late respondent No. Soon Muhammad Obtain also moved the Custodian in Revision. 12. That the learned respondent No. 1, however rejected the ref* Terence of the Additional Custodian, Evacuee Property and allowed the Revision filed by late Soon Muhammad Obtain, vide order dated 28th October, 1971. 13. That the petitioners however, filed a review petition before the respondent No. 1, who by his order dated 24th July, 1974 dismissed the same as he could not review the order of his learned predecessor. 14. The learned Advocate for the petitioners in support of the above petition submitted as under :. (a) That the order of the learned Custodian is perverse, inasmuch as the learned respondent No. has not considered the relevant documents, though the same were very much available before him. (b) That the documents which are mostly registered deeds as old as 35 years old, and the genuineness cannot be, suspected as they were executed much before the commencement of the Evacuee laws, clearly show, that it was the late ancestor of the petitioners Heidi Air BUX Bhutto, who acquired the full ownership rights in the disputed properties. (c) That the learned respondent No. 1, it appears has not cared to go through the orders passed by the relevant authorities in the case. The order dated 11th August, 1964 passed by the respondent No. 2, is so clear, which hardly required any interference by the. Custodian Department. The unfortunate thing is. that neither the Deputy Custodian (B.P.) for the respondent No. had.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): through the orders passed by the relevant authorities in the case. The order dated 11th August, 1964 passed by the respondent No. 2, is so clear, which hardly required any interference by the. Custodian Department. The unfortunate thing is. that neither the Deputy Custodian (B.P.) for the respondent No. had. taken notice of it even. The learned Custodian ought- to have considered, that the respondent No. was an authority on the spot and could be well-informed of the entire situation. The respondent No. late Soon Muhammad Obtain was known for his misdeeds. The learned Custodian ought to have considered, that on the contrary a document viz. the death certificate in respect of Diwan Lansing, produced by the late respondent No. was a forged document* as Khairpur Mir’s is not a notified area : but it has a Municipal Committee, from where the petitioners had obtained and produced the death certificate about the actual date of death of Diwan Lansing. (d) That the learned Custodian has seriously erred in holding9 that because the petitioners could not produce the Deal receipts for the years before 1946-47, therefore, they were not the owners. This contention is quite perverse and illegal and ultra vires, when the name of the petitioners is very much available in Form 8 for the year 1946-47, there was no sense in talk mg about the Deal receipts for the year 1946-47. (e) That the learned respondent No. 1, it appears has not cared to - go through the contents of registered documents of the year 1938 ; the land prior to the sale-deed was mortgaged, and this fact too is very much mentioned m the sale-deed. In short there is nothing to suspect the bona fide of the petitioners' cm any way. The ownership of the petitioners was proved in full beyond any reasonable doubt. k y (g) That the partition deed dated 9th July, 1957 is a registered document* showing the partition of the property between the petitioner No. and petitioner No. and that there is clear entry of the disputed survey numbers in the said deed. (A) That the admitted position is, that till July, 1957 the properties in dispute were not declared an Evacuee Property, as such the respondent No. was barred from giving such a finding and bolding the properties to be an evacuee property. That the order passed by the respondent No. is illegal, ultra vires and void and is liable to be quashed. IS. In support of the above contentions, the learned Advocate for. the petitioners relied upon cases reported in PLD 1973 S C ; PLD 1961 Keir. 589 ; PLD 1964 SC 74; PLD 1972 LAH. 798 ; PLD 1978 Quetta 121, PLD 1978 B. J. 1, PLD 1968 Lab. 148, PLD 1958 Keir. 518 ; PLD 1964 Lab. 274 and PLD 1982 S C 330. 16. The learned Advocate for respondent No. on the other hand submitted as under: 1d y (a) That by notification in 1959 all evacuee properties

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): 121, PLD 1978 B. J. 1, PLD 1968 Lab. 148, PLD 1958 Keir. 518 ; PLD 1964 Lab. 274 and PLD 1982 S C 330. 16. The learned Advocate for respondent No. on the other hand submitted as under: 1d y (a) That by notification in 1959 all evacuee properties were acquired by the Government of Pakistan and become part of the compensation pool and since in Jacaranda Register these properties stood in the name of the Hindus they were treated as Hidden Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958 and on issue of. above notification these properties become part and parcel of Compensation Pool and as such petitioners' application under section 22 of Pakistan (Administration of. Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957 was not maintainable and was liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. h. (6) That notice dated 20th May, 1958 under section 2 (3) (b) of Act XII of 1957 was issued by Assistant Custodian (Survey) to petitioners to show cause, why the properties in question should not be treated as evacuee properties, but petitioners did not send any reply nor appeared before the said Assistant Custodian and consequently properties in question were rightly treated as Hidden. Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958. (c) That order dated nil of the Deputy Custodian passed on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957, cannot be challenged by way of writ, as the same has been confirmed by Custodian of Evacuee Property, vide his impugned order, dated 28th October, 1971. (d) That petitioners petition suffers from laches, as impugned order of learned Custodian is dated 28th October, 1971 and even petitioners Review Petition was dismissed on 25th July, 1974 whereas above petition was filed on 21st February, 1975 and con* sequently on this ground alone, the above petition is liable to be dismissed. 16. In support of the above petition the learned Advocate for respondent No. relied upon cases reported in P LD 1974 S C 139, PLD 1976 Keir. 514, 1969 SCMR 315; 1975 SCMR PLD 1973 S C 451 and 1973 Law Notes 559. 17. The learned Advocate appearing for respondents Nos. and 2 submitted, that by notice dated 20th May, 1958 of Assistant Custodian (Survey) which was final notice, properties in question were treated as evacuee properties. However, the learned Advocate for respondents Nos. ] and 2 stated, that he was not in position to produce or point out any order prior to IST January, 1957 by which the properties in question were treated as Evacuee Properties and/or-declared. as such. He also admitted, that there is no specific order under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958, by which the properties in question were treated, as Hidden Evacuee Properties. 18. I have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned counsels before me and have gone through R P of this learned Deputy Custodian,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act of 1958, by which the properties in question were treated, as Hidden Evacuee Properties. 18. I have carefully considered the above submissions made by the learned counsels before me and have gone through R P of this learned Deputy Custodian, Additional Custodian and Custodian of Evacuee Property and their respective orders as well as through the various cases cited by the learned Advocates before me. w 19. Provisions of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 are very clear, that no property could be treated as Evacuee Property after 1st January, 19S7 unless it was covered under two exceptions to the said section. Neither learned Advocate for respondent No. for learned Advocate for respondents Nos. and were able to post out to me anything on record to show, that any pro feedings for treating the properties m question as Evacuee Properties had commenced prior to IST January, 1957. The question of applicability of clause 2(b) of section 3 to the rights claimed by the petitioners and their predecessors-in-title obviously did not arise, as these properties were purchased by registered Sale Deeds in the years 1936 and 1938 and in respect of sale-deed dated 19th December, 1947 confirmation order was passed by Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, Khairpur State, which has not been set aside, nor it is the case of respondents, that the said order was set aside at any time. 20. In view of the above facts, which were not disputed by respondents before me, I am of the opinion, that properties in question were neither declared as evacuee nor treated as such prior to 1st January. 1957 and consequently these properties did not become part and parcel of Compensation Pool, as a result of notification issued in this connection! MN 1959. 21. The only question which now requires consideration is whether properties in question were treated as Hidden/Concealed Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, and as such protection given under section 3 of Act XII of 1957, would not be available to the petitioners. In this connection, I repeatedly asked the learned Advocates of respondents to show me any order under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 in respect of these properties, but they were unable to post -out any such order. In addition to these petitioners acquired these properties much before partition by a registered sale-deeds of 1936 and 1938, genuineness of which cannot be doubted, merely on the basis of the reasoning given by the learned Custodian in his impugned order, in my opinion. The sale-deed dated 19th December, 1947 was duly confirmed by Deputy Custodian and there is nothing in the impugned order by which, any doubt is shown on existence of such order. - Even the learned Advocates of respondents before me have not disputed passing of such order in favor of the petitioners. It may be further noted,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): duly confirmed by Deputy Custodian and there is nothing in the impugned order by which, any doubt is shown on existence of such order. - Even the learned Advocates of respondents before me have not disputed passing of such order in favor of the petitioners. It may be further noted, that learned Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property in his order dated 5th June, 1969 on the basis of documents on record held, that Heidi Air BUX Bhutto and thereafter petitioners have been in continuance possession of these survey numbers, as this finding was fully supported by Ex. 47, the order of Additional Settlement Commissioner (Land) which was produced before him and as such non-mention of the names of petitioners and/or their predecessors-in-title in Revenue Records cannot by itself deprive the petitioners of their legitimate legal rights acquired by the registered documents, hereinbefore mentioned, as entries in Revenue Record, by itself do not confer rights of ownership, such entries are only corroborative evidence for said purpose. 1] h' 22. In view of my above conclusions and observations, in my opinion it was not necessary for the petitioners to have moved application under section 22 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, consequently dismissal of petitioners said application by impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 does not affect the non-evacuee nature of ownership rights acquired by petitioners, under above-mentioned three registered documents, in respect of the survey numbers in question, as these survey numbers were neither treated as evacuee properties, nor declared as such prior to IST January, 1957, nor it could be considered-] ed as hidden/concealed Evacuee Properties under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, on any grounds mentioned in the order dated Nil of the learned Deputy Custodian Evacuee Property and/or impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property. 23. The last point which requires consideration is whether above petition is liable to be dismissed on account of laches, as urged by the learned Advocate of the respondents. I am afraid, in view of fact mentioned hereinbefore, this is not a fit case, where the said doctrine BF made applicable. However this is the discretion vested in. this Court, which I am not prepared to exercise in favor of respondents, in view OL the above-mentioned facts, specially as Review Petition filed by petitioner! against the order dated 28th October, 1971 was dismissed on 24th July, 1974 and above petition was filed on 21st February, 1975. In this view of mine, I am fully supported by judgment of Hon’BLE Supreme Court reported in PLD 1982 S C 330 and observations made in para. 10 of the said judgment. 24. Therefore I allow the above petition and declare, that nonevacuee status of the agricultural survey Nos., *586, 487, and admeasuring 6–10 acres, situated in Del Visor Wall an Talk and District Khairpur Mrs, belonging to petitioners, which were acquired by petitioners by means of registered sale-deeds dated 2nd September, 1936,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 CLC 204?
Answer: From case 1984 CLC 204 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1982-11-21): Therefore I allow the above petition and declare, that nonevacuee status of the agricultural survey Nos., *586, 487, and admeasuring 6–10 acres, situated in Del Visor Wall an Talk and District Khairpur Mrs, belonging to petitioners, which were acquired by petitioners by means of registered sale-deeds dated 2nd September, 1936, 24th March, 1938 and 19th December, 1947 are not in any way affected by impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian and/or order dated Nil of the learned Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property passed on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957, as the said agricultural survey numbers were neither treated as Evacuee Property and/or declared as such prior to IST January, 1957 nor the said survey numbers could be considered as concealed/Hidden Evacuee Property under section 3 of the Displaced Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958, so as. to automatically become Evacuee Properties and form part of the compensation pool and as such became available for allotments to the original respondent No. 3. 25. In view of the above declaration granted to the petitioners, and in view of my conclusion, that filing of application under section 22 of the Act XII of 1957 was not at all necessary for the petitioners, order dated Nil of the Deputy Custodian on petitioners' application under section 22 of Act XII of 1957 and impugned order dated 28th October, 1971 of the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property are of no legal consequence and do not in any way affect the ownership of petitioner nor non- evacuees status of the survey numbers in question, which were acquired by three registered sale-deeds, by the petitioners predecessors-in-title. 25. The above petition is disposed of in terms of the above judgment with no order as to costs. T Petition allowed.

Question: What is case 1984 SCMR 47 about?
Answer: Case 1984 SCMR 47 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1982-05-03. The case involved MUSHTAQ AHMAD (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE ADMINISTRATOR RESIDUAL PROPERTY AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLES 185(3) AND 199. The case was heard by \ASLAM RIAZ HUSSAIN, NASIM HASAN SHAH AND ;,M. S. H. QURAISH, JJ '.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 SCMR 47?
Answer: In case 1984 SCMR 47, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLES 185(3) AND 199. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1982-05-03.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 SCMR 47?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 SCMR 47 were: ISHAQ MUHAMMAD KHAN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY TANVIR AHMAD SHEIKH, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER.. The judges presiding were: \ASLAM RIAZ HUSSAIN, NASIM HASAN SHAH AND ;,M. S. H. QURAISH, JJ '.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 SCMR 47?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 SCMR 47 were: MUSHTAQ AHMAD (PETITIONER) VERSUS THE ADMINISTRATOR RESIDUAL PROPERTY AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 SCMR 47.
Answer: V. Order M. SI H. Quraish, Ji-The petitioner seeks leave to appeal from the judgment of the Lahore High Court dated 24-1-1982, whereby his writ petition, filed to challenge the rejection of his plea for transfer of a Delhi and courtyard by the Administrator, Residual Property, was dismissed. 2. The Delhi and the courtyard m question form part of a composite building, the ground-floor of which comprises, besides the Delhi and courtyard, a number of shops. The first-floor is a residential unit. The shops had been transferred in favor of their respective occupants, including petitioner Must Ahmad, while the residential portion on the first-floor to Abdul Harbor respondent No. 3, by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on 4- 4-1973. Later on the application of Abdul Harbor, the Delhi and the courtyard were transferred in his favor by the Deputy Administrator, Residual Property, on 8-8-1979. The petitioner applied for implement in the proceeding before, the Deputy Administrator. But his application was rejected. He filed a revision petition which was dismissed, by the Administrator on 28-9-1980, against which he had moved the writ petition. 3. The; case of the petitioner was that the Delhi and the courtyard had already stood transferred in his favor by the initial transfer order of 4-4-1973 and that as no portion of the ground-floor had remained available, the question of the transfer of the Delhi and the courtyard in favor of Abdul Harbor did not arise. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner’s order dated 4-4-1973, by which all the shops had been transferred to their respective occupants speaks, of only “shop having two rooms” having been transferred to the petitioner. There is no mention there that the Delhi / and the courtyard had also, been transferred to him. Both the Deputy Administrator and the Administrator, Residual Property, had come to the view that only the shop had been transferred to the petitioner and that he was not in physical possession of or had any link with the Delhi and the courtyard. With these findings of fact the Hill Court had rightly declined to interfere. "FM. y, ‘. 4. We, therefore, -find no merit in this petition which we according? RUN Re Hyenas-com WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 SCMR 47?
Answer: From case 1984 SCMR 47 (SUPREME COURT, 1982-05-03): V. Order M. SI H. Quraish, Ji-The petitioner seeks leave to appeal from the judgment of the Lahore High Court dated 24-1-1982, whereby his writ petition, filed to challenge the rejection of his plea for transfer of a Delhi and courtyard by the Administrator, Residual Property, was dismissed. 2. The Delhi and the courtyard m question form part of a composite building, the ground-floor of which comprises, besides the Delhi and courtyard, a number of shops. The first-floor is a residential unit. The shops had been transferred in favor of their respective occupants, including petitioner Must Ahmad, while the residential portion on the first-floor to Abdul Harbor respondent No. 3, by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on 4- 4-1973. Later on the application of Abdul Harbor, the Delhi and the courtyard were transferred in his favor by the Deputy Administrator, Residual Property, on 8-8-1979. The petitioner applied for implement in the proceeding before, the Deputy Administrator. But his application was rejected. He filed a revision petition which was dismissed, by the Administrator on 28-9-1980, against which he had moved the writ petition. 3. The; case of the petitioner was that the Delhi and the courtyard had already stood transferred in his favor by the initial transfer order of 4-4-1973 and that as no portion of the ground-floor had remained available, the question of the transfer of the Delhi and the courtyard in favor of Abdul Harbor did not arise. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner’s order dated 4-4-1973, by which all the shops had been transferred to their respective occupants speaks, of only “shop having two rooms” having been transferred to the petitioner. There is no mention there that the Delhi / and the courtyard had also, been transferred to him. Both the Deputy Administrator and the Administrator, Residual Property, had come to the view that only the shop had been transferred to the petitioner and that he was not in physical possession of or had any link with the Delhi and the courtyard. With these findings of fact the Hill Court had rightly declined to interfere. "FM. y, ‘. 4. We, therefore, -find no merit in this petition which we according? RUN Re Hyenas-com WW.

Question: What is case 1984 MLD 340 about?
Answer: Case 1984 MLD 340 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-03-25. The case involved THE DEPUTY CUSTODIAN, ENEMY PROPERTY—APPELLANT VERSUS MESSRS MUHAMMAD JAMIL CO.—RESPONDENT*. The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S.100-. The case was heard by FAKHRUDDIN SHAIKH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: In case 1984 MLD 340, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S.100-. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-03-25.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 MLD 340 were: ABDUL MAJEED KHAN FOR APPELLANT. NEMO FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: FAKHRUDDIN SHAIKH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 MLD 340 were: THE DEPUTY CUSTODIAN, ENEMY PROPERTY—APPELLANT VERSUS MESSRS MUHAMMAD JAMIL CO.—RESPONDENT*. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 MLD 340.
Answer: This second appeal has been filed against the judgment of learned Find Additional District Judge, Hyderabad dated 1-6-1971, whereby he had set aside the judgment of Civil Judge, Hyderabad, dated 9-8-1969 in Civil Suit No.885 of 1963 and decreed the suit of the respondent for Rs.10,000 with costs against the appellant. 2. The case of the respondent/plaintiff before the Civil Judge was that Muhammad Jamil, Muhammad Saeed and others were partners of the plaintiffs firm namely, M/s. Muhammad Jamil Co. and used to run business at Hyderabad. This firm had dealings with Central Bank of India Ltd.( hereafter referred to as the Bank) which has since been taken over by the Custodian of Enemy Property. The account with the Bank was being operated both by Muhammad Jamil and Muhammad Saeed. The respondents alleged that on 16-9-1960 the Bank fraudulently and without their consent transferred an amount of Rs.10,000 from their account and credited the same in the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. The respondents came to know of this fact m April, 1961 when they received their passbook with the above entry of debit from the Bank. Thereafter the respondents immediately wrote to the Bank that the amount was wrongly transferred/debited from their account and credited to the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. Muhammad Jamil died in the meanwhile and the subsequent correspondence on the point continued between Muhammad Saeed and the Bank. As the Bank refused to WeTransfer this amount from the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. to that of the respondent, hence they filed suit. 3. In the written statement it was alleged by the Bank that on 2-9-1960 M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. had advised them to transfer an amount of Rs.10,000 from their account to that of the respondents by way of loan for 10–15 days, that on this advice the amount was transferred to the respondent's account and that on 16th September, 1960 the Bank received a telephone call from deceased Muhammad Jamil partner of the respondent's firm to WeTransfer the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. It is, therefore, alleged that no amount is payable by the Bank to the respondent's firm. 4. On these pleadings following issues were framed by the trial Court Whether plaintiff is stopped from bringing the suit?. "(1 (2 (3 (4 (5 (6 Whether suit is barred under section 69 of Partnership Act? Whether suit fails on account of non-joinder of necessary parties? Whether defendant fraudulently misappropriated the suit amount? Is defendant liable to pay the amount to the plaintiff? What should the decree be?".5. In support of the above issue the respondent's firm examined Muhammad Saeed only, as Ex.25. He has produced 10 letters which are Ex's. to saying that the Bank had wrongly transferred the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondent's firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and further asking the Bank to credit this amount in the account of their firm. This correspondence had taken place between 2nd May, 1961 to 2nd March; 1963. P.W. Muhammad Saeed was also confronted with the document (Ex.32) dated 1-7-1961 in cross-examination. This document is a letter dated 1-7-1961 from the Bank addressed to the respondent's firm saying that the balance debit of Rs. 10,746.60 as on 1-7-1961 in the account of respondents firm may be confirmed. Below this letter there is endorsement signed by Muhammad Jamil on behalf of M/s. Jamil Co. as follows-TI "We hereby confirm the correctness of the securities mentioned above and that the balance now due by me/us in the above account against the said securities inter alia is Rs.10,746.60 as at 30-6-61.".116. In rebuttal the appellant Bank examined Nazi Shah, the agent of the Bank who has produced various extracts from the ledger of the respondents! firm and M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. showing debit, credit and again debit of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondents firm, M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and the respondents! firm dated 2-9-1960, 16-9-1960 and 16-9-1960, respectively. LV -, 7. The learned Civil Judge relied on. the endorsement of Muhammad Jamil Ex.32 and held that the respondents/Plaintiffs are stopped from challenging the transfer of Rs.10,000 from the account of the firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. by the Bank. On this finding the suit was dismissed. h 8. In first appeal the learned Additional District Judge relied on the correspondence Exes. to in which both Muhammad Jamil and after his death, Muhammad Saeed had, between the two dates mentioned above, been consistently denying any oral instructions having been given to the Bank in respect of transfer of Rs.10,000 from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. The learned first Appellate Court was also of the view that the burden of proving the oral instructions alleged to have been given by M/s. Jamil 6 Co. to the Bank, was upon the Bank, but the latter has failed to prove this allegation, hence the plaintiff's suit was liable to be decreed. x 4'1 9. I have heard arguments of Mr. Abdul Marked learned counsel for the appellant, who has laid stress only on the endorsement of deceased Muhammad Jamil on Ex.32 acknowledging the balance of Rs. 10,746.60 on the debit side on 1-7-1961. The learned counsel has stated that this balance on the* debit side of the respondent's account also included the disputed amount of Rs.10,000 which was transferred from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. as long back. As on 16-9-1960. This letter does not show that the balance includes the disputed amount. Had it been so, then Muhammad Jamil himself in his letter, dated22nd May, 1961' Ex. would not have emphatically denied having given oral instructions to the Bank for transfer of Rs.10,000 from the account of the Bank. Again on 30-6-1961 Muhammad Jamil addressed a letter Ex. to the Bank in which he categorically stated that the amount of Rs.10,000 was arbitrarily debited in their account on 16-9-1960. In the correspondence that followed right up to 21-3-1963, both Muhammad Jamil and after his death Muhammad Saeed, had been repudiating the claim of the Bank that there were any instructions on behalf of the firm for debiting,Rs.10,000 on 16-9-1960 from their account. In the face of these documents which consist of correspondence between the respondent's firm and the Bank and which has not been denied by the Bank, it cannot be understood that in July, 1961 deceased Muhammad Jamil would have confirmed the debit of Rs.10,000 which related to 16-9-1961. Thus the endorsement on Ex.32 is of no help to the Bank and does note stop the respondent from claiming the amount of Rs.10,000 which in view of the lengthy correspondence which ensued between the parties for about two years, 1s proved to have been wrongly debited from the account of the respondents. 10. Mr. Abdul Marked, learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the judgment of the First Appellate Court should be set aside on the ground that a very important document namely Ex.32 has not been taken into consideration. In support of this plea he has relied on the case of Muhammad Afar and 7 others v. Allah Pitta and 13 others j- PLD 1970S CM R118. This decision related to second appeal under section 100, C.P.C. in which it was held by the Supreme Court that non-consideration of material evidence would vitiate finding of fact and could be interfered with in second appeal. He.has also relied on the case of Mayan Goal v. Marian Bear PLD 1969 S C 617. This case also related to second appeal under section 100, C.P.C. It was held by the Supreme Court in this case that finding of fact of First Appellate Court, which is at variance with that of TNA Court, ordinarily prevails, but it would not possess the same, value or sanctity as of concurrent findings. It was further held that if finding of Lower Appellate Court is not supported by evidence on record or if the Appellate Court to take into account material evidence or not revealing logical basis for differ mg from finding of the trial Court, then such finding of the First Appellate Court can be interfered with in the second appeal. 11. The only piece of evidence which, according to Mr. Abdul Marked Khan, has not been considered by the learned appellate Court is Ex.32. It his been shown in para. No. above that even if the document Ex.32 had been considered, the result would not have been any different. The above decisions are therefore, of no assistance to the learned counsel 111 therefore, do not find any reason to take exception to the view that has been taken by the First Appellate Court. Consequently the appeal fails and is dismissed. As none was present for the respondents, hence there shall be no order as to costs. ' M.Y.H. Appeal dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 340 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-03-25): This second appeal has been filed against the judgment of learned Find Additional District Judge, Hyderabad dated 1-6-1971, whereby he had set aside the judgment of Civil Judge, Hyderabad, dated 9-8-1969 in Civil Suit No.885 of 1963 and decreed the suit of the respondent for Rs.10,000 with costs against the appellant. 2. The case of the respondent/plaintiff before the Civil Judge was that Muhammad Jamil, Muhammad Saeed and others were partners of the plaintiffs firm namely, M/s. Muhammad Jamil Co. and used to run business at Hyderabad. This firm had dealings with Central Bank of India Ltd.( hereafter referred to as the Bank) which has since been taken over by the Custodian of Enemy Property. The account with the Bank was being operated both by Muhammad Jamil and Muhammad Saeed. The respondents alleged that on 16-9-1960 the Bank fraudulently and without their consent transferred an amount of Rs.10,000 from their account and credited the same in the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. The respondents came to know of this fact m April, 1961 when they received their passbook with the above entry of debit from the Bank. Thereafter the respondents immediately wrote to the Bank that the amount was wrongly transferred/debited from their account and credited to the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. Muhammad Jamil died in the meanwhile and the subsequent correspondence on the point continued between Muhammad Saeed and the Bank. As the Bank refused to WeTransfer this amount from the account of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. to that of the respondent, hence they filed suit. 3. In the written statement it was alleged by the Bank that on 2-9-1960 M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. had advised them to transfer an amount of Rs.10,000 from their account to that of the respondents by way of loan for 10–15 days, that on this advice the amount was transferred to the respondent's account and that on 16th September, 1960 the Bank received a telephone call from deceased Muhammad Jamil partner of the respondent's firm to WeTransfer the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. It is, therefore, alleged that no amount is payable by the Bank to the respondent's firm. 4. On these pleadings following issues were framed by the trial Court Whether plaintiff is stopped from bringing the suit?. "(1 (2 (3 (4 (5 (6 Whether suit is barred under section 69 of Partnership Act? Whether suit fails on account of non-joinder of necessary parties? Whether defendant fraudulently misappropriated the suit amount? Is defendant liable to pay the amount to the plaintiff? What should the decree be?".5. In support of the above issue the respondent's firm examined Muhammad Saeed only, as Ex.25. He has produced 10 letters which are Ex's. to saying that the Bank had wrongly transferred the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondent's firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and further asking the Bank to credit this amount in the account of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 340 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-03-25): only, as Ex.25. He has produced 10 letters which are Ex's. to saying that the Bank had wrongly transferred the amount of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondent's firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and further asking the Bank to credit this amount in the account of their firm. This correspondence had taken place between 2nd May, 1961 to 2nd March; 1963. P.W. Muhammad Saeed was also confronted with the document (Ex.32) dated 1-7-1961 in cross-examination. This document is a letter dated 1-7-1961 from the Bank addressed to the respondent's firm saying that the balance debit of Rs. 10,746.60 as on 1-7-1961 in the account of respondents firm may be confirmed. Below this letter there is endorsement signed by Muhammad Jamil on behalf of M/s. Jamil Co. as follows-TI "We hereby confirm the correctness of the securities mentioned above and that the balance now due by me/us in the above account against the said securities inter alia is Rs.10,746.60 as at 30-6-61.".116. In rebuttal the appellant Bank examined Nazi Shah, the agent of the Bank who has produced various extracts from the ledger of the respondents! firm and M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. showing debit, credit and again debit of Rs.10,000 from the account of the respondents firm, M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. and the respondents! firm dated 2-9-1960, 16-9-1960 and 16-9-1960, respectively. LV -, 7. The learned Civil Judge relied on. the endorsement of Muhammad Jamil Ex.32 and held that the respondents/Plaintiffs are stopped from challenging the transfer of Rs.10,000 from the account of the firm to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. by the Bank. On this finding the suit was dismissed. h 8. In first appeal the learned Additional District Judge relied on the correspondence Exes. to in which both Muhammad Jamil and after his death, Muhammad Saeed had, between the two dates mentioned above, been consistently denying any oral instructions having been given to the Bank in respect of transfer of Rs.10,000 from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. The learned first Appellate Court was also of the view that the burden of proving the oral instructions alleged to have been given by M/s. Jamil 6 Co. to the Bank, was upon the Bank, but the latter has failed to prove this allegation, hence the plaintiff's suit was liable to be decreed. x 4'1 9. I have heard arguments of Mr. Abdul Marked learned counsel for the appellant, who has laid stress only on the endorsement of deceased Muhammad Jamil on Ex.32 acknowledging the balance of Rs. 10,746.60 on the debit side on 1-7-1961. The learned counsel has stated that this balance on the* debit side of the respondent's account also included the disputed amount of Rs.10,000 which was transferred from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. as long back. As on 16-9-1960. This letter does not show that the balance includes the disputed amount. Had it been so, then Muhammad Jamil himself in his letter, dated22nd May, 1961'

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 340 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-03-25): the disputed amount of Rs.10,000 which was transferred from their account to that of M/s. Kazan Cotton Co. as long back. As on 16-9-1960. This letter does not show that the balance includes the disputed amount. Had it been so, then Muhammad Jamil himself in his letter, dated22nd May, 1961' Ex. would not have emphatically denied having given oral instructions to the Bank for transfer of Rs.10,000 from the account of the Bank. Again on 30-6-1961 Muhammad Jamil addressed a letter Ex. to the Bank in which he categorically stated that the amount of Rs.10,000 was arbitrarily debited in their account on 16-9-1960. In the correspondence that followed right up to 21-3-1963, both Muhammad Jamil and after his death Muhammad Saeed, had been repudiating the claim of the Bank that there were any instructions on behalf of the firm for debiting,Rs.10,000 on 16-9-1960 from their account. In the face of these documents which consist of correspondence between the respondent's firm and the Bank and which has not been denied by the Bank, it cannot be understood that in July, 1961 deceased Muhammad Jamil would have confirmed the debit of Rs.10,000 which related to 16-9-1961. Thus the endorsement on Ex.32 is of no help to the Bank and does note stop the respondent from claiming the amount of Rs.10,000 which in view of the lengthy correspondence which ensued between the parties for about two years, 1s proved to have been wrongly debited from the account of the respondents. 10. Mr. Abdul Marked, learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the judgment of the First Appellate Court should be set aside on the ground that a very important document namely Ex.32 has not been taken into consideration. In support of this plea he has relied on the case of Muhammad Afar and 7 others v. Allah Pitta and 13 others j- PLD 1970S CM R118. This decision related to second appeal under section 100, C.P.C. in which it was held by the Supreme Court that non-consideration of material evidence would vitiate finding of fact and could be interfered with in second appeal. He.has also relied on the case of Mayan Goal v. Marian Bear PLD 1969 S C 617. This case also related to second appeal under section 100, C.P.C. It was held by the Supreme Court in this case that finding of fact of First Appellate Court, which is at variance with that of TNA Court, ordinarily prevails, but it would not possess the same, value or sanctity as of concurrent findings. It was further held that if finding of Lower Appellate Court is not supported by evidence on record or if the Appellate Court to take into account material evidence or not revealing logical basis for differ mg from finding of the trial Court, then such finding of the First Appellate Court can be interfered with in the second appeal. 11. The only piece of evidence which, according to Mr. Abdul Marked Khan, has not been considered by the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 340?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 340 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-03-25): evidence or not revealing logical basis for differ mg from finding of the trial Court, then such finding of the First Appellate Court can be interfered with in the second appeal. 11. The only piece of evidence which, according to Mr. Abdul Marked Khan, has not been considered by the learned appellate Court is Ex.32. It his been shown in para. No. above that even if the document Ex.32 had been considered, the result would not have been any different. The above decisions are therefore, of no assistance to the learned counsel 111 therefore, do not find any reason to take exception to the view that has been taken by the First Appellate Court. Consequently the appeal fails and is dismissed. As none was present for the respondents, hence there shall be no order as to costs. ' M.Y.H. Appeal dismissed

Question: What is case 1984 MLD 202 about?
Answer: Case 1984 MLD 202 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-04-01. The case involved ABDUL BAQI KHAN—PETITIONER VERSUS ' THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARDAND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199- DISPLACED' PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - 8.29. The case was heard by SALEEM AKHTART.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: In case 1984 MLD 202, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199- DISPLACED' PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - 8.29. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-04-01.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 MLD 202 were: KHALILUR REHMAN FOR PETITIONER. WAJIHUDDIN AHMED FOR RESPONDENT NO.2. ABDUL NASEER KHAN FOR RESPONDENT NO.3.. The judges presiding were: SALEEM AKHTART.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 MLD 202 were: ABDUL BAQI KHAN—PETITIONER VERSUS ' THE CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARDAND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 MLD 202.
Answer: The petitioner has challenged the order passed by the respondents Nos.] 2 whereby the respondent No.3 has been permitted to occupy a portion of the courtyard. The Properties bearing Plots No. R.C. 12/37A and 12/37B, situated in Ran chore Quarter, Karachi, were treated as evacuee properties and acquired in the Compensation Pool. It has been stated by the Petitioner that plot No. RC. is dependent from plot No. 12/37B and separated by Tea Street. The property on Plot No. RC 12/37A consists of a double storeyed building having three tenements on the.first floor numbered as G/l, G/2 and G/3 in the records of the Custodian Evacuee Property. The tenement bearing No. G/I and G/2 were transferred to the petitioner under a PTO dated 10-5-1960 followed by an approved plan demarcating the said tenement and finally a PTD was issued on 8-6-1965 and the petitioner accordingly got his name mutated in the records of rights and the relevant records of various authorities. After PTO was issued in favor of the petitioner he filed proceedings under section 29 of the Displaced Persons (Rehab. Comp.) Act, 1958 against Marauding and others for their ejectment by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner who by his order, dated 30th April, 1962 rejected it and the petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional Settlement Commissioner. In those proceedings Marauding arid others took the stand that Property R.C. 12/37A was Evacuee Trust Property. Notice was sent to the Trust Board which was represented by a counsel before the Additional Settlement Commissioner, who by his order dated 4- 6-1963 held that property No. being a trust property is separated by Tea Street, and has no. Concern with Plot No.R.C. A and consequently accepted the appeal and directed the lower Court to proceed with the application under section 29 filed by the petitioner. The petitioner, however, served a notice under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act and on refusal of Marauding the petitioner filed an ejectment application before the Controller. In these proceedings the Controller directed Marauding to. deposit arrears of rent amounting to Rs.4,400 before 15-4-1975. As Merrajuddin defaulted in. payment of rent application for striking off the defense was filed which was granted on 2-8-1975 and Marauding was directed to handover possession by 30th August, 1975. It is pleaded that during the pendency of the proceedings before the Controller, the Respondent No.3 stored some planks with Merajuddin in the courtyard and approached the. Deputy, Administrator the respondent No.2 for regularization of his possession in respect of property No. R.C. without disclosing that the disputed portion was part and parcel of 12/37A™* nor it was disclosed that the disputed portion was transferred to the petitioner. An ex parte order was obtained from the respondent No. on 6-2-1975; whereby,th$ occupation of portion of R.C. was regularized and rent was proposed to be charged. The respondent No.3 thereafter stated collecting material with object to raise unauthorized construction IRR the courtyard. The petitioner filed an appeal before the Administrator Evacuee Property* Trust Board* Karachi. The Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board considering the confused state of facts inspected the site and by order dated, 14-4-1975 held that the respondent No.3 was not in possession as claimed by him and set aside the order of the Deputy Administrator, dated 6-2-1975. He also directed the Respondent - No. to seek determination of the status of property as evacuee, trust property.-The respondent No,3 filed an appeal before the respondent No.1 which according to the petitioner was -not a Trust Property and the action could be taken as PTD had been issued to the petitioner. The petitioner challenged the jurisdiction of the respondent No.1 However the respondent No.1! on the basis of possession of the father of the respondent No.3 on the roof of G/3 of R.C.12/37A allowed, him to be entitled to use a portion in the courtyard for earning his livelihood. Against this order a Revision was filed’ before;>the Jolt Secretary who held that as the status of the property had >not been determined he had no jurisdiction in the matter. The respondent No.l] was again, approached by< the petitioner and by order, dated 15-2-1977 he refused to withdraw or- cancel his previous order, dated, 25-5-1976. The petitioner has therefore* challenged these orders in this petition. Petition No. has. been.filed by Bashir Ahmed who is respondent No.3 in Petition.- He has pleaded that he and his late father were residing in a portion of the first floor of property No.RC12/37A bearing No. and he is carrying on business in a portion of the property on the first floor’ fac mg the ma'am road for the last 30 years. It has been pleaded that these "properties were trust properties, and could not be transferred by the Settlement Department* nor could be taken in compensation and Rehabilitation Pool It-is further, pleaded that his father was occupy mg portion of. plot No.R.C. A and has. applied for transfer of property, but as it was evacuee trust property application was not entertained. It is further stated that his possession was regularized on 6-2-1976* but Abdul Bali predecessor of. Abdul Had! Khan respondent. No.3 (petitioner in Petition No. ) filed an appeal which was allowed. Thereafter an appeal was filed which was allowed in favor, of, Bashir, it has been pleaded that PTO has been illegally obtained by late Abdul Bali Khan. On the application of the Deputy Administrator Evacuee Property respondent No.2 the Chairman Evacuee Trust, Property decided the matter by order dated 29-1-1978 holding that R.C. 12/37A was evacuee. Trust property and declared it to be evacuee trust property under section 8 of, Act XIII. of 1975. Bashir has also challenged that the PTO and site plan issued in favor of Abdul Bali is illegal and void. It has been further prayed that orders dated 29-1-78 and 27-11-1978 are illegal and erroneous. I ‘' The admitted position seems to be that both the parties now agree that the property is an evacuee trust property. There is no dispute on this post, and therefore, all objections in that regard-raised by the petitioner MN Petition No. are of no consequence. As regards Petition No. the learned counsel for Abdul Bali has contended that Bashir has no locus standi as he is not a transferee of any portion of the property, and the. order dated 6-2-1975 was set aside by the Administrator and the respondent No.]| also has not regularized his possession, nor there was any order by the Chairman in his favor and hence it is stated that the order passed by the respondent No.l] was merely on a compassionate ground and has no legal basis. From the statement of fact and the history of litigation it is plain that now the only dispute remains in respect of the portion of courtyard occupied by respondent No.3 Bashir* He has not made any claim of any nature whatsoever on the property transferred to the petitioner. Throughout the entire litigation he has resisted the claim of the petitioner in respect of portion of courtyard occupied by him. In these circumstances,v I do. not find much force in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent No.3 that Bashir is entitled to seek relief for the cancellation of P T 0 and other title* documents issued to the petitioner by the Settlement Authorities. Now coming to the disputed land the courtyard there seems to be conflicting claims. Bashir has stated that his father was residing on the first floor and that he had been occupying the land for the last 30 years. He has also stated that he had applied for its transfer, but in fact no document of any nature was produced whatsoever at any stage and the only finding in his favor given by the respondent No.1 is that he is' occupy mg a very small corner portion of the courtyard for carrying on his business. The respondent No.2 before whom the matter was proceeding had inspected the site and even considered the rival claims as the possession of Bashir had been regularized ex parte. He had come to the conclusion that the two properties and 12/37A were two distinct and different properties. He had also noted that the record was silent about the possession of. the respondent No.l on the disputed portion of the courtyard. Bashir (Respondent No.3) only resided with his father on the first floor and therefore, it was held that the respondent No.3 does not have any locus standi. The respondent No.l, however summarized the situation in the following manner:- "It has been established that tenements G/l and G/2 have been transferred to Mr. Abdul Bali Khan, or it may be said that Mr. Abdul Bali is the occupant of the said two tenements in property No. 12/37A. Mr. Irshad Hussain is the occupant of tenement No.G/3,in the same building. There is more than one ( family residing on the first floor of this property and among them Mr. Allah Baths, the petitioner's father. The existence of this tenant in the building is proved by the record and the fact that he has paid rent for several years. Photographs have been placed on record confirming that ramshackle structures have been set by people who. live on the first floor. The fact remains that there are people who do live there. The entrance to the house is through the courtyard where Mr. Muhammad Bashir occupies a smalbycorner. and through the front verandah’ where the stairs to the. first floor are located. Thai courtyard, has therefore to be considered a* place, for the common use of all those who, live in the building, Mr. Muhammad Bashir therefore as one of the occupants has the right to use the courtyard as much as the other tenant, Mr;Abdul Bali Khan, of his tenancy is disputed, his father's occupation of a part of the main building has been established. Thong;h’Mr. Bashir has -filed affidavits of local occupants to; support ‘his tenancy his claim to use the courtyard for work is supported by his father's presence in the building. This occupation AR\d used of this'portion by Mr. Bashir is subject to the bye-laws of the Karachi Municipal Corporation. But there is] hardly any, justification, under the circumstances of the case to prevent him from using the small\ nook in the courtyard for4 earning his live. The appears therefore disposed of accordingly.11 ': I. 1114 J he. main ground, for. granting permission! to Bashir to. Use the courtyard for business purposes seems to be that, his father was. occupy NG a tenement on. The first floor. In fact, it was.a teacher on the roof:BF G/3 and therefore. it.was observed; :that every party. who has; been residing is. Entitled to a-right to'use the courtyard. The report proceeded further that the respondent No.3 should be allowed to continue to earn his; livelihood. The order seems to be completely contradictory, inasmuch as the only night if at all conferred on Bashir,> the respondent to.3s by virtue of his father's possession of a tenement on the first floor in which he is alleged for reside is that he; can use the courtyard like other allottees and transferees’ residing in different tenements. The permission to use the portion of courtyard to 'carry on business does not seem.to have any legal justification. In titfer second‘order. dated 15-2-1977 ’the respondent No.] has proceeded,on completely different grounds' relating to the declaration! of the status of property.’ In view of these facts the order, dated 25-5-1976 granting respondent No.3 Mohammad "Bashir a right to occupy and carry in business in a portion of the courtyard was passed without lawful Authority. To that extent the Petition Nb. is allowed and the Petition Nb. is dismissed; with no order as to cost. I\Part‘.1

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): The petitioner has challenged the order passed by the respondents Nos.] 2 whereby the respondent No.3 has been permitted to occupy a portion of the courtyard. The Properties bearing Plots No. R.C. 12/37A and 12/37B, situated in Ran chore Quarter, Karachi, were treated as evacuee properties and acquired in the Compensation Pool. It has been stated by the Petitioner that plot No. RC. is dependent from plot No. 12/37B and separated by Tea Street. The property on Plot No. RC 12/37A consists of a double storeyed building having three tenements on the.first floor numbered as G/l, G/2 and G/3 in the records of the Custodian Evacuee Property. The tenement bearing No. G/I and G/2 were transferred to the petitioner under a PTO dated 10-5-1960 followed by an approved plan demarcating the said tenement and finally a PTD was issued on 8-6-1965 and the petitioner accordingly got his name mutated in the records of rights and the relevant records of various authorities. After PTO was issued in favor of the petitioner he filed proceedings under section 29 of the Displaced Persons (Rehab. Comp.) Act, 1958 against Marauding and others for their ejectment by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner who by his order, dated 30th April, 1962 rejected it and the petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional Settlement Commissioner. In those proceedings Marauding arid others took the stand that Property R.C. 12/37A was Evacuee Trust Property. Notice was sent to the Trust Board which was represented by a counsel before the Additional Settlement Commissioner, who by his order dated 4- 6-1963 held that property No. being a trust property is separated by Tea Street, and has no. Concern with Plot No.R.C. A and consequently accepted the appeal and directed the lower Court to proceed with the application under section 29 filed by the petitioner. The petitioner, however, served a notice under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act and on refusal of Marauding the petitioner filed an ejectment application before the Controller. In these proceedings the Controller directed Marauding to. deposit arrears of rent amounting to Rs.4,400 before 15-4-1975. As Merrajuddin defaulted in. payment of rent application for striking off the defense was filed which was granted on 2-8-1975 and Marauding was directed to handover possession by 30th August, 1975. It is pleaded that during the pendency of the proceedings before the Controller, the Respondent No.3 stored some planks with Merajuddin in the courtyard and approached the. Deputy, Administrator the respondent No.2 for regularization of his possession in respect of property No. R.C. without disclosing that the disputed portion was part and parcel of 12/37A™* nor it was disclosed that the disputed portion was transferred to the petitioner. An ex parte order was obtained from the respondent No. on 6-2-1975; whereby,th$ occupation of portion of R.C. was regularized and rent was proposed to be charged. The respondent No.3 thereafter stated collecting material with object to raise unauthorized construction IRR the courtyard. The petitioner filed an appeal before the Administrator

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): ex parte order was obtained from the respondent No. on 6-2-1975; whereby,th$ occupation of portion of R.C. was regularized and rent was proposed to be charged. The respondent No.3 thereafter stated collecting material with object to raise unauthorized construction IRR the courtyard. The petitioner filed an appeal before the Administrator Evacuee Property* Trust Board* Karachi. The Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board considering the confused state of facts inspected the site and by order dated, 14-4-1975 held that the respondent No.3 was not in possession as claimed by him and set aside the order of the Deputy Administrator, dated 6-2-1975. He also directed the Respondent - No. to seek determination of the status of property as evacuee, trust property.-The respondent No,3 filed an appeal before the respondent No.1 which according to the petitioner was -not a Trust Property and the action could be taken as PTD had been issued to the petitioner. The petitioner challenged the jurisdiction of the respondent No.1 However the respondent No.1! on the basis of possession of the father of the respondent No.3 on the roof of G/3 of R.C.12/37A allowed, him to be entitled to use a portion in the courtyard for earning his livelihood. Against this order a Revision was filed’ before;>the Jolt Secretary who held that as the status of the property had >not been determined he had no jurisdiction in the matter. The respondent No.l] was again, approached by< the petitioner and by order, dated 15-2-1977 he refused to withdraw or- cancel his previous order, dated, 25-5-1976. The petitioner has therefore* challenged these orders in this petition. Petition No. has. been.filed by Bashir Ahmed who is respondent No.3 in Petition.- He has pleaded that he and his late father were residing in a portion of the first floor of property No.RC12/37A bearing No. and he is carrying on business in a portion of the property on the first floor’ fac mg the ma'am road for the last 30 years. It has been pleaded that these "properties were trust properties, and could not be transferred by the Settlement Department* nor could be taken in compensation and Rehabilitation Pool It-is further, pleaded that his father was occupy mg portion of. plot No.R.C. A and has. applied for transfer of property, but as it was evacuee trust property application was not entertained. It is further stated that his possession was regularized on 6-2-1976* but Abdul Bali predecessor of. Abdul Had! Khan respondent. No.3 (petitioner in Petition No. ) filed an appeal which was allowed. Thereafter an appeal was filed which was allowed in favor, of, Bashir, it has been pleaded that PTO has been illegally obtained by late Abdul Bali Khan. On the application of the Deputy Administrator Evacuee Property respondent No.2 the Chairman Evacuee Trust, Property decided the matter by order dated 29-1-1978 holding that R.C. 12/37A was evacuee. Trust property and declared it to be evacuee trust property under section 8 of, Act XIII. of 1975. Bashir has also challenged that the PTO and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): Deputy Administrator Evacuee Property respondent No.2 the Chairman Evacuee Trust, Property decided the matter by order dated 29-1-1978 holding that R.C. 12/37A was evacuee. Trust property and declared it to be evacuee trust property under section 8 of, Act XIII. of 1975. Bashir has also challenged that the PTO and site plan issued in favor of Abdul Bali is illegal and void. It has been further prayed that orders dated 29-1-78 and 27-11-1978 are illegal and erroneous. I ‘' The admitted position seems to be that both the parties now agree that the property is an evacuee trust property. There is no dispute on this post, and therefore, all objections in that regard-raised by the petitioner MN Petition No. are of no consequence. As regards Petition No. the learned counsel for Abdul Bali has contended that Bashir has no locus standi as he is not a transferee of any portion of the property, and the. order dated 6-2-1975 was set aside by the Administrator and the respondent No.]| also has not regularized his possession, nor there was any order by the Chairman in his favor and hence it is stated that the order passed by the respondent No.l] was merely on a compassionate ground and has no legal basis. From the statement of fact and the history of litigation it is plain that now the only dispute remains in respect of the portion of courtyard occupied by respondent No.3 Bashir* He has not made any claim of any nature whatsoever on the property transferred to the petitioner. Throughout the entire litigation he has resisted the claim of the petitioner in respect of portion of courtyard occupied by him. In these circumstances,v I do. not find much force in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent No.3 that Bashir is entitled to seek relief for the cancellation of P T 0 and other title* documents issued to the petitioner by the Settlement Authorities. Now coming to the disputed land the courtyard there seems to be conflicting claims. Bashir has stated that his father was residing on the first floor and that he had been occupying the land for the last 30 years. He has also stated that he had applied for its transfer, but in fact no document of any nature was produced whatsoever at any stage and the only finding in his favor given by the respondent No.1 is that he is' occupy mg a very small corner portion of the courtyard for carrying on his business. The respondent No.2 before whom the matter was proceeding had inspected the site and even considered the rival claims as the possession of Bashir had been regularized ex parte. He had come to the conclusion that the two properties and 12/37A were two distinct and different properties. He had also noted that the record was silent about the possession of. the respondent No.l on the disputed portion of the courtyard. Bashir (Respondent No.3) only resided with his father on the first

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): come to the conclusion that the two properties and 12/37A were two distinct and different properties. He had also noted that the record was silent about the possession of. the respondent No.l on the disputed portion of the courtyard. Bashir (Respondent No.3) only resided with his father on the first floor and therefore, it was held that the respondent No.3 does not have any locus standi. The respondent No.l, however summarized the situation in the following manner:- "It has been established that tenements G/l and G/2 have been transferred to Mr. Abdul Bali Khan, or it may be said that Mr. Abdul Bali is the occupant of the said two tenements in property No. 12/37A. Mr. Irshad Hussain is the occupant of tenement No.G/3,in the same building. There is more than one ( family residing on the first floor of this property and among them Mr. Allah Baths, the petitioner's father. The existence of this tenant in the building is proved by the record and the fact that he has paid rent for several years. Photographs have been placed on record confirming that ramshackle structures have been set by people who. live on the first floor. The fact remains that there are people who do live there. The entrance to the house is through the courtyard where Mr. Muhammad Bashir occupies a smalbycorner. and through the front verandah’ where the stairs to the. first floor are located. Thai courtyard, has therefore to be considered a* place, for the common use of all those who, live in the building, Mr. Muhammad Bashir therefore as one of the occupants has the right to use the courtyard as much as the other tenant, Mr;Abdul Bali Khan, of his tenancy is disputed, his father's occupation of a part of the main building has been established. Thong;h’Mr. Bashir has -filed affidavits of local occupants to; support ‘his tenancy his claim to use the courtyard for work is supported by his father's presence in the building. This occupation AR\d used of this'portion by Mr. Bashir is subject to the bye-laws of the Karachi Municipal Corporation. But there is] hardly any, justification, under the circumstances of the case to prevent him from using the small\ nook in the courtyard for4 earning his live. The appears therefore disposed of accordingly.11 ': I. 1114 J he. main ground, for. granting permission! to Bashir to. Use the courtyard for business purposes seems to be that, his father was. occupy NG a tenement on. The first floor. In fact, it was.a teacher on the roof:BF G/3 and therefore. it.was observed; :that every party. who has; been residing is. Entitled to a-right to'use the courtyard. The report proceeded further that the respondent No.3 should be allowed to continue to earn his; livelihood. The order seems to be completely contradictory, inasmuch as the only night if at all conferred on Bashir,> the respondent to.3s by virtue of his father's possession of a tenement on the first floor in which he is alleged for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 202?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 202 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-04-01): No.3 should be allowed to continue to earn his; livelihood. The order seems to be completely contradictory, inasmuch as the only night if at all conferred on Bashir,> the respondent to.3s by virtue of his father's possession of a tenement on the first floor in which he is alleged for reside is that he; can use the courtyard like other allottees and transferees’ residing in different tenements. The permission to use the portion of courtyard to 'carry on business does not seem.to have any legal justification. In titfer second‘order. dated 15-2-1977 ’the respondent No.] has proceeded,on completely different grounds' relating to the declaration! of the status of property.’ In view of these facts the order, dated 25-5-1976 granting respondent No.3 Mohammad "Bashir a right to occupy and carry in business in a portion of the courtyard was passed without lawful Authority. To that extent the Petition Nb. is allowed and the Petition Nb. is dismissed; with no order as to cost. I\Part‘.1

Question: What is case 1984 MLD 607 about?
Answer: Case 1984 MLD 607 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1984-05-13. The case involved ABDUL HANNAN KHAN PETITIONER VERSUS CHAIRMAN EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (I OF 1981) - ARTICLE 9. The case was heard by IBADAT YAR KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: In case 1984 MLD 607, the court applied the following statutes: PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (I OF 1981) - ARTICLE 9. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1984-05-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1984 MLD 607 were: MANZOOR-UL-HAQ FOR PETITIONER.S.H.MUJTABA FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: IBADAT YAR KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: The parties in case 1984 MLD 607 were: ABDUL HANNAN KHAN PETITIONER VERSUS CHAIRMAN EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1984 MLD 607.
Answer: *. Petitioner Abdul Hanna migrated to Pakistan from India in 1947 in the wake of partition. He tried to establish himself by obtain possession of a Shop No.N.P/101/II(GI-VL,) Napier Quarters, Sara fa Bazaar, Method, Karachi. Formally the' shop was occupied by Hindu Evacuee, who were running the business of Sweetmeat in TT. Thus, it was used as a Hallie shop. After the Hindus migrated to India, petitioners possession was regularized by an allotment order from the Rent Controller, Karachi who in those early days was the competent authority to issue allotments. The petitioner started paying rents to the Custodian as the shop was treated as Evacuee Property. Sometimes in 1963 the Evacuee Trust Property Committee raised- a claim that the shop was a Trust Property and forced the petitioner to pay rents to them. This resulted in a clash of merest between the Settlement Authority who were treating the property as Evacuee Property acquired by the Government under section 3 of the Displaced Persons Rehabilitation and Settlement Act, and the Evacuee Trust Property Committee who were claiming that it was a property belonging to a Hindu Trust. ms,3yan$ :order dated '7L21968-i thDeputySettiem rafted city‘to fife ‘'‘antirust Property wfisotfeldthat ¥iricW1936it« Wade'the Sr6p8rt$iofKilivisual o and after* the'ET‘M'gptftioVi8Srit‘J was Created as'l facile *-Broperty1 11 was fort HEV? EF trial the* *-prop'efriywas 'fife q re if b y t* fire Government((Under sections 3-tpf the'edit-placedPeWdns G64 flpeHsafton*” Trr*d Rehabilitation Act and formed a part of the Compensate Tigris-p 661 available for disposal according to law. The,petitioner'was;interested purchasing Owners OE VEST SY iji-mo1& v.".5yt>s 1--".* ° this property. The Settlement authorities agreed to dispose of the Pprbpertytt to.the petitioner* The petitioner paid Rs. 1,89,072 to ‘the Settlement Department, and they transferred the property to the petitioner. The petitioner thus became a full-fledged owner of the shop and has been and continues MTB be-in-possession of the same till now. -~ Some time in 1982 the respondents*! moved the respondent No,2 to treat the property as Evacuee Trust Property:. The petitioner received a notice of hearing of ‘the case and ANJ 25-10-1982. The petitioner V w appeared before the;respondent Nb.|v? \Who JhefirdHthe parties and closed the. case the same day. Request of the petitioner for further time to produce more evidence was reefed' and the respondent-No.] after closing the J RFL!Try smJjilwHDfuS-S Tupi >/3.3 JU31 }iris/up order was communicated to the respondent No.2 who of his letter dated 15-2-1983, informed t'\spirit'Io.ti?Bertha'.t the case at Lahore and_the property was held,to be an Evacuee. Jr rust Property. ‘The petitioner received this information on 6r2-1983. A1photo color herder passed by respondent No.l was >also.enclosed GK YFAFIW. UiCflHw Norma noise j.< UNC> OTN petitioner {.wanted travail thirty,Pi.diBrssitiey [deposited a.sum(EDF «RsU30qgiteNMibnaHB‘funk-of Paris?an> onset'x2f98.31yDn 1222:198*3> he Hettie'after copies and.enclaedbthe/ireGeipt'tofj sBQ0slecdpyinchiiargeS which he" FIA'd obtained from the Bank. The petitioner.receivedthfe,certifie,d at Copy of, 77715 "TEF'7 1. (A £’Jars.7- 'Ms*1 A'U's*,u?r',ci'( the order dated 10-1-1983 from Lahore on,10-4.-1983.;, FRT,>is\ in, V* -4 Walsh FIV In the meantime, without waiting, furl the-certified Copy-from Lahore, the petitioner rely mg on thephqstatrcopy of the order, despatched the revision to the respondent to on 8-3-1983;- In this revision he explained; why uncertified'BPY; of )*the' order"was tot enclosed - and NDT'Ki tojifttenthefia-nice *as soonfcasit was recetvedfrom LAH'ore ?v AS stated;* above an application for certified, copy had,already, been sent t.o Lahore ‘along with the Bank receipt,the um. of Rs,30 being the'copying charges. This.certified,copy _ was received,byt!TNE.;petitioner on 10-41983 )and before4 the" petitioner could despatch} TT to Respondent No. in terms of the. Undertakings in the revision, he had : filed before fit*!. Vi *Jj494 J f J 'SSW 27.101 m ft v J '« W* <I J f3? Ms R,e:visionHEetitionhas,rtheen presented'Lomé today 5IET P Lahore s RS - dated,-;loth? January’ 1983regarding the « status "of property bearing -p.y; Git yr? Jury,eyTr- Np.;V/101htM -situated fire Sara fa'iBtfZ&rva'Rey'dhotis given;IFP Petition're-hdtdOrivincing'! It is not possible for me to entertain it at this stage. The Revision Petition is dismissed on the grounds of being time-barred. Parties to be formed." The perusal of the above order would show that the respondent No.3 has failed to bestow the attention and the care that the situation demanded. In para. of the Revision filed before him and quoted in this petition the petitioner had detailed the circumstances under which the Revision was being filed before the respondent No.3. The respondent No.3 seems to have completely ignored that the order passed on 10-1- 1983 was served on the petitioner on 16- 2-1983. The respondent also has failed to notice that the petitioner deposited the copying fee in the IBANK on 21-2-1983 and in spite of curfew in the city and without waiting for the certified copy filed the Revision on 8-3-1984. The certified copy of order which, according to the rules is a necessary requirement for pursuing the remedy of Revision was not available to the petitioner till 10-4- 1983. K There is force in the contention of the learned counsel that time should commence from, the date when the certified copy of the order was received by the petitioner at Lahore and not from 10-1-1983 when the order was passed. In this view of the matter the Revision is not only within time but has been filed premature. The only time that can be counted against the petitioner is between 16-2-1983. When he received the order dated 10-1;-1983 and 22-2-1983 when he applied for certified copy. Limitation would remain suspended till the certified copy is delivered to petitioner. And admittedly this was not delivered to the petitioner before 10-4-1983. But the petitioner had long before filed HIA Revision on 8-3- 1983. The respondent No. has unfortunately taken a very harsh and judicious view, and this view is against law and equity. The Petition is, therefore, allowed. The order passed by respondent No.3 is quashed. The respondent -No.3 is directed to dispose of the Revision on merits after allowing full opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. Petition is allowed. Case remanded to the respondent No.3 for early disposal according to law. MLL Petition allowed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 607 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-05-13): *. Petitioner Abdul Hanna migrated to Pakistan from India in 1947 in the wake of partition. He tried to establish himself by obtain possession of a Shop No.N.P/101/II(GI-VL,) Napier Quarters, Sara fa Bazaar, Method, Karachi. Formally the' shop was occupied by Hindu Evacuee, who were running the business of Sweetmeat in TT. Thus, it was used as a Hallie shop. After the Hindus migrated to India, petitioners possession was regularized by an allotment order from the Rent Controller, Karachi who in those early days was the competent authority to issue allotments. The petitioner started paying rents to the Custodian as the shop was treated as Evacuee Property. Sometimes in 1963 the Evacuee Trust Property Committee raised- a claim that the shop was a Trust Property and forced the petitioner to pay rents to them. This resulted in a clash of merest between the Settlement Authority who were treating the property as Evacuee Property acquired by the Government under section 3 of the Displaced Persons Rehabilitation and Settlement Act, and the Evacuee Trust Property Committee who were claiming that it was a property belonging to a Hindu Trust. ms,3yan$ :order dated '7L21968-i thDeputySettiem rafted city‘to fife ‘'‘antirust Property wfisotfeldthat ¥iricW1936it« Wade'the Sr6p8rt$iofKilivisual o and after* the'ET‘M'gptftioVi8Srit‘J was Created as'l facile *-Broperty1 11 was fort HEV? EF trial the* *-prop'efriywas 'fife q re if b y t* fire Government((Under sections 3-tpf the'edit-placedPeWdns G64 flpeHsafton*” Trr*d Rehabilitation Act and formed a part of the Compensate Tigris-p 661 available for disposal according to law. The,petitioner'was;interested purchasing Owners OE VEST SY iji-mo1& v.".5yt>s 1--".* ° this property. The Settlement authorities agreed to dispose of the Pprbpertytt to.the petitioner* The petitioner paid Rs. 1,89,072 to ‘the Settlement Department, and they transferred the property to the petitioner. The petitioner thus became a full-fledged owner of the shop and has been and continues MTB be-in-possession of the same till now. -~ Some time in 1982 the respondents*! moved the respondent No,2 to treat the property as Evacuee Trust Property:. The petitioner received a notice of hearing of ‘the case and ANJ 25-10-1982. The petitioner V w appeared before the;respondent Nb.|v? \Who JhefirdHthe parties and closed the. case the same day. Request of the petitioner for further time to produce more evidence was reefed' and the respondent-No.] after closing the J RFL!Try smJjilwHDfuS-S Tupi >/3.3 JU31 }iris/up order was communicated to the respondent No.2 who of his letter dated 15-2-1983, informed t'\spirit'Io.ti?Bertha'.t the case at Lahore and_the property was held,to be an Evacuee. Jr rust Property. ‘The petitioner received this information on 6r2-1983. A1photo color herder passed by respondent No.l was >also.enclosed GK YFAFIW. UiCflHw Norma noise j.< UNC> OTN petitioner {.wanted travail thirty,Pi.diBrssitiey [deposited a.sum(EDF «RsU30qgiteNMibnaHB‘funk-of Paris?an> onset'x2f98.31yDn 1222:198*3> he Hettie'after copies and.enclaedbthe/ireGeipt'tofj sBQ0slecdpyinchiiargeS which he" FIA'd obtained from the Bank. The petitioner.receivedthfe,certifie,d at Copy of, 77715 "TEF'7 1. (A £’Jars.7- 'Ms*1 A'U's*,u?r',ci'( the order dated 10-1-1983 from Lahore on,10-4.-1983.;, FRT,>is\ in, V* -4 Walsh FIV In the meantime, without waiting, furl the-certified Copy-from Lahore, the petitioner rely

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 607 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-05-13): 1222:198*3> he Hettie'after copies and.enclaedbthe/ireGeipt'tofj sBQ0slecdpyinchiiargeS which he" FIA'd obtained from the Bank. The petitioner.receivedthfe,certifie,d at Copy of, 77715 "TEF'7 1. (A £’Jars.7- 'Ms*1 A'U's*,u?r',ci'( the order dated 10-1-1983 from Lahore on,10-4.-1983.;, FRT,>is\ in, V* -4 Walsh FIV In the meantime, without waiting, furl the-certified Copy-from Lahore, the petitioner rely mg on thephqstatrcopy of the order, despatched the revision to the respondent to on 8-3-1983;- In this revision he explained; why uncertified'BPY; of )*the' order"was tot enclosed - and NDT'Ki tojifttenthefia-nice *as soonfcasit was recetvedfrom LAH'ore ?v AS stated;* above an application for certified, copy had,already, been sent t.o Lahore ‘along with the Bank receipt,the um. of Rs,30 being the'copying charges. This.certified,copy _ was received,byt!TNE.;petitioner on 10-41983 )and before4 the" petitioner could despatch} TT to Respondent No. in terms of the. Undertakings in the revision, he had : filed before fit*!. Vi *Jj494 J f J 'SSW 27.101 m ft v J '« W* <I J f3? Ms R,e:visionHEetitionhas,rtheen presented'Lomé today 5IET P Lahore s RS - dated,-;loth? January’ 1983regarding the « status "of property bearing -p.y; Git yr? Jury,eyTr- Np.;V/101htM -situated fire Sara fa'iBtfZ&rva'Rey'dhotis given;IFP Petition're-hdtdOrivincing'! It is not possible for me to entertain it at this stage. The Revision Petition is dismissed on the grounds of being time-barred. Parties to be formed." The perusal of the above order would show that the respondent No.3 has failed to bestow the attention and the care that the situation demanded. In para. of the Revision filed before him and quoted in this petition the petitioner had detailed the circumstances under which the Revision was being filed before the respondent No.3. The respondent No.3 seems to have completely ignored that the order passed on 10-1- 1983 was served on the petitioner on 16- 2-1983. The respondent also has failed to notice that the petitioner deposited the copying fee in the IBANK on 21-2-1983 and in spite of curfew in the city and without waiting for the certified copy filed the Revision on 8-3-1984. The certified copy of order which, according to the rules is a necessary requirement for pursuing the remedy of Revision was not available to the petitioner till 10-4- 1983. K There is force in the contention of the learned counsel that time should commence from, the date when the certified copy of the order was received by the petitioner at Lahore and not from 10-1-1983 when the order was passed. In this view of the matter the Revision is not only within time but has been filed premature. The only time that can be counted against the petitioner is between 16-2-1983. When he received the order dated 10-1;-1983 and 22-2-1983 when he applied for certified copy. Limitation would remain suspended till the certified copy is delivered to petitioner. And admittedly this was not delivered to the petitioner before 10-4-1983. But the petitioner had long before filed HIA Revision on 8-3- 1983. The respondent No. has unfortunately taken a very harsh and judicious view, and this view is against law

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1984 MLD 607?
Answer: From case 1984 MLD 607 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1984-05-13): suspended till the certified copy is delivered to petitioner. And admittedly this was not delivered to the petitioner before 10-4-1983. But the petitioner had long before filed HIA Revision on 8-3- 1983. The respondent No. has unfortunately taken a very harsh and judicious view, and this view is against law and equity. The Petition is, therefore, allowed. The order passed by respondent No.3 is quashed. The respondent -No.3 is directed to dispose of the Revision on merits after allowing full opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. Petition is allowed. Case remanded to the respondent No.3 for early disposal according to law. MLL Petition allowed

Question: What is case 1971 PLD 779 about?
Answer: Case 1971 PLD 779 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1971-08-20. The case involved FAZAL DIN AND 14 OTHERS—APPELLANTS VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE AND 21 OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ARTICLE 98 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERLY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 2(3), 7,16 AND 22 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1971/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_779.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:52 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/197 1/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_779.html. The case was heard by '". MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALI, SAJJAD AHMAD AND M.R. KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: In case 1971 PLD 779, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1962 - ARTICLE 98 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERLY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 2(3), 7,16 AND 22 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1971/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_779.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:52 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/197 1/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_779.html. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1971-08-20.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 PLD 779 were: BASHIR AHMAD, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT (MAHMOOD AHMAD QURESHI, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH HIM) INSTRUCTED BY MASUD AKHTAR, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR APPELLANTS. MIAN MUHAMMAD SHAFT, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY MUHAMMAD NAZAR KHAN, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 22.. The judges presiding were: '". MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALI, SAJJAD AHMAD AND M.R. KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 PLD 779 were: FAZAL DIN AND 14 OTHERS—APPELLANTS VERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE AND 21 OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 PLD 779.
Answer: Salad Ahmad, X—The brief history of this case, which has been brought to this Court by special leave, is as follows: The land in dispute was originally held by the Sukkur Barrage authorities, and was granted to some Hindus, who paid a few installments for acquiring proprietary rights their, but defaulted in making payment of the remain mg, and subsequently became evacuees on the Partition of the subcontinent. The appellants, who are refugees from India, on arrival in Pakistan in the year 1948, were temporarily allotted, these lands by the Rehabilitation Department. It appears that the Barrage authorities, acting on the terms and conditions of the grants made to the Hindu evacuees, cancelled the grants and resumed the lands on the 26th of April 1949. Following,this cancellation," "the' Rehabilitation Commissioner informed the Barrage authorities on the 22nd of May 1951, that the lands in dispute belonged to the Barrage authorities and that they could deal v/with then as they liked. Upon this, the Barrage authorities made fresh grants of these lands in favor of the appellants on payment of the initial installment of ETH of the price. Notwithstanding this disposal of the lands by the Barrage authorities, the Rehabilitation, Commissioner in the year 1959 again allotted some land out of the disputed area to the: respondents, who obtained ejectment orders against the appellants* on which the. Latter filed two writ petitions in the erstwhile. High Court of West Pakistan, Karachi Bench. The writ petitions were allowed to the extent :that some of the orders of the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner, which appeared to be contrary to the permanent settlement scheme, were quashed, and the case was referred back to the Rehabilitation authorities to examine whether the appellants had contravened any of the provisions, of the permanent settlement scheme. All the same, the High Court held that the lands in dispute had been rightly held to be evacuee properties by the Rehabilitation authorities. The appellants sought to challenge the allotment orders made in favor of the respondents before the Rehabilitation authorities and ultimately filed a petition under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, for a declaration that TT was how-evacuee property. This application was finally rejected by the Custodian on the 12th of October 1962. They then moved the Central Government for their relief} which referred the matter to the Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner. The latter,; by his order dated the 8th of May 1963, rejected their petitions. Thereafter, the appellants filed another writ petition in the High Court in the 26th of July 1963, which was dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court on the 9th of December 1964, leading to a petition for special leave to appeal in this Court, which was granted to examine the con-? Mention raised on behalf of the appellants that the High Court has erred in withholding from the appellants the protection, given by subsection (1) of section 3 of Evacuee Property Act XII of 1957. It was contended in this behalf that after the Rehabilitation Commissioner had in 1951 treated the property as nonevacuee, and had allowed the Barrage authorities to dispose of the same, the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner could not after the 1st day of January 1957, again treat the property as evacuee property, particularly as no appeal or revision of any kind had been filed to challenge the validity of the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner, whereby the lands were returned to the Barrage authorities. In the decision of the Writ Petitions Nos. 101 and I2y of 1960, by the order dated the 19th of September 1960, already referred to above, the High Court inter alia held-— ‘The main contention of Mr. Raza, the learned Advocate for the petitioners in both the petitions, was that the right and interest of the Hindus who left some time in 1947 for India was not evasive property and therefore ITT could not be allotted in favor of the contesting respondents. I have given the best consideration to this question and I have come to the conclusion that the right and interest of the Hindus in the lands settled on them by the Barrage authorities was evacuee.” It was further found that “the land in dispute vested in the Custodian with effect from the 1st of September 1947, and the occupants were in possession on behalf the Custodian.” The learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, vide his order dated the 12th of October 1962, while disposing of the appellants’ petition under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, which was Sled after the decision of the High Court, mentioned above, recorded his finding as follows-— “On a careful consideration of the facts of the case, I am of the view that the property had vested in the Custodian on the IST of March 1947, and it had acquired immunity from interference by the Courts or other authorities and the Custodian alone had the exclusive jurisdiction to decide the matter relating to it. I, therefore, decline to confirm the order of Mr. Muhammad Umar, Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated the 7th of December 1960, and accepting the recommendation made by Mr. Sham shad Hussain Died, by his order dated the 2nd of October 1961, rejected application of Chaudhary Reheat Ali and others, which they had filed under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957).” Sh. Bashir Ahmad, the learned counsel for the appellants, has rested his arguments before us mainly on the contention that in view of section 3 of Act XII of 1957, the property not having been treated as evacuee property before the IST of January 1957, could not thereafter be treated as evacuee property and settled on respondents Nos. to 22. It was pointed out by the learned counsel that since 1951 after the Rehabilitation Commissioner released the land in dispute in favor of the Barrage authorities, it has remained under the latter’s control It is true that the appellants have continued to remain in possession of the land since 1951 as lessees of the Barrage authorities. They had also made offers to purchase it on installments basis, which, however were rejected, and the amounts deposited by them for this purpose were ordered to be refunded. But this fact does not at all advance the appellant’s claim for determining the evacuee or non-evacuee character of the property. The learned counsel for the respondents has raised a preliminary objection that whether the property is evacuee or non-evacuee Is res judicata between the parties, in view of the clear finding of the flight Court, already mentioned above, made in Writ Petitions Nos. 101 and 129 of 1960. Reference has been made to a case reported as Radha Sham Datta v. Patna Municipal Corporation, Patna (1) wherein it was held: ‘Even if one were to agree that the provisions of res judicata, as incorporated in section 11, Civil Procedure Code, may not strictly apply to successive writ applications, the general principle of res judicata, apart from section 11, Civil Procedure Code can be made applicable to write applications also.” To the same effect is a Bombay case reported as Man ahem S. Reshoot v. Union of India In a case from the Supreme Court of India reported as Darya v. State of U. P. some guiding principles were formulated in this respect, which may be reproduced with advantage-— “TF the petition filed in the High Court under Article 226 is dismissed not on the merits but because of the laches of the party applying for the writ or because TT is held that the party had an alternative remedy available to it, then the dismissal of the writ petition would not constitute a bar to a subsequent petition under Article 32 (Indian Constitution). If a writ petition is dismissed in liming and an order is pronounced in that behalf whether the dismissal would constitute a bar would depend upon the nature of the order. If the order is on merits, it would be a bar; if the order shows that the dismissal was for the reason that the petitioner was guilty of laches or that he had an alternative remedy it would not be a bar, except in cases which are already indicated. If the petition is dismissed in liming without passing a speaking order, then such dismissal cannot be treated as creating a bar of res judicata. It is true that, prima facie, dismissal in lime even without passing a speaking order in that behalf may strongly suggest that the Court took the view that there was no substance in the petition at all, but in the absence of a speaking order it would not be easy to decide what factors weighed in the mind of the Court and that makes it difficult and unsafe to hold that such a summary dismissal is a dismissal on merits and as such constitutes a bar of res judicata against a similar petition filed under Article 32. If the petition 1s dismissed as withdrawn, it cannot be a bar to a subsequent petition under Article 32, because in such a case there has been no decision in the merits by the Court.” The principle of res judicata is invoked on the basis that a party who has lost the cause once, should not be allowed to agitate it on the same facts and on the same cause of action to unnecessarily harass the other party. In the previous judgment of the High Court given between the same parties against the appellants, it was categorically held that the property m dispute was evacuee property. This does operate as a bar in the way of the appellants for agitating this matter once again against the respondents. Again the appellants had themselves taken the matter to the Custodian under section 22 of the Act XII of 1957, who also gave a finding adverse to them after examine the whole question. If, as argued by the learned counsel for the appellants, the Custodian had the exclusive and final jurisdiction to determine the character of the property to be evacuee or non-evacuee, it is difficult to see how can he get over this hurdle of the finality of the order of the Custodian made in the matter. Similarly, they had themselves also invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court at the earlier stage, and it does not lie in their mouth to say that the proceedings taken by them were of no effect and were merely taken in vacuum, as the High Court could not deal with this matter because the jurisdiction lay conclusively with the Custodian. As remarked in the judgment under appeal, even on merits the appellants have no case. The general order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner in 1959 directing not to allot the Barrage lands anymore to the refugees, could not have changed the nature of the property. The property, which was admittedly evacuee property and which had vested in the Custodian as such could not buy a simple declaration like this be changed into nonevacuee property by an officer of the Rehabilitation Department. The Custodian alone could decide this issue regarding the character of the property, and he has, in his final order, dealt with all the aspects of the matter and come to the conclusion that it was evacuee property. It is not disputed that the evacuees were grantees of this property, and they had paid certain installments also for acquisition of proprietary rights their. It is also not disputed that in 1948, the lands were allotted to the appellants by the Rehabilitation authorities. In these circumstances, the assumption of the control of the lands by the Barrage authorities could not extinguish the rights of the evacuees in these lands for any default committed by them after their evacuation. Section 8 of Ordinance XV of 1949, as repeated in Act XII of 1957, fully protected their rights. It may also be mentioned that subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957, on which reliance is placed by the learned counsel for the appellants, is not applicable to those cases which are covered by subsection (2) of the same section. Under subsection (3)(b) of the Act, it is provided that section 3(1) of the Act will not apply to property, which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority to do so after the 28th day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian. The appellants are merely claiming the properties in dispute as the lessees of the Barrage authorities without any proprietary title to the same. They cannot, therefore, claim anything more than what the Barrage authorities could themselves have claimed. The Barrage authorities could not have assumed the right to supervise or manage the properties nor could they have authorized appellants to occupy the same without the Custodian's permission. Since the property is agricultural property, it is governed by section 3 of the Displaced Persons Land Settlement Act of 1958. Under this provision, it was the duty of the Barrage authorities to disclose the nature of the properties in their possession to the Rehabilitation authorities. Under subsection (2) of this section, any property referred to in subsection (1) shall, notwithstanding the provision of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, be treated as evacuee property and shall vest and be deemed to have vested in the Custodian in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 7 of the Act. In view of what has been stated above, we are unable to find any fault with the judgment of the High Court, dismissing the writ petition of the appellants. This appeal is dismissed, but there shall be no order as to costs. K.b.a Appeal dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 779 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-08-20): Salad Ahmad, X—The brief history of this case, which has been brought to this Court by special leave, is as follows: The land in dispute was originally held by the Sukkur Barrage authorities, and was granted to some Hindus, who paid a few installments for acquiring proprietary rights their, but defaulted in making payment of the remain mg, and subsequently became evacuees on the Partition of the subcontinent. The appellants, who are refugees from India, on arrival in Pakistan in the year 1948, were temporarily allotted, these lands by the Rehabilitation Department. It appears that the Barrage authorities, acting on the terms and conditions of the grants made to the Hindu evacuees, cancelled the grants and resumed the lands on the 26th of April 1949. Following,this cancellation," "the' Rehabilitation Commissioner informed the Barrage authorities on the 22nd of May 1951, that the lands in dispute belonged to the Barrage authorities and that they could deal v/with then as they liked. Upon this, the Barrage authorities made fresh grants of these lands in favor of the appellants on payment of the initial installment of ETH of the price. Notwithstanding this disposal of the lands by the Barrage authorities, the Rehabilitation, Commissioner in the year 1959 again allotted some land out of the disputed area to the: respondents, who obtained ejectment orders against the appellants* on which the. Latter filed two writ petitions in the erstwhile. High Court of West Pakistan, Karachi Bench. The writ petitions were allowed to the extent :that some of the orders of the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner, which appeared to be contrary to the permanent settlement scheme, were quashed, and the case was referred back to the Rehabilitation authorities to examine whether the appellants had contravened any of the provisions, of the permanent settlement scheme. All the same, the High Court held that the lands in dispute had been rightly held to be evacuee properties by the Rehabilitation authorities. The appellants sought to challenge the allotment orders made in favor of the respondents before the Rehabilitation authorities and ultimately filed a petition under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, for a declaration that TT was how-evacuee property. This application was finally rejected by the Custodian on the 12th of October 1962. They then moved the Central Government for their relief} which referred the matter to the Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner. The latter,; by his order dated the 8th of May 1963, rejected their petitions. Thereafter, the appellants filed another writ petition in the High Court in the 26th of July 1963, which was dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court on the 9th of December 1964, leading to a petition for special leave to appeal in this Court, which was granted to examine the con-? Mention raised on behalf of the appellants that the High Court has erred in withholding from the appellants the protection, given by subsection (1) of section 3 of Evacuee Property Act XII of 1957. It

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 779 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-08-20): for special leave to appeal in this Court, which was granted to examine the con-? Mention raised on behalf of the appellants that the High Court has erred in withholding from the appellants the protection, given by subsection (1) of section 3 of Evacuee Property Act XII of 1957. It was contended in this behalf that after the Rehabilitation Commissioner had in 1951 treated the property as nonevacuee, and had allowed the Barrage authorities to dispose of the same, the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner could not after the 1st day of January 1957, again treat the property as evacuee property, particularly as no appeal or revision of any kind had been filed to challenge the validity of the order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner, whereby the lands were returned to the Barrage authorities. In the decision of the Writ Petitions Nos. 101 and I2y of 1960, by the order dated the 19th of September 1960, already referred to above, the High Court inter alia held-— ‘The main contention of Mr. Raza, the learned Advocate for the petitioners in both the petitions, was that the right and interest of the Hindus who left some time in 1947 for India was not evasive property and therefore ITT could not be allotted in favor of the contesting respondents. I have given the best consideration to this question and I have come to the conclusion that the right and interest of the Hindus in the lands settled on them by the Barrage authorities was evacuee.” It was further found that “the land in dispute vested in the Custodian with effect from the 1st of September 1947, and the occupants were in possession on behalf the Custodian.” The learned Custodian of Evacuee Property, vide his order dated the 12th of October 1962, while disposing of the appellants’ petition under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957, which was Sled after the decision of the High Court, mentioned above, recorded his finding as follows-— “On a careful consideration of the facts of the case, I am of the view that the property had vested in the Custodian on the IST of March 1947, and it had acquired immunity from interference by the Courts or other authorities and the Custodian alone had the exclusive jurisdiction to decide the matter relating to it. I, therefore, decline to confirm the order of Mr. Muhammad Umar, Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated the 7th of December 1960, and accepting the recommendation made by Mr. Sham shad Hussain Died, by his order dated the 2nd of October 1961, rejected application of Chaudhary Reheat Ali and others, which they had filed under section 22 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957).” Sh. Bashir Ahmad, the learned counsel for the appellants, has rested his arguments before us mainly on the contention that in view of section 3 of Act XII of 1957, the property not having been treated as evacuee property before the IST of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 779 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-08-20): of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957).” Sh. Bashir Ahmad, the learned counsel for the appellants, has rested his arguments before us mainly on the contention that in view of section 3 of Act XII of 1957, the property not having been treated as evacuee property before the IST of January 1957, could not thereafter be treated as evacuee property and settled on respondents Nos. to 22. It was pointed out by the learned counsel that since 1951 after the Rehabilitation Commissioner released the land in dispute in favor of the Barrage authorities, it has remained under the latter’s control It is true that the appellants have continued to remain in possession of the land since 1951 as lessees of the Barrage authorities. They had also made offers to purchase it on installments basis, which, however were rejected, and the amounts deposited by them for this purpose were ordered to be refunded. But this fact does not at all advance the appellant’s claim for determining the evacuee or non-evacuee character of the property. The learned counsel for the respondents has raised a preliminary objection that whether the property is evacuee or non-evacuee Is res judicata between the parties, in view of the clear finding of the flight Court, already mentioned above, made in Writ Petitions Nos. 101 and 129 of 1960. Reference has been made to a case reported as Radha Sham Datta v. Patna Municipal Corporation, Patna (1) wherein it was held: ‘Even if one were to agree that the provisions of res judicata, as incorporated in section 11, Civil Procedure Code, may not strictly apply to successive writ applications, the general principle of res judicata, apart from section 11, Civil Procedure Code can be made applicable to write applications also.” To the same effect is a Bombay case reported as Man ahem S. Reshoot v. Union of India In a case from the Supreme Court of India reported as Darya v. State of U. P. some guiding principles were formulated in this respect, which may be reproduced with advantage-— “TF the petition filed in the High Court under Article 226 is dismissed not on the merits but because of the laches of the party applying for the writ or because TT is held that the party had an alternative remedy available to it, then the dismissal of the writ petition would not constitute a bar to a subsequent petition under Article 32 (Indian Constitution). If a writ petition is dismissed in liming and an order is pronounced in that behalf whether the dismissal would constitute a bar would depend upon the nature of the order. If the order is on merits, it would be a bar; if the order shows that the dismissal was for the reason that the petitioner was guilty of laches or that he had an alternative remedy it would not be a bar, except in cases which are already indicated. If the petition is dismissed in liming without passing a speaking order, then such

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 779 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-08-20): order shows that the dismissal was for the reason that the petitioner was guilty of laches or that he had an alternative remedy it would not be a bar, except in cases which are already indicated. If the petition is dismissed in liming without passing a speaking order, then such dismissal cannot be treated as creating a bar of res judicata. It is true that, prima facie, dismissal in lime even without passing a speaking order in that behalf may strongly suggest that the Court took the view that there was no substance in the petition at all, but in the absence of a speaking order it would not be easy to decide what factors weighed in the mind of the Court and that makes it difficult and unsafe to hold that such a summary dismissal is a dismissal on merits and as such constitutes a bar of res judicata against a similar petition filed under Article 32. If the petition 1s dismissed as withdrawn, it cannot be a bar to a subsequent petition under Article 32, because in such a case there has been no decision in the merits by the Court.” The principle of res judicata is invoked on the basis that a party who has lost the cause once, should not be allowed to agitate it on the same facts and on the same cause of action to unnecessarily harass the other party. In the previous judgment of the High Court given between the same parties against the appellants, it was categorically held that the property m dispute was evacuee property. This does operate as a bar in the way of the appellants for agitating this matter once again against the respondents. Again the appellants had themselves taken the matter to the Custodian under section 22 of the Act XII of 1957, who also gave a finding adverse to them after examine the whole question. If, as argued by the learned counsel for the appellants, the Custodian had the exclusive and final jurisdiction to determine the character of the property to be evacuee or non-evacuee, it is difficult to see how can he get over this hurdle of the finality of the order of the Custodian made in the matter. Similarly, they had themselves also invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court at the earlier stage, and it does not lie in their mouth to say that the proceedings taken by them were of no effect and were merely taken in vacuum, as the High Court could not deal with this matter because the jurisdiction lay conclusively with the Custodian. As remarked in the judgment under appeal, even on merits the appellants have no case. The general order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner in 1959 directing not to allot the Barrage lands anymore to the refugees, could not have changed the nature of the property. The property, which was admittedly evacuee property and which had vested in the Custodian as such could not buy a simple declaration like

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 779 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-08-20): order of the Rehabilitation Commissioner in 1959 directing not to allot the Barrage lands anymore to the refugees, could not have changed the nature of the property. The property, which was admittedly evacuee property and which had vested in the Custodian as such could not buy a simple declaration like this be changed into nonevacuee property by an officer of the Rehabilitation Department. The Custodian alone could decide this issue regarding the character of the property, and he has, in his final order, dealt with all the aspects of the matter and come to the conclusion that it was evacuee property. It is not disputed that the evacuees were grantees of this property, and they had paid certain installments also for acquisition of proprietary rights their. It is also not disputed that in 1948, the lands were allotted to the appellants by the Rehabilitation authorities. In these circumstances, the assumption of the control of the lands by the Barrage authorities could not extinguish the rights of the evacuees in these lands for any default committed by them after their evacuation. Section 8 of Ordinance XV of 1949, as repeated in Act XII of 1957, fully protected their rights. It may also be mentioned that subsection (1) of section 3 of Act XII of 1957, on which reliance is placed by the learned counsel for the appellants, is not applicable to those cases which are covered by subsection (2) of the same section. Under subsection (3)(b) of the Act, it is provided that section 3(1) of the Act will not apply to property, which is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority to do so after the 28th day of February 1947, has not been accepted or approved by the Custodian. The appellants are merely claiming the properties in dispute as the lessees of the Barrage authorities without any proprietary title to the same. They cannot, therefore, claim anything more than what the Barrage authorities could themselves have claimed. The Barrage authorities could not have assumed the right to supervise or manage the properties nor could they have authorized appellants to occupy the same without the Custodian's permission. Since the property is agricultural property, it is governed by section 3 of the Displaced Persons Land Settlement Act of 1958. Under this provision, it was the duty of the Barrage authorities to disclose the nature of the properties in their possession to the Rehabilitation authorities. Under subsection (2) of this section, any property referred to in subsection (1) shall, notwithstanding the provision of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, be treated as evacuee property and shall vest and be deemed to have vested in the Custodian in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 7 of the Act. In view of what has been stated above, we are unable to find any fault with the judgment of the High Court, dismissing the writ petition of the appellants. This appeal is dismissed, but there

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 779?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 779 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-08-20): Custodian in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of section 7 of the Act. In view of what has been stated above, we are unable to find any fault with the judgment of the High Court, dismissing the writ petition of the appellants. This appeal is dismissed, but there shall be no order as to costs. K.b.a Appeal dismissed

Question: What is case 1971 PLD 811 about?
Answer: Case 1971 PLD 811 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1971-10-20. The case involved CIVIL APPEAL NO. 36 OF 1970LAHORE IMPROVEMENT TRUST, LAHORE THROUGH ITS CHAIRMAN —APPELLANTVERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND4 OTHERS— RESPONDENTS CIVIL APPEAL NO. 37 OF 1970 UNIVERSITY OF THE PUNJAB, LAHORE— APPELLANTVERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - S. 36 LAND ACQUISITION ACT (1 OF 1894) - S. PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - SS. 24, 28 AND 36 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 98. The case was heard by HAMOODUR RAHMAN, C. J. MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALI AND SAJJAD AHMAD.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: In case 1971 PLD 811, the court applied the following statutes: PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - S. 36 LAND ACQUISITION ACT (1 OF 1894) - S. PUNJAB TOWN IMPROVEMENT ACT (IV OF 1922) - SS. 24, 28 AND 36 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1962) - ARTICLE 98. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1971-10-20.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1971 PLD 811 were: MAHM OOD ZAMAN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT INSTRUCTED BY SALIM AHMAD MALIK, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR APPELLANT (IN C. A. NO. 36 OF 1970).MANZUR QADIR, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT (MUHAMMAD ISMAIL BHATTI, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT WITH HIM) INSTRUCTED BY EJAZ AHMAD KHAN, ADVOCATE- ON-RECORD FOR APPELLANT (INC. A. NO. 37 OF 1970). https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1971/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_811.html 1/27 28/10/2025, 01:53 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/1971/PLD/html_txt/PLD_1971_811.html. The judges presiding were: HAMOODUR RAHMAN, C. J. MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALI AND SAJJAD AHMAD.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: The parties in case 1971 PLD 811 were: CIVIL APPEAL NO. 36 OF 1970LAHORE IMPROVEMENT TRUST, LAHORE THROUGH ITS CHAIRMAN —APPELLANTVERSUS THE CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY,WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND4 OTHERS— RESPONDENTS CIVIL APPEAL NO. 37 OF 1970 UNIVERSITY OF THE PUNJAB, LAHORE— APPELLANTVERSUS CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, WEST PAKISTAN, LAHORE AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1971 PLD 811.
Answer: Judgment Muhammad Aqua Ali, J—This order will dispose of Civil Appeal No. 36 of 1970 filed by the Lahore Improvement Trust hereafter referred to as the Trust and Coil Appeal No. 37 of 1970 filed by the Punjab University hereinafter referred to as the University. Both the appeals are directed against the judgment and order of a Division Bench of the erstwhile High Court of West Pakistan, Lahore Seat, dated the 26th May 1969, whereby Writ Petition No. 1142 of 1965 filed by the Trust to call in question the sale of 2508 canals and 7 Marley of land situated in village Khanewal, Thesis Lahore, by the Custodian of Evacuee Property in favor of Rican Co-operative Society hereafter referred to as the Society was dismissed. The facts giving rise to these appeals may first be taken notice of The old Campus of the University is situated outside the walled city of Lahore between the Lower Mall Road and College Road. In the course optime the number of Colleges affiliated to the University multiplied manifold and many new departments were added to the teaching section consequent upon which it became necessary to expand the Campus of the University. No land in the locality was, however, available at the old site. In view of this congestion the Trust made provision in the Greater Lahore Scheme framed by it in 1944 for shifting of the University Campus to an area of 2200 acres between Ferozepur Road and Multan Road three miles away from the existing Campus. The Scheme was not yet finalized when Partition took place in, 1947 and nothing more was heard of TT. In 1950 the Punjab Government set up a University Commission which, submitted its report in 1953. Among other proposals it was recommended by the Commission that the University and its affiliated colleges be shifted from the existing crowded localities to the site earlier earmarked by the Trust in the Scheme framed by it in 1944. The proposal was accepted by the Provincial Government and a direction was given to the Trust to frame a development Scheme for construction of a modern housing colony and a New Campus for the University. The Scheme under sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act was framed by the Trust in early 1954 comprising an area of 3100 acres. Under section 36 of the Act the Scheme was notified in Daily Newspaper appearing in Lahore on the 10th and 16th of April 1954, meeting objections by the Mayor of the Corporation of the City of Lahore, Health Officer, public and the owners whose lands were included in the Scheme. As part of the land belonged to evacuee notices were separately sent to the Custodian of Evacuee Property and the Rehabilitation Commissioner as representative of the Evacuee interest. The history of the Scheme up to this stage is summed up by the Vice-Chancellor of the University in his letter to the Chairman of the Trust reproduced below: “August 16, 1955. My dear Rahim, A few days ago I had a telephone talk with you regarding the new site for the University. Since then J have studied the University file dealing with this case. The proposal to shift the University out of the present congested area has been under consideration for many years, but I will take up the story from 1944 when Mr. Afoul AHSA wrote a letter "to the Vice-Chancellor (D. O. No. 99, dated the 17th April 1944). The area which Mr. Afoul AHSA suggested was on this side of the canal, between Ferozepur Road and Multan Road, beyond Muslim Town. Several meetings were held, and the question discussed again and again. I find a printed copy of the resolution No. 38, passed at the ordinary meeting of the Lahore Improvement Trust, held on the 10th March 1945, regarding the University Area Scheme. There are printed in this. document mutes of a meeting held at the residence of the Hon’BLE Minister of Education on the 8th February 1945, wherein details are given, and the site selected by the Lahore Improvement Trust for the construction of a new University Town (approximately 2500 acres) was approved. There is a letter No. 2142 dated September 6, 1946, from the Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, to the Vice-Chancellor which says: “Much of the land affected by the scheme was noticed for requisition on the 29th October 1344, and if it is not decided very soon to complete the acquisition we shall have in fairness to the owners to drop this scheme altogether’, to which Vice-Chancellor replied to the effect that he was awaiting reply from the Government. There was some discussion about this matter further, but this phase evidently ended in October 1946, without any definite decision. The Scheme was again revived in 1953 and there is a D. O. No. SB/52/SB/, dated the 27th April 1953, from the Town Planner, Lahore Improvement Trust to Dr. Bash Ahmad, Vice-Chancellor, and an alternative suggestion had been made that the University might shift to Reich Chandra. In September 1953, Dr. Bashir Ahmad discussed this question with Mr. Muhammad Iqbal, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, and Mr. S. A. Rahim, Town Planner. It was then estimated that the cost Orland would be Rs. 300 per canal. and the Development charges Rs. 700 per canal the total beg Rs. 1,000 per canal. On 26th January 1954, there was a discussion between Mr. Howe, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, Dr. Bashir Ahmad, Vice- Chancellor, Mr. S. A. Rahim, Town Planner, Sh. Muhammad Iqbal, Secretary, Lahore Improvement Trust, Registrar, Deputy Registrar and the University Engineer. Then followed a meeting held on the 16th February 1954, in the room of the Hon’BLE Chief Muster, Punjab, Malik Froze Khan Moon. The Chairman of the Improvement Trust was instructed to proceed with the acquisition of the land. It was decided that out of this total area of 3000 acres approximately 2200 acres would be for the University Campus and the rest will be developed by the Improvement Trust as a modern residential area. Dr. Bashir Ahmad received an encouraging reply No. F16(21)/ 54. R. I, dated the 18th February 1954, from the Mister of Refugees and Rehabilitation, Government of Pakistan, stating that the Central Government would agree to sanction the acquisition of the evacuee land in question provided the Government of the Punjab undertook to provide suitable alternative land to the refugees settled on that land. On March 31 1954, the Lahore Improvement Trust, Lahore, issued a notice under section 36 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922, regarding the acquisition of approximately 3100 acres situated on both sides of Lahore Branch Bari Drab Canal giving the boundary. This notice appeared in the Pakistan Times dated April 3, 1954, and April 10, 1954. Mr, Howe, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust addressed a Letter No. SB-, dated the 19th May 1954, to the Commissioner, Lahore Division, Lahore, raising various questions. I think here the matter rests. I shall be grateful if you will kindly let me know what the present position is? University is anxious to proceed with the scheme and the first step is acquiring land. I shall feel most grateful if you will kindly take necessary action and give me an estimate of the cost of approximate 1500 acres which will be required by the University. Yours sincerely, (SD.) JM. Axial Hussein) _ ‘ ““'"“. © Vice-Chancellor.”, In response to the notices issued by the Trust under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act a number of persons raised objections to the proposed Scheme which were disposed of in the meeting of the Trust held on 14-7-1955. Thereafter the Scheme was on 7-12-1955 submitted by the Chairman to the Commissioner, Lahore Division, for obtain sanction of the Government under section 41 of the Act. The Provincial Government was further requested to obtain sanction of the Central Government for acquisition of evacuee land as required by section 12 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance XV of 1949. The area of 3100 acres included in the Scheme was divided into four parts: (1) Satellite Town, (1) One-Unit Staff Quarters, (Hi) Development Scheme and (iv) University Area. The Provincial Government raised CERTAM objections to the proposed Scheme and directed that the area earmarked for One-Unit Staff Quarters be deleted from the Scheme as the Public Works Department had since then decided to construct the staff quarters through its own agency and acquire the land for this purpose separately. The Scheme for Satellite Town was also abandoned by the Government’ in the interest of the University. The Scheme was revised by the Trust and resubmitted to the Commissioner Lahore Division, on 8-12-1956. The area included in the Scheme was, as mentioned in the letter of the Chairman of the Trust accompanying the revised Scheme, now reduced to 2478 acres divided into three parts: University Campus. 1615 (11) Development Scheme adjacent to Muslim Town. 221.84 (hi) Development Scheme adjacent to Garden Town. acres The Scheme was sanctioned by the Provincial Government and published in the official Gazette dated the 24th January 1957. The Trust was authorized to acquire the land included in the Scheme either under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Schedule attached to the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1832, or-by purchase, exchange, or otherwise. The Governor of West Pakistan was further pleased to declare that the purpose for which the Trust required land was a public purpose under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922. The Land Acquisition Collector was authorized to take possession of the land before announcement of the Award for compensation as provided in section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act. Possession of evacuee land was, however, to betaken after permission to acquire was obtained from the Central Government. The Collector obtained orders from the Provincial Government for acquisition of privately owned land comprised in the Scheme under section 7 of the Land Acquisition Act and issued notices under sections 9 and 10 to the owners of the lands for film statements of their claims. Separate notice were given to the Custodian of Evacuee Property and the Rehabilitation Commissioner for this purpose as representatives of Evacuee interest. Before these notices were issued the Central Government had accorded permission to acquire evacuee land on the conditions laid down their No. F-16(33)/57-P. II dated the 18th April 1957, addressed to the Secretary to the Government of West Pakistan, Refugees and Rehabilitation Department, Lahore, reproduced below: “With reference to your letter No. 2447-RR/| R-57, dated the 2ad April 1957, I am directed to say that in exercise of the powers conferred by section 16(3)\b) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII of 1957;, the Central Government is pleased to accord approval to the acquisition by the Government of West Pakistan under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922, of evacuee land measuring 11,924 canals and 18 Marley as per details shown in the schedule received with your letter under reference situated in District Lahore for University Campus on the competition that fair compensation in accordance with the principles laid down in the said Act will be assessed in consultation with the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, and paid to that officer for credit to the evacuee owners’ account and that the refugees, if any, settled thereon will be provided with alternative land.” After the expiration of prescribed period of 15 days the Collector took possession of the lands included in the Scheme and made it over to the Trust. The possession of the land in village Khanewal of which the land in dispute forms a part was taken by the Collector on 26-6-1958 as recorded in the Daily Diary of Atari Helga dated 2nd July 1958. On considering the claims filed by the local owners and the data supplied by the Revenue authorities the Collector drew up a tentative award fixing the price of both evacuee and nonevacuee land at an average rate of Rs. 550 per canal. The. Award was sent to the Custodian of Evacuee Property for his approval m terms of the direction given by the Central Government. The Custodian reluctantly agreed to the rate -of compensation and accepted the tentative award, but desired that the rate fixed. in this case should - not be treated as a precedent in other cases. Thereafter the Collector pronounced the final awards for separate estates situated in village Diana Mufasa on 19th March 1959, in village Khanewal on 19th April 1960, in village Devastated on 20th September 1960, and village Chara on 26th September 1960. The total price of the evacuee land acquired by the Collector worked out at Rs. 24,24,b07-6-0. Out of this sum the University paid as mentioned earlier Rs. 20 lacs to the Custodian partly through the Trust and partly by a deposit in the account of the Custodian. Soon thereafter the University started construction of its New Campus MN accordance with the plans drawn up by a foreign firm of architects. According to the figures given in the blueprint of the Scheme published by the University in 1954 the total cost of buildings and equipment amounted to a little over Rs. five crores. Turning to the claim by the Society we find that’ it was registered in 1953 with the object of acquiring land and providing building sites to its like-minded members at cheap rates. The land selected for this purpose was situated in village Khanewal and was already included in the University New Campus Schemes. This fact was fully known to the Society and on 1- 9-1955 it obtained a No-Objection Certificate from the Town Planner of the Trust who had no lawful authority to give the certificate. Similar certificates were obtained from the Rehabilitation Commissioner (Lands) in 1954 and’ from. the Urban Development Commissioner in 1955. Finally on 13-7-1959 approval of the Central Government was obtained under section 16(3) (b) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1956 for the purchase of 2508 canals OND Marley of evacuee land (a little more than 312 acres) comprising Kara Nos. 1388 to 1622. In consultation with the Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, the Custodian fixed the price of the land at Rs. 250 per canal although earlier he had rather reluctantly accepted Rs. 550, per canal, as the price of land acquired by the Trust. The Society deposited the sale price amounting to Rs. 6,27,087.00 with the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner Lahore, and there-! upon a formal sale-deed was executed in its favor on the 22nd March 1964. After entering into possession the Society commenced buildings operation which came to the notice of the Lahore Improvement Trust and TNE Punjab University. The Trust applied to the Custodian of Evacuee Property for cancellation of the sale of 2508 canals and 7 Marley of land to the Society which already stood acquired by it and title had passed on to the Trust under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act. The application was rejected and thereupon the Trust filed Writ Petition in the High Court imp leading among others the Custodian of Evacuee Property, the Society and the University as respondents. It was claimed that the Custodian having been divested of title in the land acquired by the Trust could not have resold the same to the Society. In its written statement the University supported the claim of the Trust and pleaded that it had already paid Rs. 20 lacs as price of the land given to it by the Trust for the construction of its Campus and that the Campus was already under construction. The claim made by the Trust in the Writ Petition was controverted by the Society on variety of grounds to which reference will be made at a later stage. A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that (1) the notice issued by the Trust under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act was illegal as prior approval of the Central Government as required by section 12(0 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordnance XV of 1949 was not obtained (i) that no proper scheme was prepared by the Trust in respect of which notice under section 36 could be issued; (Hi) that the acquisition was not for any purpose contemplated by they Town Improvement Act; (iv) that in acquiring the land the Trust did not act bona fide’, and that under the Town Improvement Act the Trust could not acquire land for another corporate body. Leave to appeal was granted both to the Trust and the Punjab University as important questions of law were involved in the decision of the case and there was no authoritative pronouncement of the Court on these points. During the hearing of the appeals the counsel for the Society and the Trust arrived at a settlement and made the following statements before the Court on 12-3-1971 : “Mr. Goiás Mohammad states that the Improvement Trust and Rican Colony agreed that the sale of land in question by the Custodian in favor of Rican Colony, should be maintained as valid and Rican Colony undertakes to abide by rules, bye-laws and Regulation of the Lahore Improvement Trust, regarding development of this land by the Rican Colony. The parties to bear their own costs. (SD.) Goiás Mohammad. Mr. Mahmood Haman, Advocate, for the Improvement Trust, says that they have agreed to accommodate the Rican Colony and to accept the sale, in favor of Rican Colony, on the above terms and conditions. (SD.) Mahmood Haman.” Counsel for the Punjab University did not subscribe to the agreement and maintained that the Custodian having been divested of title in the land, in dispute its resale in favor of the Society was wholly illegal and void. No amount of agreement between the Trust and the Society could, therefore, deprive the University of the land which had come to be vested in it long before the sale in favor of the Society. The statement made by Mr, Mahmood Haman on instructions from the Chairman of the Trust was also claimed to be without any legal authority. Under section.96 of the Town Improvement Act the powers of the Chairman are confined to—. institute, defend or withdraw from legal proceedings under this Act; (11) compound any offense against this Act;. (in) admit, compromise or withdraw any claim made under this Act; and (iv) obtain such legal advice and assistance as he may from time to time deem TT necessary or expedient to obtain, or as he may be desired by the Trust to obtain, for any of the purposes referred to in the foregoing clause of this section, or- for securing the lawful exercise or discharge -of any-power- -or duty vested in or imposed upon the trust or any officer or servant of the trust.” ' The claim made by the Society that the land, in dispute had been lawfully acquired by it from the Custodian did not constitute a claim under the Town Improvement Act. The Chairman had, therefore, no power to admit the clam of the Society and thereby surrender valuable property rights of the Trust. Such a compromise could only be made by the Trust and that too with the concurrence of the University and the Provincial Government. The former had paid Rs. 20 lacs for purchase of land which included the disputed area of 2509 canals sold by the Custodian to the Society. The approval of the Provincial Government was' necessary as the compromise offended the provisions of the Town Improvement Act which lay down that after a Scheme has been sanctioned by the Provincial Government under section 40, a substantial modification cannot be fade except with the approval of the Provincial Government and on giving fresh’ notices to the persons affected thereby. The Court, accordingly, declined to enforce the settlement and heard the appeals on merits. We may examine now in detail the reasons on which the High Court judgment TS based. The learned Judges held firstly that the notice given by the Trust under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act was bad in law because there was no proper scheme in respect of which the notice as an essential step in the acquisition proceedings was to be given. Secondly TT was held that section 36 which authorized the Land Acquisition Collector to enter upon the land proposed to be acquired and perform certain acts on the land including causing an injury to the land was in conflict with section 24. of Ordinance XV of 1949. Thirdly the Scheme for which the land was acquired was held to be outside the purview of the Town Improvement Act as the requisites of sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act. Were not complied with. Fourthly it was considered necessary to obtain prior permission of the Central Government when notice under section 36 was given. Reliance was placed on section 12 of the Administration of ' Evacuee Property Ordinance XV of 1949 in this behalf: Lastly it was held that the Trust could not acquire land for the University as it was not one of the purposes of the Town Improvement Act. The principal question argued from the bar before us was whether sanction of the Central Government was necessary before the Trust could give notice under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act. We will therefore, advert to it first. Under the Schedule to the Town Improvement Act notices under sections 36 and 42 have the same effect as notices under sections and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. It is well established that a material defect in a notice issued under either section renders the entire acquisition proceedings illegal. The learned Judges relied in support of this proposition on the decisions in Caesar Singh v. Secretary of State for India Mercer v. Liverpool St. Helen's and South Lancashire Rail Co. (2), Associated Hotels of India Ltd. etc. v. ODHA Mai Thalia (3) and Froze Din v. Government of West Pakistan There can be no disagreement with the view expressed by the learned Judges on this point. But was prior permission necessary under section 12 which in substance provides that no legal process shall issue against evacuee property and that while the Central Government may acquire it under any law which confers on it this power to do so, the Provincial Government shall obtain prior approval of the Central Government when exercising this power. The learned Judges held that prior approval was necessary because a notice under section of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, creates a defect in the title of the owner as held in the case Associated Hotels. of India Ltd. etc. v. ODHA Mai Thalia. Two questions arise for consideration in this respect. Firstly whether notice under section 36 created a defect in the title of evacuee owners and the Custodian of Evacuee Property as representatives of their interest and secondly whether there was a bar in section 12 to the giving of such a notice as an essential step in the acquisition proceedings. It was contended by Mr. Manner Nadir with considerable force that whatever may be the position under the ordinary law, notice under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act did not create any defect in the title of the owner of evacuee land as provided m section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 which is reproduced below : “12. Exemption from legal process.—(1) Property which has vested in, or of which possession has been taken by, the Custodian shall be exempt from legal process, including seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale by any officer of Court or any other authority, and no injunction or other order of whatever kind in respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court or any other authority. (2) Upon the commencement of this Ordinance, any such legal process as aforesaid subsisting immediately before such commencement shall cease to have effect and all evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian or other officer or person appointed by it, shall, upon delivery of the same being called for by the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian. (3) Nothing contained in the foregoing subsections shall— (a) prevent Registering Officer from ordering registration of a deed of sale or exchange relating to evacuee immovable property, or a civil Court from ordering specific performance of a contract of sale or exchange of any such property where the sale or exchange or the contract of the same has been duly confirmed or approved by the Custodian and ' the required certificate has been granted by him; or (b) affect any power conferred on the Central Government by or under any Jaw for the time being in force to requisition or acquire property, and it is hereby declared that if by or under such law or any other law for the time being in force like power is conferred upon or delegated to a Provincial Government the Provincial Government may exercise the same in relation to evacuee property with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government and subject to such direction as the Central Government may at any time see fit to give. Clause (b) of this subsection shall be deemed to have taken effect on the day this Ordinance came into force.” A notice under section 36 meter Asia notifies boundaries oft the land included in the scheme under preparation. Under section 38 it is necessary to give within 30 days of the publication] of the notice under section 36, individual notices to the owners of the land who may thereupon lodge objections to the proposed acquisition of their land. Notices under section 38 were issued to all the owners including evacuees by publication in daily newspapers. Separate notices were given to the Custodian of Evacuee Property and the Rehabilitation Commissioner as representatives of the interest of evacuee owners. No objection was filed by the evacuees or the said authorities on their behalf The declared intention of section 36 is thus to notify to the owners that their land is proposed to be included in a scheme and that if so advised they may file objections to the proposed acquisition. The bar contained in section 12 is to the issuance of a legal process, such as, seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment, etc. and to acquisition of evacuee land by the Provincial Government without prior approval of the Central Government. Subsection (3) expressly preserves the power of the Central Government to acquire evacuee land under any law in force for the time BMG which includes Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and the Town Improvement Act, 1922. It cannot, therefore, be questioned that notwithstanding the bar contained m subsection (1) of section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949, the Central Government may give order to a Collector under section 7 of the Land Acquisition Act to acquire evacuee land and thereupon he may issue notice under section and enter upon acquisition proceedings. Would it, therefore, make any difference if the Provincial Government directs the Collector to enter upon acquisition proceedings. The answer must be in the negative for the operation of subsection (1) of section 12 is applicable to the Central as well as the Provincial Governments. We have, therefore, to see whether under clause (b) of subsection (3) of section 12, the Trust could not give notice of a scheme in which evacuee land was proposed to be included. On its plain reading clause (b) bars the Provincial Government from exercising power under any law for the time being in force to acquire evacuee land. At the stage when notice under section 36 was given, the Provincial Government had directed the Trust to prepare a development scheme for the construction I of a new campus for the University and a modern housing colony. The Scheme had yet to be finalized by the Trust and submitted to the Provincial Government for sanction under section 40 of the Town Improvement Act. As mentioned earlier the Scheme was sent back by the Provincial Government to the Trust with certain objection, and it had to be revised and resubmitted for sanction. In the circumstances it could not be said that at the time when notice under section 36 was given by the Trust the Provincial Government was exercising the power conferred on it by the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Town Improvement Act to acquire evacuee land. Prior approval of the Central Government was, therefore, not necessary for giving notice under section 36. In coming to the contrary conclusion the learned Judges of the High Court relied on the legal incidence of notice given under section of the Land Acquisition Act that it creates a defect in the title of the owner of the land proposed to be acquired. But creating of defect in the title of an owner is not an essential ingredient of a notification under section of the Land Acquisition Act or section 36 of the Town Improvement Act. As contended by Mr. Manner Nadir section 12 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance XV of 1949 itself safeguarded against any defect being created in the title of the owner of evacuee land or the Custodian of Evacuee Property as his representative in interest. Evacuee land could not be acquired without the prior approval of the Central Government in this c case. The notice issued by the Trust, therefore, only notified to the evacuee owners that their lands were likely to be included in the Scheme and did not go a step further to create a defect in their title in the land. As creation of a defect in the title of the owner of the land which is proposed to be included in a scheme notified under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act is not an essential ingredient of that section, the notice was validly given in spite of the bar contained in section 12. Before we part with this aspect of the case it may be pointed out that even before the Trust notified the Scheme under section 36 the Central Government had expressly agreed to the acquisition of evacuee land for. the University- and directed the - Vice- Chancellor to move the Provincial Government for this purpose. Reference may be made in this behalf to the following letter written by the Minister In charge, Refugees and Rehabilitation Department, Government of Pakistan, to the Vice-Chancellor on 18-2-1954 :. “My dear Mr. Bashir Ahmad, Please refer to your d.o. letter dated the 25th January 1954, regarding acquisition of certain evacuee land in connection with the construction of new buildings for the University of the Punjab. — The Central Government would agree to sanction the acquisition of the evacuee land in question provided the Government of the Punjab undertake to provide suitable alternative land to the refugees settled on that land. The acquisition proceedings are conducted by the Provincial Govern-! Meet under the Land Acquisition Act. No proposal has so far been received from the Government of the Punjab and I would, therefore, suggest that you may approach the Rehabilitation Commissioner (General), who is also Secretary to the Government of the Punjab in the Rehabilitation Department, to move in the matter. The proposal will be dealt with promptly in this Ministry on its receipt from the Provincial Government. The papers received with your letter are herewith returned. Yours sincerely. (SD.) (Shriek Qureshi). Bashir Ahmad, Esquire, _ Vice-Chancellor, The University of the Punjab, Lahore.” The Central Government had thus in principle agreed to the acquisition of evacuee land included in the University New Campus Scheme. However, under section 12 it was necessary for the Provincial Government to obtain prior approval of the Central Government and the record bears out. that as soon as the letter written by the Secretary to the Provincial Government reached the Ministry of Refugees and Rehabilitation, the requisite permission was given. The Scheme framed by the Trust thus had the prior approval of the Central Government, and it could not be said that the Trust acted in breach of the law which provided protection to evacuee property from BMG compulsorily acquired under the Land Acquisition Act. The learned Judges next held the notice issued under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act bad in law as it was a legal process which under section 12(1) of Ordinance XV of 1949 could not be issued in respect of evacuee property. “Legal Process’! is defined in Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary as “Process is the dog of something in a proceeding MN a civil or criminal Court, and that which may be"done without the aid of a Court is not a ‘process’. Therefore, a distract, whether for rent or any other payment, and whether the right of distress be given by the common law or statute is not a ‘process’, nor is it ‘execution or other legal process, within the Bankruptcy Act, 1869 (32 33 Viet. C. 71). “Process” does not include an order made by a Court in the exercise of its punitive jurisdiction; therefore, a Justice’s order, under Distress for Rates Act, 1849 (12 13 Viet. C. 14) committing a person to prison for non-payment of rates, or an order of J imprisonment for either of the defaults in payment mentioned in the Exceptions to Debtors Act, 1869 (32 and 33 Viet. C. 62), section is not a ‘legal process against the property or person of the debtor.’ Similarly, a committal for non-payment of debt under section 5, Debtors Act, 1869, is punitive, and is not a ‘legal process’. Obviously, “all the steps taken in an execution the seizure and the sale—are, in the natural meaning of the word, comprehended in the term ‘process’,” (Lynch, J, : Re Delay A mere notice, though headed with the name of a county Court, is not a‘process’ within County Courts Act, 1846 (9 10 Viet. C. 95) section 57 (R. v. Castle This definition of ‘process’ in subsection (1) of section 12 is made clear by the succeeding subsection that “any such legal process as aforesaid subsisting immediately before such commencement shall cease to have effect and all evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian or other officer or person appointed by it, shall, upon delivery of the same being called for by the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian.” The nature of legal process contemplated in section 12 (1) is also illustrated by the description “seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale, injunction’. As notification of the Scheme was not covered by any of these legal processes Mr. Goiás Mohammad relied on the words s “or other order of whatever kind” in the second part of subsection (1) of section 12. This clause, however, is qualified by the words “shall be granted or made by any Court’. The notice issued under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act was, therefore, not covered by subsection (1) of section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 and the learned Judges erred in arriving at the contrary conclusion. We may now turn to the finding by the learned Judges that acquisition of land by the Trust for the University was outside the purview of the Town Improvement Act. In support of this proposition they placed reliance on the provisions of sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act which are reproduced below for facility of reference, “24. Development and expansion schemes.—(1) The trust may, for the purpose of development of any locality within the municipal limits contained in its local area, prepare “‘a development scheme’”’, and (2) Such trust may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient and for the public advantage to promote and control the development of land to provide for the expansion of a municipality in’ any locality adjacent thereto, within the local area of such trust prepare "an expansion scheme”’. ' (3) “A development scheme” or “an expansion scheme” may provide for the lay-out of the locality to be developed, the purposes for which particular portions of such locality are to be utilized, the prescribed street alignment and the building line on each side of the streets proposed in such locality, the damage of insanitary localities and such other details as may appear desirable.” “28. Combinations of schemes and matters which may be : provided for. in the scheme.-(\) A Scheme under this-Act may combine one or more types of schemes or any special features thereof. (2) Scheme under this Act may provide for all or any of the following matters:. (i) The acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by this Act, or the abandonment of such acquisition under sections 56 and 57 of this Act, of any land or any interest in land necessary for or affected by the execution of the scheme, or adjoining any street, thoroughfare open space to be improved or formed under the scheme;. (i) the acquisition by purchase, lease, exchange, or otherwise of such land or interest in land; (a1) the retention, letting on hire, lease, sale, exchange or disposal otherwise of any land vested in or acquired by the trust;. (JV) the demolition of buildings or portions of buildings that are unfit for the purpose for which they are intended and that obstruct light or air or project beyond the building line; (v) the relaying out of any land comprised in the scheme and the redistribution of sites belonging to owners of property comprised in the scheme; (vi) the laying out and alteration of streets; (VH) the provision of open spaces in the interests of the residents of any locality comprised in the scheme or any adjoining locality and the enlargement or alteration of existing open spaces; ' (will) the raising, lowering or reclamation of any land vested in or to be acquired by the trust for the purposes of the scheme and the reclamation or reservation of land for the production of fruit, vegetables, fuel, fodder and the like for the residents of the local area; (ix) the drawing, water-supply and lighting of streets altered or constructed; (x) the provision of a system of drains and sewers for the improvement of ill-defined and insanitary localities3 ’ ‘ " ‘ (xi) The dome of all acts intended to promote the health of residents of the area comprised in the scheme, including the conservation and preservation from jury or pollution of rivers and other sources and means of water supply; (,xu) the demolition of existing buildings and the erection and re-erection of buildings by the trust or by the owners or by the trust in default of the owners; (xi) the advance to the owners of land comprised within the scheme upon such terms and conditions as to interest and sinking fund and otherwise as may be prescribed under the scheme of the whole or part of the capital requisite for the erection of buildings in accordance with the scheme; (xiv) the provision of facilities for communication; (xv) all other matters which the Provincial Government may deem necessary to promote the general efficiency of a scheme or to improve the locality comprised in such scheme” In the opinion of the learned Judges the Act gives the Trust the power to acquire land only if it is required for executing one of the schemes under the Act. The scheme for the construction of a new campus for the University which was to be developed by the University and not by the Trust was in this view considered to be outside the purview of the Town Improvement Act. The willingness of the Trust to exercise this power at the request of the Government for the benefit of the University was on this hypothesis held to be ultra vires of the tent of the Act itself. The learned Judges relied on the dictum in Manic Hand Mahatma v. Corporation of Calcutta Calcutta Improvement Trust v. MST. Meherunisa (2) and Lynch v. Commissioners of Sewers of the City of London (3) and concluded thus:— “We have no doubt that the Trust was exercising its power not for statutory purpose of executing the scheme, but that the land should be handed over to the University for building the New Campus. The Trust it appears was conscious of this position. They had been asked by the Government to acquire the land for the University. They could not legally do so, but to carry out the wishes of the Government which they thought, though wrongly, they could not ignore, they, by giving the transaction as ostensible name of Development Scheme, proceeded to acquire the land under the Act. The Trust did not act bona fide.” We are unable to concur in the view expressed by the learned Judges that the acquisition of the land by the Trust was not for any one of its purposes and that in making the acquisition the Trust did not act bona fide. The finding on this point of the case is based solely on the assumption that the entire land acquired by the Collector was handed over to the University for development and that in making resort to the provisions of the Town Improvement Act land was acquired at less than the market value and thereby a wrongful gain was conferred on the University. In the plan accompanying the revised scheme to which reference has been made earlier the area of 2478 acres included in the Schemas divided into three parts—— (1) University Campus 1615 acres (2) Development Scheme adjacent. to Muslim Town. 221.84 acres (3) Development Scheme adjacent to Garden Town. 606 acres In the middle is the area earmarked for the University Campus and on the other two sides adjoining areas are earmarked for housing colonies. The area earmarked for the University Campus was made over to the University authority to be developed by them in accordance with the special requirements “of a teaching “institution. The University had prepared a comprehensive scheme for the construction and development of the New Campus and printed its copies in early 1954. Five copies of the scheme were sent to the Chairman of the Trust. One of the copies was placed on the file of the Scheme with which we are concerned. In a meeting held TN the Office of the Chief Mister of the Punjab on 16th 'February 1954, which was attended by the Hon’BLE Chief Minister, Minister for Education, Minister for Revenue, Minister for Agriculture, Vice-Chancellor, Director of Public Instruction, Financial Commissioner, Revenue, Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, Secretary, Lahore Improvement Trust, Registrar, Punjab University, Town Planner, Lahore, Deputy Registrar (Administration), Punjab University, and the University Engineer. It was inter alia resolved:— “After discussing the pros and cons of the proposal, it was unanimously decided that the proposed site beyond Muslim Town, between Multan and Ferozepur Roads, comprising 3000 acres be acquired. The Chairman of the Improvement Trust was instructed to proceed with the acquisition of the land. It was decided that out,of this total area of 3000 acres, approximately, 2200 acres will be for the University Campus and the rest will be developed by the Improvement Trust as a modern residential area under their own Scheme.” It has been mentioned earlier that the Scheme was revised by the Trust in the light of the objections raised by the Provincial Government and resubmitted by the Chairman to the Commissioner, Lahore Division, on the 8th December, 1956. In his covering letter the Chairman proceeded to say:— Sr. I have the honor to refer to the West Pakistan Government Memo. No. 495 C AT dated the 25th February 1956, to your address a copy of which was also endorsed to me under No. 495-C&T- of even date and to state as under:—. Vide this office letter No. SB-153-7145 dated the 7th December, 1955, the sanction of the Government was sought to the acquisition of the land included in the scheme shown on the plan and described in the notification sent herewith. Para. of this letter clearly lays down the reasons for not preparing a layout. Oat of the land included in the scheme an area measuring approximately 320 acres has been utilised by the P. W. D. for the construction of the colony known as “What Colony”. A portion of the land included in the Scheme measuring approximately 1500 acres was proposed to be developed as a Satellite Town by the Urban Development Department, but as will be evident from D. O. letter No. E. S. P. A- dated the 20th November 1956, from the Secretary to Government, West Pakistan, Education Department, to my address and his Memo. No. A- -56 dated the 6th November 1956, to the address of Secretary to Government, West Pakistan, Social Welfare and Local Government Department (Copies attached) the Government have now decided to drop the scheme for building a Satellite Town in this area. Now, therefore, after excluding the area taken by the P. W. D. under the “What Colony” and the contiguous area along the Kacha Multan Road the boundary of the scheme has been changed as shown on Drawing No. D. S. -54 attached herewith. The remaining area after excluding the What Colony will be developed as under : (1) Land measuring 1650 acres for setting up the New University Campus. (2) Land measure 221.84 acres to be developed as a Trust development scheme as framed by the Trust in its Resolution No. 23 dated 23-3-1954 which was noticed by the Trust on 31-3-1954 a copy of which was sent to you and the Government under endorsement No. SB- dated 21-3-1954. 3. Proposals for the development of the remaining area measuring about 606.76 acres which is mostly composed of Muslim ownership will be formulated later. As a matter of fact it is contemplated to leave this land with the owners after its development by the Trust at their (owners) cost on exemption basis. (i) The University authorities are arranging to obtain the necessary funds for the acquisition of the land through the Trust. (1) SME the area under the University Campus will be developed by the University itself, the Trust has not drawn up any lay out plan for the Campus at this stage. The finalization of such a lay-out will take some considerable time and the Vice-Chancellor is very anxious to have the foundation stone of the New University Campus laid at a very early date. This would not be possible until the land is acquired and placed at the disposal of the University Authorities and the case is BMG submitted without a lay-out plan for the areas. (hi) As stated in (1) (i) above the Trust contemplates to develop an area measuring 221.84 acres and when forwarding separately that scheme for Government sanction it will submit the rough cost estimate on the lines of P. W. D. giving specifications, of works to be done, the streets to be paved, the schedules of rates on which the expenditure will be incurred etc. "For the renaming area a separate scheme will be prepared under section 28 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, later on and submitted with the desired cost estimates as required under section 40 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922. (TV) The'land taken by the P. W. D. under “Washday Colony” and contiguous land along the Kacha Multan Road not required by the Trust has been excluded, and Public Notice is being issued accordingly. ’ (v) The land measuring 221.84 acres will be developed by the Trust from its own resources within the next two years and their renaming areas will Be developed after another two years thereafter. (vi) University Authorities and the Government are press mg hard for the immediate possession of the land and therefore a notification by Government under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, is an absolute necessity. D. O. No. A-3-61-5 dated -10- 56 from the Secretary to Government, West Pakistan Education Department speaks for itself (vi) The Trust has vide Resolution No. dated 15-9-1955 decided to give freely, exemptions to Muslim Owners in all its scheme. The land falling with the New University Campus is mostly composed of evacuee land and Government land under the Artillery Rifle Range (an application for the transfer of which free of cost has since been made vide my letter No. SB- dated 8- 7-1954 to your address-correspondence resting with late Punjab Government endorsement No. 3613-C P- dated 19- 4-1956 to you refers). IPI) After the sanction of the scheme the Land Acquisition Collector will be advised to deal with the land of the Corporation under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Punjab Town Improvement Act or the land will be acquired by private treaty. ' (ix) A revised draft notification is enclosed herewith as desired. It is now requested that the Government may. kindly be approached to sanction at a date as early as possible the acquisition of the land by the Lahore Improvement Trust also authorize the L. I. T. to take possession of the land under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act. 1894. ' Your obedient servant -. (SD.). Abdul Rahim, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust.” The Scheme thus included not only the construction of a New I Campus for the University, but also development of two housing) colonies. This was in accordance with the decision taken in the meeting held by the Chief Minister on 16-2-1954 to which reference has been made above. Under section 24 of the Town Improvement Act the Trust may inter alia prepare a scheme for the purpose of development of any locality within the municipal limits. Construction of a new campus for the University and development of housing colonies in the area included Sn the scheme was thus amply covered by the provisions of section 24. Mr. Mahmood Haman, appearing for the Trust maintained and rightly so that construction of a new campus for the University was for the development of the city of Lahore and that the real beneficiaries of the scheme were the citizens of Lahore generally and the students' community in particular. We will now examine the two other grounds on which the acquisition proceedings were invalidated by the High Court (1) that the scheme framed by the Trust was no scheme at all under sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act and* therefore, no notice under section 36 could be given MN respect of it; and (u) the Trust could not acquire land for another corporate body. Earlier we have reproduced in extensor the provisions of sections 24 and 28 which inter alia authorize the Trust to frame a development scheme within a municipal area. A plain reading of these sections makes out that a scheme framed under section 24 may provide for all or any one of the matters provided in it. A scheme may thus provide for acquisition of land only and that seems to be the case here. The University Campus was to be developed by the University, the scheme for developing a housing colony in 221.84 acres had been prepared separately and submitted to the Government for sanction as mentioned in the letter of the Chairman, reproduced earlier, while the scheme for development of 608.70 acres was to be prepared at a later stage. It would not, therefore, be said that the scheme prepared! by the Trust was no scheme in the eye of law at all, because it)c did not provide for relay mg out of land comprised in the scheme or laying out and alteration of streets, earmarking open spaces,' raising, lowering or reclamation of land, drainage, water supply and lighting. The learned Judges posted out that no estimate of costs was prepared, but that was necessary only in respect of that part of the scheme which was to be executed by the Trust itself, The University Campus was to be constructed by the University Authorities. No estimate of costs for this part of the scheme was, therefore, necessary. Estimate of costs of the housing scheme in 221.84 acres had been submit Ted along with the scheme. The third part of the scheme had yet to be prepared. The omission to submit an estimate of cost for, the entire scheme was, therefore, no fatal defect in the scheme as held by the learned Judges. In dealing with section 28 of the Town Improvement Act, reproduced above, the learned Judges again fell in error in making the assumption that a scheme which did not make provision for all the matters enumerated in the section was no scheme at all under the Act. The section expressly provides that the scheme may provide for all or any of the matters set out therein. The scheme in respect of which notice was given was. thus amply covered by’ the provisions of ’sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act and the notice issued in respect of it under section 36 of that Act was quite valid in law. A word may be said about the observations by the learned Judges that in acquiring the land for the University the Trust did not act bona fide and that the scheme was a fraud on the Town Improvement Act. It has been noticed that while compensation for evacuee land was fixed by the Collector at the rate of Rs. 550, per canal, and the Custodian of Evacuee Property accepted this price grudgingly, the portion of the same land was sold by him to the Society, seven years later, when prices had _ appreciated - considerably, at "Rs: 250, "per Etihad. Could it, therefore, be said that in acquiring the land for the University the Trust wanted to confer a wrongful gain on the University or that it was an abuse of the Town Improvement Act. On the contrary in their letter dated 18th April 1957, the Central Government had expressly provided that approval was accorded to the acquisition of evacuee land by the Government of West Pakistan under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by Second Schedule to the Town Improvement Act. It has also been seen that a scheme for shifting the University Campus was first framed by the Trust in 1944 which was abandoned because of Partition in 1947. The Trust had thus acted in accordance with law and not male FIDE in acquiring land inter Asia for the construction of a new campus for the University. The last ground that the Trust could not acquire land under the Town Improvement Act for another corporate body is equally untenable. The decided cases on which they have relied have been mentioned earlier. The entire reasoning on this part of the cases proceeded on an erroneous assumption. As seen the Trust was required by the Provincial Government to prepare a scheme inter alia for the construction of a new campus for the University. Possession of the land was given under the orders of the Collector to the Trust and thereupon title in 'the land passed to it under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The total area of land acquired by the Collector m the four villages of Khanewal, Devisable, Diana Singh Walk and Chara as given in the chart at page 601 of the Collector’s Files 1192.67 acres. The rest of the land belonged to the Government. It had been used in the past as Rifle Range by Armed Forces. At the request of the Punjab Government, the Government of Pakistan surrendered it for construction of the University Campus. The letter of the Central Government is in the records of the Trust. The learned Judges have themselves emphasized that the University did not claim any title in the land in dispute. It was therefore, correct to say that the Trust had acted as an agent of the University in acquiring the land comprised in the scheme. The University paid Rs. 20 lacs to reimburse the Trust for the compensation payable by it to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, but that is true in all cases m which the Trust acquires land Included in a development scheme and subsequently transfers it to others for build mg houses, shops, factories, etc. It does not mean that land is acquired by the Trust for those individuals as an agent. In the instant case the land was acquired for a development scheme as envisaged in sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act and its legality could not be challenged on the ground that it was subsequently disposed of to other persons including a corporate body. As held earlier the acquisition of land by the Trust was within the purposes of the Act and on that ground alone the acquisition of the land comprised in the scheme was valid. None of the decided cases on which the learned Judges of the High Court have relied in support of this ground is, therefore, applicable to the facts of the present case. After the arguments were concluded and judgment was reserved Mr. GhiasMohammad filed a miscellaneous petition forrehearmg the appeals on the ground that his clients had succeeded in laying their hands on two housing colony schemes framed by the Trust on part of the land acquired under the scheme with which we are concerned at later dates. It was intended to show that the original scheme included only the construction of a campus for the University, the assumption made by the petitioners is palpably incorrect. We have reproduced for this purpose in this order the letter of the Chairman of the Trust No. SB- dated the 8th December 1956, written to the Commissioner, Lahore Division, under which he submitted the revised scheme for sanction of the Provincial Government. The plan accompanying the scheme shows in different colors the areas earmarked for the two housing colonies and the University Campus. The area of each sector is mentioned in the plan and is referred to in the letter. The proposals of the two housing colonies schemes at later dates on which the respondents rely, therefore, has no bearing on the decision of these appeals. We did not, therefore, consider it necessary to reopen the hearing of these appeals. It remains to mention one more ground urged by Mr. Goiás Mohammad. During the hearings of the appeals, he made a grievance that this Court should not make reference to any document of which copy was not produced in the High Court by the Trust and of which he had no notice. As the matter raised is of substance, we will examine it in detail. In its writ petition the Trust relied among others on the Resolution passed by the Trustees approving the scheme framed under sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act, the Notification issued by it under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act in which the boundaries of the land included in the scheme were delineated; the No-Objection Certificate issued by the Rehabilitation authorities for acquisition of evacuee Land included in the scheme ; Notification issued by the Provincial Government according sanction to the scheme under section 42 of the Town Improvement Act ; the permission granted by the Central Government under section 12 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of 1949 ; orders passed by the Governor declaring that the scheme for which laud was to be acquired was covered by section 50 of the Land Acquisition Act and application of section 17 to the acquisition proceedings under which the Collector could take possession of arable" and wasteland before delivery of award ; order given by the. Provin-cial Government to the Collector to enter upon acquisition proceedings ; notices issued by the Collector under sections 9 and 10 of the Land Acquisition Act ; entry in the Roznamcha of the Atari recording delivery of possession to the Trust on 26-6-1957; the concurrence given by the Custodian to the tentative award drawn up by the Collector ; and finally the awards delivered by the Collector and payment of Rs. 20. lacs by the University to'the Custodian of Evacuee Property as compensation for evacuee land acquired by the Trust. Copies of these documents formed appendixes to the writ petition. Nothing Moore was needed, on the part of the Trust to make "out its "case that "the Custodian of Evacuee Property as well as the evacuee owners having been divested of title in the laud acquired by the Trust, the Custodian could not in law resell the same land to the Society. The onus was thereafter on the Society to show that the acquisition proceedings in which the land sold to it was acquired earlier by the Trust was illegal and void. The Society filed documents to show that it had acquired the land after obtain No- Objection Certificates from the Rehabilitation Department and the Town Planner of the Trust though the latter had nonlegal authority to issue such a certificate and that permission of the Central Government was obtained under section 12 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of 1949 for acquisition of evacuee land. Copy of the sale deed executed; by the Custodian and-the receipt showing payment of Rs. 6,27,037.50 by the Society to the Custodian as price of the land were also placed on record. None of these documents, however, reflected on the legality of the acquisition proceedings in which the same land had been earlier acquired by the Trust. The pleas taken up by the Society in their written statement were different from the pleas urged during the hearing of the writ petition. Initially the Society maintained that the land, MN dispute, was withdrawn from the scheme prepared by the Trust, that the approval given by the Central Government under section 12 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of*1949 for acquisition of evacuee land by the Trust was revoked, that no price for the land, in dispute, was paid by the Trust to the Custodian, that the Trust having issued a No-Objection Certificate to the purchase of the land, in dispute, by it was stopped from challenging the legality of the sale of that land and finally that the writ petition filed six years after the sale in favor of the Society had been completed washable to be dismissed on grounds of laches. The last ground was factually correct. Sale deed in favor of the Society was executed in March 1964, and the writ petition was filed on 1965. On perusal of the pleadings of the parties the learned Judges \m the High Court directed counsel for the Trust to produce the -1a relating to the acquisition of the disputed land by the Trust. This fact is mentioned in clause (d) of the replication hied by the Trust to the preliminary objections raised by the Society. It reads: “However, in view of the objections raised by respondent No. and as directed by this Hon’BLE Court, the record relating to acquisition of the land, IA dispute, has been produced. All the grounds on which the acquisition proceedings were later on declared by the High Court to be illegal thus arose from the perusal of the record by the learned Judges of the High Court and not on the basis of the written statement filed by the Society or any document produced by it. The learned Judges themselves make mention of the fact that they had perused the records of acquisition of the land by the Trust on which their conclusions are based. In summoning the record and using it for the purpose of determine the legality of the acquisition proceedings, the learned Judges acted with jurisdiction. This, however, does not mean that examination of the record by this Court should be Limited only to those documents on which the learned Judges have relied. The entire record was before the High Court and a fortiori the same is open to examination by this Court. Another principle attracted in the case is that before an order passed by a public authority is struck d.own it is the duty of the Court to explore every possible explanation for its validity and examine the entire field of powers conferred on the authority in pursuance to which the impugned order has been passed. See The Chairman, East Pakistan Railway Board, Chittagong and another v. Abdul Majid Vardar, Ticket Collector It was remarked in this judgment : “Acts performed and orders made by public authorities deserve due regard by Courts and every possible explanation for their validity should be explored and the whole field of powers in pursuance to which the public authorities act or perform their functions examined and only then if it is found that the act done, order made or proceeding undertaken is without lawful authority should the Courts declare them to be of no legal effect.” To satisfy the requirement of this rule it is the duty of the Court to exam me the entire record pertaining to the action taken, order passed and proceedings undertaken which are challenged as without lawful authority under Article 98 of the Constitution. Otherwise grave miscarriage of justice may take place in the exercise of this beneficial jurisdiction. The objection raised by Mr. Goiás Mohammad that the appellants or the Court so moth could not make resort to any document on the record of the Collector, the Trust and the University which was not relied upon in the High Court has, therefore, no substance. For the forego mg reasons we allow both the appeals, set aside the judgment and order of the High Court passed in Writ Petition No. 1142 of 1965 on 26th May 1969, and declare that the sale of the land describe din the writ petition by the Custodian of Evacuee Property to the Society under the sale deed executed by him on IST of May 1964, was without lawful authority and direct him to cancel the sale-deed and to refund to the Society the sum of Rs. 6,27,037.50 paid by-the-Society to -him* as‘sale price. _ In the circumstances of the case, we refrain from burdening the respondents with the costs of these proceedings. - Appeals accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): Judgment Muhammad Aqua Ali, J—This order will dispose of Civil Appeal No. 36 of 1970 filed by the Lahore Improvement Trust hereafter referred to as the Trust and Coil Appeal No. 37 of 1970 filed by the Punjab University hereinafter referred to as the University. Both the appeals are directed against the judgment and order of a Division Bench of the erstwhile High Court of West Pakistan, Lahore Seat, dated the 26th May 1969, whereby Writ Petition No. 1142 of 1965 filed by the Trust to call in question the sale of 2508 canals and 7 Marley of land situated in village Khanewal, Thesis Lahore, by the Custodian of Evacuee Property in favor of Rican Co-operative Society hereafter referred to as the Society was dismissed. The facts giving rise to these appeals may first be taken notice of The old Campus of the University is situated outside the walled city of Lahore between the Lower Mall Road and College Road. In the course optime the number of Colleges affiliated to the University multiplied manifold and many new departments were added to the teaching section consequent upon which it became necessary to expand the Campus of the University. No land in the locality was, however, available at the old site. In view of this congestion the Trust made provision in the Greater Lahore Scheme framed by it in 1944 for shifting of the University Campus to an area of 2200 acres between Ferozepur Road and Multan Road three miles away from the existing Campus. The Scheme was not yet finalized when Partition took place in, 1947 and nothing more was heard of TT. In 1950 the Punjab Government set up a University Commission which, submitted its report in 1953. Among other proposals it was recommended by the Commission that the University and its affiliated colleges be shifted from the existing crowded localities to the site earlier earmarked by the Trust in the Scheme framed by it in 1944. The proposal was accepted by the Provincial Government and a direction was given to the Trust to frame a development Scheme for construction of a modern housing colony and a New Campus for the University. The Scheme under sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act was framed by the Trust in early 1954 comprising an area of 3100 acres. Under section 36 of the Act the Scheme was notified in Daily Newspaper appearing in Lahore on the 10th and 16th of April 1954, meeting objections by the Mayor of the Corporation of the City of Lahore, Health Officer, public and the owners whose lands were included in the Scheme. As part of the land belonged to evacuee notices were separately sent to the Custodian of Evacuee Property and the Rehabilitation Commissioner as representative of the Evacuee interest. The history of the Scheme up to this stage is summed up by the Vice-Chancellor of the University in his letter to the Chairman of the Trust reproduced below: “August 16, 1955. My dear

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): to the Custodian of Evacuee Property and the Rehabilitation Commissioner as representative of the Evacuee interest. The history of the Scheme up to this stage is summed up by the Vice-Chancellor of the University in his letter to the Chairman of the Trust reproduced below: “August 16, 1955. My dear Rahim, A few days ago I had a telephone talk with you regarding the new site for the University. Since then J have studied the University file dealing with this case. The proposal to shift the University out of the present congested area has been under consideration for many years, but I will take up the story from 1944 when Mr. Afoul AHSA wrote a letter "to the Vice-Chancellor (D. O. No. 99, dated the 17th April 1944). The area which Mr. Afoul AHSA suggested was on this side of the canal, between Ferozepur Road and Multan Road, beyond Muslim Town. Several meetings were held, and the question discussed again and again. I find a printed copy of the resolution No. 38, passed at the ordinary meeting of the Lahore Improvement Trust, held on the 10th March 1945, regarding the University Area Scheme. There are printed in this. document mutes of a meeting held at the residence of the Hon’BLE Minister of Education on the 8th February 1945, wherein details are given, and the site selected by the Lahore Improvement Trust for the construction of a new University Town (approximately 2500 acres) was approved. There is a letter No. 2142 dated September 6, 1946, from the Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, to the Vice-Chancellor which says: “Much of the land affected by the scheme was noticed for requisition on the 29th October 1344, and if it is not decided very soon to complete the acquisition we shall have in fairness to the owners to drop this scheme altogether’, to which Vice-Chancellor replied to the effect that he was awaiting reply from the Government. There was some discussion about this matter further, but this phase evidently ended in October 1946, without any definite decision. The Scheme was again revived in 1953 and there is a D. O. No. SB/52/SB/, dated the 27th April 1953, from the Town Planner, Lahore Improvement Trust to Dr. Bash Ahmad, Vice-Chancellor, and an alternative suggestion had been made that the University might shift to Reich Chandra. In September 1953, Dr. Bashir Ahmad discussed this question with Mr. Muhammad Iqbal, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, and Mr. S. A. Rahim, Town Planner. It was then estimated that the cost Orland would be Rs. 300 per canal. and the Development charges Rs. 700 per canal the total beg Rs. 1,000 per canal. On 26th January 1954, there was a discussion between Mr. Howe, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, Dr. Bashir Ahmad, Vice- Chancellor, Mr. S. A. Rahim, Town Planner, Sh. Muhammad Iqbal, Secretary, Lahore Improvement Trust, Registrar, Deputy Registrar and the University Engineer. Then followed a meeting held on the 16th February 1954, in the room of the Hon’BLE Chief Muster,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): between Mr. Howe, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, Dr. Bashir Ahmad, Vice- Chancellor, Mr. S. A. Rahim, Town Planner, Sh. Muhammad Iqbal, Secretary, Lahore Improvement Trust, Registrar, Deputy Registrar and the University Engineer. Then followed a meeting held on the 16th February 1954, in the room of the Hon’BLE Chief Muster, Punjab, Malik Froze Khan Moon. The Chairman of the Improvement Trust was instructed to proceed with the acquisition of the land. It was decided that out of this total area of 3000 acres approximately 2200 acres would be for the University Campus and the rest will be developed by the Improvement Trust as a modern residential area. Dr. Bashir Ahmad received an encouraging reply No. F16(21)/ 54. R. I, dated the 18th February 1954, from the Mister of Refugees and Rehabilitation, Government of Pakistan, stating that the Central Government would agree to sanction the acquisition of the evacuee land in question provided the Government of the Punjab undertook to provide suitable alternative land to the refugees settled on that land. On March 31 1954, the Lahore Improvement Trust, Lahore, issued a notice under section 36 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922, regarding the acquisition of approximately 3100 acres situated on both sides of Lahore Branch Bari Drab Canal giving the boundary. This notice appeared in the Pakistan Times dated April 3, 1954, and April 10, 1954. Mr, Howe, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust addressed a Letter No. SB-, dated the 19th May 1954, to the Commissioner, Lahore Division, Lahore, raising various questions. I think here the matter rests. I shall be grateful if you will kindly let me know what the present position is? University is anxious to proceed with the scheme and the first step is acquiring land. I shall feel most grateful if you will kindly take necessary action and give me an estimate of the cost of approximate 1500 acres which will be required by the University. Yours sincerely, (SD.) JM. Axial Hussein) _ ‘ ““'"“. © Vice-Chancellor.”, In response to the notices issued by the Trust under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act a number of persons raised objections to the proposed Scheme which were disposed of in the meeting of the Trust held on 14-7-1955. Thereafter the Scheme was on 7-12-1955 submitted by the Chairman to the Commissioner, Lahore Division, for obtain sanction of the Government under section 41 of the Act. The Provincial Government was further requested to obtain sanction of the Central Government for acquisition of evacuee land as required by section 12 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance XV of 1949. The area of 3100 acres included in the Scheme was divided into four parts: (1) Satellite Town, (1) One-Unit Staff Quarters, (Hi) Development Scheme and (iv) University Area. The Provincial Government raised CERTAM objections to the proposed Scheme and directed that the area earmarked for One-Unit Staff Quarters be deleted from the Scheme as the Public Works Department had since then decided to construct the staff quarters through its

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): Staff Quarters, (Hi) Development Scheme and (iv) University Area. The Provincial Government raised CERTAM objections to the proposed Scheme and directed that the area earmarked for One-Unit Staff Quarters be deleted from the Scheme as the Public Works Department had since then decided to construct the staff quarters through its own agency and acquire the land for this purpose separately. The Scheme for Satellite Town was also abandoned by the Government’ in the interest of the University. The Scheme was revised by the Trust and resubmitted to the Commissioner Lahore Division, on 8-12-1956. The area included in the Scheme was, as mentioned in the letter of the Chairman of the Trust accompanying the revised Scheme, now reduced to 2478 acres divided into three parts: University Campus. 1615 (11) Development Scheme adjacent to Muslim Town. 221.84 (hi) Development Scheme adjacent to Garden Town. acres The Scheme was sanctioned by the Provincial Government and published in the official Gazette dated the 24th January 1957. The Trust was authorized to acquire the land included in the Scheme either under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Schedule attached to the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1832, or-by purchase, exchange, or otherwise. The Governor of West Pakistan was further pleased to declare that the purpose for which the Trust required land was a public purpose under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922. The Land Acquisition Collector was authorized to take possession of the land before announcement of the Award for compensation as provided in section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act. Possession of evacuee land was, however, to betaken after permission to acquire was obtained from the Central Government. The Collector obtained orders from the Provincial Government for acquisition of privately owned land comprised in the Scheme under section 7 of the Land Acquisition Act and issued notices under sections 9 and 10 to the owners of the lands for film statements of their claims. Separate notice were given to the Custodian of Evacuee Property and the Rehabilitation Commissioner for this purpose as representatives of Evacuee interest. Before these notices were issued the Central Government had accorded permission to acquire evacuee land on the conditions laid down their No. F-16(33)/57-P. II dated the 18th April 1957, addressed to the Secretary to the Government of West Pakistan, Refugees and Rehabilitation Department, Lahore, reproduced below: “With reference to your letter No. 2447-RR/| R-57, dated the 2ad April 1957, I am directed to say that in exercise of the powers conferred by section 16(3)\b) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (XII of 1957;, the Central Government is pleased to accord approval to the acquisition by the Government of West Pakistan under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922, of evacuee land measuring 11,924 canals and 18 Marley as per details shown in the schedule received with your letter under reference situated in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): the acquisition by the Government of West Pakistan under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922, of evacuee land measuring 11,924 canals and 18 Marley as per details shown in the schedule received with your letter under reference situated in District Lahore for University Campus on the competition that fair compensation in accordance with the principles laid down in the said Act will be assessed in consultation with the Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore, and paid to that officer for credit to the evacuee owners’ account and that the refugees, if any, settled thereon will be provided with alternative land.” After the expiration of prescribed period of 15 days the Collector took possession of the lands included in the Scheme and made it over to the Trust. The possession of the land in village Khanewal of which the land in dispute forms a part was taken by the Collector on 26-6-1958 as recorded in the Daily Diary of Atari Helga dated 2nd July 1958. On considering the claims filed by the local owners and the data supplied by the Revenue authorities the Collector drew up a tentative award fixing the price of both evacuee and nonevacuee land at an average rate of Rs. 550 per canal. The. Award was sent to the Custodian of Evacuee Property for his approval m terms of the direction given by the Central Government. The Custodian reluctantly agreed to the rate -of compensation and accepted the tentative award, but desired that the rate fixed. in this case should - not be treated as a precedent in other cases. Thereafter the Collector pronounced the final awards for separate estates situated in village Diana Mufasa on 19th March 1959, in village Khanewal on 19th April 1960, in village Devastated on 20th September 1960, and village Chara on 26th September 1960. The total price of the evacuee land acquired by the Collector worked out at Rs. 24,24,b07-6-0. Out of this sum the University paid as mentioned earlier Rs. 20 lacs to the Custodian partly through the Trust and partly by a deposit in the account of the Custodian. Soon thereafter the University started construction of its New Campus MN accordance with the plans drawn up by a foreign firm of architects. According to the figures given in the blueprint of the Scheme published by the University in 1954 the total cost of buildings and equipment amounted to a little over Rs. five crores. Turning to the claim by the Society we find that’ it was registered in 1953 with the object of acquiring land and providing building sites to its like-minded members at cheap rates. The land selected for this purpose was situated in village Khanewal and was already included in the University New Campus Schemes. This fact was fully known to the Society and on 1- 9-1955 it obtained a No-Objection Certificate from the Town Planner of the Trust who had no lawful authority to give the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): for this purpose was situated in village Khanewal and was already included in the University New Campus Schemes. This fact was fully known to the Society and on 1- 9-1955 it obtained a No-Objection Certificate from the Town Planner of the Trust who had no lawful authority to give the certificate. Similar certificates were obtained from the Rehabilitation Commissioner (Lands) in 1954 and’ from. the Urban Development Commissioner in 1955. Finally on 13-7-1959 approval of the Central Government was obtained under section 16(3) (b) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1956 for the purchase of 2508 canals OND Marley of evacuee land (a little more than 312 acres) comprising Kara Nos. 1388 to 1622. In consultation with the Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, the Custodian fixed the price of the land at Rs. 250 per canal although earlier he had rather reluctantly accepted Rs. 550, per canal, as the price of land acquired by the Trust. The Society deposited the sale price amounting to Rs. 6,27,087.00 with the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner Lahore, and there-! upon a formal sale-deed was executed in its favor on the 22nd March 1964. After entering into possession the Society commenced buildings operation which came to the notice of the Lahore Improvement Trust and TNE Punjab University. The Trust applied to the Custodian of Evacuee Property for cancellation of the sale of 2508 canals and 7 Marley of land to the Society which already stood acquired by it and title had passed on to the Trust under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act. The application was rejected and thereupon the Trust filed Writ Petition in the High Court imp leading among others the Custodian of Evacuee Property, the Society and the University as respondents. It was claimed that the Custodian having been divested of title in the land acquired by the Trust could not have resold the same to the Society. In its written statement the University supported the claim of the Trust and pleaded that it had already paid Rs. 20 lacs as price of the land given to it by the Trust for the construction of its Campus and that the Campus was already under construction. The claim made by the Trust in the Writ Petition was controverted by the Society on variety of grounds to which reference will be made at a later stage. A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that (1) the notice issued by the Trust under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act was illegal as prior approval of the Central Government as required by section 12(0 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordnance XV of 1949 was not obtained (i) that no proper scheme was prepared by the Trust in respect of which notice under section 36 could be issued; (Hi) that the acquisition was not for any purpose contemplated by they Town Improvement Act; (iv) that in acquiring the land the Trust did not act bona fide’, and that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): that no proper scheme was prepared by the Trust in respect of which notice under section 36 could be issued; (Hi) that the acquisition was not for any purpose contemplated by they Town Improvement Act; (iv) that in acquiring the land the Trust did not act bona fide’, and that under the Town Improvement Act the Trust could not acquire land for another corporate body. Leave to appeal was granted both to the Trust and the Punjab University as important questions of law were involved in the decision of the case and there was no authoritative pronouncement of the Court on these points. During the hearing of the appeals the counsel for the Society and the Trust arrived at a settlement and made the following statements before the Court on 12-3-1971 : “Mr. Goiás Mohammad states that the Improvement Trust and Rican Colony agreed that the sale of land in question by the Custodian in favor of Rican Colony, should be maintained as valid and Rican Colony undertakes to abide by rules, bye-laws and Regulation of the Lahore Improvement Trust, regarding development of this land by the Rican Colony. The parties to bear their own costs. (SD.) Goiás Mohammad. Mr. Mahmood Haman, Advocate, for the Improvement Trust, says that they have agreed to accommodate the Rican Colony and to accept the sale, in favor of Rican Colony, on the above terms and conditions. (SD.) Mahmood Haman.” Counsel for the Punjab University did not subscribe to the agreement and maintained that the Custodian having been divested of title in the land, in dispute its resale in favor of the Society was wholly illegal and void. No amount of agreement between the Trust and the Society could, therefore, deprive the University of the land which had come to be vested in it long before the sale in favor of the Society. The statement made by Mr, Mahmood Haman on instructions from the Chairman of the Trust was also claimed to be without any legal authority. Under section.96 of the Town Improvement Act the powers of the Chairman are confined to—. institute, defend or withdraw from legal proceedings under this Act; (11) compound any offense against this Act;. (in) admit, compromise or withdraw any claim made under this Act; and (iv) obtain such legal advice and assistance as he may from time to time deem TT necessary or expedient to obtain, or as he may be desired by the Trust to obtain, for any of the purposes referred to in the foregoing clause of this section, or- for securing the lawful exercise or discharge -of any-power- -or duty vested in or imposed upon the trust or any officer or servant of the trust.” ' The claim made by the Society that the land, in dispute had been lawfully acquired by it from the Custodian did not constitute a claim under the Town Improvement Act. The Chairman had, therefore, no power to admit the clam of the Society and thereby surrender valuable property rights

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): ' The claim made by the Society that the land, in dispute had been lawfully acquired by it from the Custodian did not constitute a claim under the Town Improvement Act. The Chairman had, therefore, no power to admit the clam of the Society and thereby surrender valuable property rights of the Trust. Such a compromise could only be made by the Trust and that too with the concurrence of the University and the Provincial Government. The former had paid Rs. 20 lacs for purchase of land which included the disputed area of 2509 canals sold by the Custodian to the Society. The approval of the Provincial Government was' necessary as the compromise offended the provisions of the Town Improvement Act which lay down that after a Scheme has been sanctioned by the Provincial Government under section 40, a substantial modification cannot be fade except with the approval of the Provincial Government and on giving fresh’ notices to the persons affected thereby. The Court, accordingly, declined to enforce the settlement and heard the appeals on merits. We may examine now in detail the reasons on which the High Court judgment TS based. The learned Judges held firstly that the notice given by the Trust under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act was bad in law because there was no proper scheme in respect of which the notice as an essential step in the acquisition proceedings was to be given. Secondly TT was held that section 36 which authorized the Land Acquisition Collector to enter upon the land proposed to be acquired and perform certain acts on the land including causing an injury to the land was in conflict with section 24. of Ordinance XV of 1949. Thirdly the Scheme for which the land was acquired was held to be outside the purview of the Town Improvement Act as the requisites of sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act. Were not complied with. Fourthly it was considered necessary to obtain prior permission of the Central Government when notice under section 36 was given. Reliance was placed on section 12 of the Administration of ' Evacuee Property Ordinance XV of 1949 in this behalf: Lastly it was held that the Trust could not acquire land for the University as it was not one of the purposes of the Town Improvement Act. The principal question argued from the bar before us was whether sanction of the Central Government was necessary before the Trust could give notice under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act. We will therefore, advert to it first. Under the Schedule to the Town Improvement Act notices under sections 36 and 42 have the same effect as notices under sections and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. It is well established that a material defect in a notice issued under either section renders the entire acquisition proceedings illegal. The learned Judges relied in support of this proposition on the decisions in Caesar Singh v. Secretary of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): notices under sections and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. It is well established that a material defect in a notice issued under either section renders the entire acquisition proceedings illegal. The learned Judges relied in support of this proposition on the decisions in Caesar Singh v. Secretary of State for India Mercer v. Liverpool St. Helen's and South Lancashire Rail Co. (2), Associated Hotels of India Ltd. etc. v. ODHA Mai Thalia (3) and Froze Din v. Government of West Pakistan There can be no disagreement with the view expressed by the learned Judges on this point. But was prior permission necessary under section 12 which in substance provides that no legal process shall issue against evacuee property and that while the Central Government may acquire it under any law which confers on it this power to do so, the Provincial Government shall obtain prior approval of the Central Government when exercising this power. The learned Judges held that prior approval was necessary because a notice under section of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, creates a defect in the title of the owner as held in the case Associated Hotels. of India Ltd. etc. v. ODHA Mai Thalia. Two questions arise for consideration in this respect. Firstly whether notice under section 36 created a defect in the title of evacuee owners and the Custodian of Evacuee Property as representatives of their interest and secondly whether there was a bar in section 12 to the giving of such a notice as an essential step in the acquisition proceedings. It was contended by Mr. Manner Nadir with considerable force that whatever may be the position under the ordinary law, notice under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act did not create any defect in the title of the owner of evacuee land as provided m section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 which is reproduced below : “12. Exemption from legal process.—(1) Property which has vested in, or of which possession has been taken by, the Custodian shall be exempt from legal process, including seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale by any officer of Court or any other authority, and no injunction or other order of whatever kind in respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court or any other authority. (2) Upon the commencement of this Ordinance, any such legal process as aforesaid subsisting immediately before such commencement shall cease to have effect and all evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian or other officer or person appointed by it, shall, upon delivery of the same being called for by the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian. (3) Nothing contained in the foregoing subsections shall— (a) prevent Registering Officer from ordering registration of a deed of sale or exchange relating to evacuee immovable property, or a civil Court from ordering specific performance of a contract of sale or exchange of any such property where the sale or exchange or the contract of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): foregoing subsections shall— (a) prevent Registering Officer from ordering registration of a deed of sale or exchange relating to evacuee immovable property, or a civil Court from ordering specific performance of a contract of sale or exchange of any such property where the sale or exchange or the contract of the same has been duly confirmed or approved by the Custodian and ' the required certificate has been granted by him; or (b) affect any power conferred on the Central Government by or under any Jaw for the time being in force to requisition or acquire property, and it is hereby declared that if by or under such law or any other law for the time being in force like power is conferred upon or delegated to a Provincial Government the Provincial Government may exercise the same in relation to evacuee property with and only with the previous approval of the Central Government and subject to such direction as the Central Government may at any time see fit to give. Clause (b) of this subsection shall be deemed to have taken effect on the day this Ordinance came into force.” A notice under section 36 meter Asia notifies boundaries oft the land included in the scheme under preparation. Under section 38 it is necessary to give within 30 days of the publication] of the notice under section 36, individual notices to the owners of the land who may thereupon lodge objections to the proposed acquisition of their land. Notices under section 38 were issued to all the owners including evacuees by publication in daily newspapers. Separate notices were given to the Custodian of Evacuee Property and the Rehabilitation Commissioner as representatives of the interest of evacuee owners. No objection was filed by the evacuees or the said authorities on their behalf The declared intention of section 36 is thus to notify to the owners that their land is proposed to be included in a scheme and that if so advised they may file objections to the proposed acquisition. The bar contained in section 12 is to the issuance of a legal process, such as, seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment, etc. and to acquisition of evacuee land by the Provincial Government without prior approval of the Central Government. Subsection (3) expressly preserves the power of the Central Government to acquire evacuee land under any law in force for the time BMG which includes Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and the Town Improvement Act, 1922. It cannot, therefore, be questioned that notwithstanding the bar contained m subsection (1) of section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949, the Central Government may give order to a Collector under section 7 of the Land Acquisition Act to acquire evacuee land and thereupon he may issue notice under section and enter upon acquisition proceedings. Would it, therefore, make any difference if the Provincial Government directs the Collector to enter upon acquisition proceedings. The answer must be in the negative for the operation of subsection (1) of section 12

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): acquire evacuee land and thereupon he may issue notice under section and enter upon acquisition proceedings. Would it, therefore, make any difference if the Provincial Government directs the Collector to enter upon acquisition proceedings. The answer must be in the negative for the operation of subsection (1) of section 12 is applicable to the Central as well as the Provincial Governments. We have, therefore, to see whether under clause (b) of subsection (3) of section 12, the Trust could not give notice of a scheme in which evacuee land was proposed to be included. On its plain reading clause (b) bars the Provincial Government from exercising power under any law for the time being in force to acquire evacuee land. At the stage when notice under section 36 was given, the Provincial Government had directed the Trust to prepare a development scheme for the construction I of a new campus for the University and a modern housing colony. The Scheme had yet to be finalized by the Trust and submitted to the Provincial Government for sanction under section 40 of the Town Improvement Act. As mentioned earlier the Scheme was sent back by the Provincial Government to the Trust with certain objection, and it had to be revised and resubmitted for sanction. In the circumstances it could not be said that at the time when notice under section 36 was given by the Trust the Provincial Government was exercising the power conferred on it by the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Town Improvement Act to acquire evacuee land. Prior approval of the Central Government was, therefore, not necessary for giving notice under section 36. In coming to the contrary conclusion the learned Judges of the High Court relied on the legal incidence of notice given under section of the Land Acquisition Act that it creates a defect in the title of the owner of the land proposed to be acquired. But creating of defect in the title of an owner is not an essential ingredient of a notification under section of the Land Acquisition Act or section 36 of the Town Improvement Act. As contended by Mr. Manner Nadir section 12 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance XV of 1949 itself safeguarded against any defect being created in the title of the owner of evacuee land or the Custodian of Evacuee Property as his representative in interest. Evacuee land could not be acquired without the prior approval of the Central Government in this c case. The notice issued by the Trust, therefore, only notified to the evacuee owners that their lands were likely to be included in the Scheme and did not go a step further to create a defect in their title in the land. As creation of a defect in the title of the owner of the land which is proposed to be included in a scheme notified under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act is not an essential ingredient of that section,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): to create a defect in their title in the land. As creation of a defect in the title of the owner of the land which is proposed to be included in a scheme notified under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act is not an essential ingredient of that section, the notice was validly given in spite of the bar contained in section 12. Before we part with this aspect of the case it may be pointed out that even before the Trust notified the Scheme under section 36 the Central Government had expressly agreed to the acquisition of evacuee land for. the University- and directed the - Vice- Chancellor to move the Provincial Government for this purpose. Reference may be made in this behalf to the following letter written by the Minister In charge, Refugees and Rehabilitation Department, Government of Pakistan, to the Vice-Chancellor on 18-2-1954 :. “My dear Mr. Bashir Ahmad, Please refer to your d.o. letter dated the 25th January 1954, regarding acquisition of certain evacuee land in connection with the construction of new buildings for the University of the Punjab. — The Central Government would agree to sanction the acquisition of the evacuee land in question provided the Government of the Punjab undertake to provide suitable alternative land to the refugees settled on that land. The acquisition proceedings are conducted by the Provincial Govern-! Meet under the Land Acquisition Act. No proposal has so far been received from the Government of the Punjab and I would, therefore, suggest that you may approach the Rehabilitation Commissioner (General), who is also Secretary to the Government of the Punjab in the Rehabilitation Department, to move in the matter. The proposal will be dealt with promptly in this Ministry on its receipt from the Provincial Government. The papers received with your letter are herewith returned. Yours sincerely. (SD.) (Shriek Qureshi). Bashir Ahmad, Esquire, _ Vice-Chancellor, The University of the Punjab, Lahore.” The Central Government had thus in principle agreed to the acquisition of evacuee land included in the University New Campus Scheme. However, under section 12 it was necessary for the Provincial Government to obtain prior approval of the Central Government and the record bears out. that as soon as the letter written by the Secretary to the Provincial Government reached the Ministry of Refugees and Rehabilitation, the requisite permission was given. The Scheme framed by the Trust thus had the prior approval of the Central Government, and it could not be said that the Trust acted in breach of the law which provided protection to evacuee property from BMG compulsorily acquired under the Land Acquisition Act. The learned Judges next held the notice issued under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act bad in law as it was a legal process which under section 12(1) of Ordinance XV of 1949 could not be issued in respect of evacuee property. “Legal Process’! is defined in Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary as “Process is the dog of something in a proceeding MN a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): Town Improvement Act bad in law as it was a legal process which under section 12(1) of Ordinance XV of 1949 could not be issued in respect of evacuee property. “Legal Process’! is defined in Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary as “Process is the dog of something in a proceeding MN a civil or criminal Court, and that which may be"done without the aid of a Court is not a ‘process’. Therefore, a distract, whether for rent or any other payment, and whether the right of distress be given by the common law or statute is not a ‘process’, nor is it ‘execution or other legal process, within the Bankruptcy Act, 1869 (32 33 Viet. C. 71). “Process” does not include an order made by a Court in the exercise of its punitive jurisdiction; therefore, a Justice’s order, under Distress for Rates Act, 1849 (12 13 Viet. C. 14) committing a person to prison for non-payment of rates, or an order of J imprisonment for either of the defaults in payment mentioned in the Exceptions to Debtors Act, 1869 (32 and 33 Viet. C. 62), section is not a ‘legal process against the property or person of the debtor.’ Similarly, a committal for non-payment of debt under section 5, Debtors Act, 1869, is punitive, and is not a ‘legal process’. Obviously, “all the steps taken in an execution the seizure and the sale—are, in the natural meaning of the word, comprehended in the term ‘process’,” (Lynch, J, : Re Delay A mere notice, though headed with the name of a county Court, is not a‘process’ within County Courts Act, 1846 (9 10 Viet. C. 95) section 57 (R. v. Castle This definition of ‘process’ in subsection (1) of section 12 is made clear by the succeeding subsection that “any such legal process as aforesaid subsisting immediately before such commencement shall cease to have effect and all evacuee property in custody of any Court, or Receiver, guardian or other officer or person appointed by it, shall, upon delivery of the same being called for by the Custodian, be delivered to the Custodian.” The nature of legal process contemplated in section 12 (1) is also illustrated by the description “seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale, injunction’. As notification of the Scheme was not covered by any of these legal processes Mr. Goiás Mohammad relied on the words s “or other order of whatever kind” in the second part of subsection (1) of section 12. This clause, however, is qualified by the words “shall be granted or made by any Court’. The notice issued under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act was, therefore, not covered by subsection (1) of section 12 of Ordinance XV of 1949 and the learned Judges erred in arriving at the contrary conclusion. We may now turn to the finding by the learned Judges that acquisition of land by the Trust for the University was outside the purview of the Town Improvement Act. In support of this proposition they placed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): of 1949 and the learned Judges erred in arriving at the contrary conclusion. We may now turn to the finding by the learned Judges that acquisition of land by the Trust for the University was outside the purview of the Town Improvement Act. In support of this proposition they placed reliance on the provisions of sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act which are reproduced below for facility of reference, “24. Development and expansion schemes.—(1) The trust may, for the purpose of development of any locality within the municipal limits contained in its local area, prepare “‘a development scheme’”’, and (2) Such trust may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient and for the public advantage to promote and control the development of land to provide for the expansion of a municipality in’ any locality adjacent thereto, within the local area of such trust prepare "an expansion scheme”’. ' (3) “A development scheme” or “an expansion scheme” may provide for the lay-out of the locality to be developed, the purposes for which particular portions of such locality are to be utilized, the prescribed street alignment and the building line on each side of the streets proposed in such locality, the damage of insanitary localities and such other details as may appear desirable.” “28. Combinations of schemes and matters which may be : provided for. in the scheme.-(\) A Scheme under this-Act may combine one or more types of schemes or any special features thereof. (2) Scheme under this Act may provide for all or any of the following matters:. (i) The acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by this Act, or the abandonment of such acquisition under sections 56 and 57 of this Act, of any land or any interest in land necessary for or affected by the execution of the scheme, or adjoining any street, thoroughfare open space to be improved or formed under the scheme;. (i) the acquisition by purchase, lease, exchange, or otherwise of such land or interest in land; (a1) the retention, letting on hire, lease, sale, exchange or disposal otherwise of any land vested in or acquired by the trust;. (JV) the demolition of buildings or portions of buildings that are unfit for the purpose for which they are intended and that obstruct light or air or project beyond the building line; (v) the relaying out of any land comprised in the scheme and the redistribution of sites belonging to owners of property comprised in the scheme; (vi) the laying out and alteration of streets; (VH) the provision of open spaces in the interests of the residents of any locality comprised in the scheme or any adjoining locality and the enlargement or alteration of existing open spaces; ' (will) the raising, lowering or reclamation of any land vested in or to be acquired by the trust for the purposes of the scheme and the reclamation or reservation of land for the production of fruit, vegetables, fuel, fodder and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): and the enlargement or alteration of existing open spaces; ' (will) the raising, lowering or reclamation of any land vested in or to be acquired by the trust for the purposes of the scheme and the reclamation or reservation of land for the production of fruit, vegetables, fuel, fodder and the like for the residents of the local area; (ix) the drawing, water-supply and lighting of streets altered or constructed; (x) the provision of a system of drains and sewers for the improvement of ill-defined and insanitary localities3 ’ ‘ " ‘ (xi) The dome of all acts intended to promote the health of residents of the area comprised in the scheme, including the conservation and preservation from jury or pollution of rivers and other sources and means of water supply; (,xu) the demolition of existing buildings and the erection and re-erection of buildings by the trust or by the owners or by the trust in default of the owners; (xi) the advance to the owners of land comprised within the scheme upon such terms and conditions as to interest and sinking fund and otherwise as may be prescribed under the scheme of the whole or part of the capital requisite for the erection of buildings in accordance with the scheme; (xiv) the provision of facilities for communication; (xv) all other matters which the Provincial Government may deem necessary to promote the general efficiency of a scheme or to improve the locality comprised in such scheme” In the opinion of the learned Judges the Act gives the Trust the power to acquire land only if it is required for executing one of the schemes under the Act. The scheme for the construction of a new campus for the University which was to be developed by the University and not by the Trust was in this view considered to be outside the purview of the Town Improvement Act. The willingness of the Trust to exercise this power at the request of the Government for the benefit of the University was on this hypothesis held to be ultra vires of the tent of the Act itself. The learned Judges relied on the dictum in Manic Hand Mahatma v. Corporation of Calcutta Calcutta Improvement Trust v. MST. Meherunisa (2) and Lynch v. Commissioners of Sewers of the City of London (3) and concluded thus:— “We have no doubt that the Trust was exercising its power not for statutory purpose of executing the scheme, but that the land should be handed over to the University for building the New Campus. The Trust it appears was conscious of this position. They had been asked by the Government to acquire the land for the University. They could not legally do so, but to carry out the wishes of the Government which they thought, though wrongly, they could not ignore, they, by giving the transaction as ostensible name of Development Scheme, proceeded to acquire the land under the Act. The Trust did not act bona fide.” We

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): could not legally do so, but to carry out the wishes of the Government which they thought, though wrongly, they could not ignore, they, by giving the transaction as ostensible name of Development Scheme, proceeded to acquire the land under the Act. The Trust did not act bona fide.” We are unable to concur in the view expressed by the learned Judges that the acquisition of the land by the Trust was not for any one of its purposes and that in making the acquisition the Trust did not act bona fide. The finding on this point of the case is based solely on the assumption that the entire land acquired by the Collector was handed over to the University for development and that in making resort to the provisions of the Town Improvement Act land was acquired at less than the market value and thereby a wrongful gain was conferred on the University. In the plan accompanying the revised scheme to which reference has been made earlier the area of 2478 acres included in the Schemas divided into three parts—— (1) University Campus 1615 acres (2) Development Scheme adjacent. to Muslim Town. 221.84 acres (3) Development Scheme adjacent to Garden Town. 606 acres In the middle is the area earmarked for the University Campus and on the other two sides adjoining areas are earmarked for housing colonies. The area earmarked for the University Campus was made over to the University authority to be developed by them in accordance with the special requirements “of a teaching “institution. The University had prepared a comprehensive scheme for the construction and development of the New Campus and printed its copies in early 1954. Five copies of the scheme were sent to the Chairman of the Trust. One of the copies was placed on the file of the Scheme with which we are concerned. In a meeting held TN the Office of the Chief Mister of the Punjab on 16th 'February 1954, which was attended by the Hon’BLE Chief Minister, Minister for Education, Minister for Revenue, Minister for Agriculture, Vice-Chancellor, Director of Public Instruction, Financial Commissioner, Revenue, Deputy Commissioner, Lahore, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust, Secretary, Lahore Improvement Trust, Registrar, Punjab University, Town Planner, Lahore, Deputy Registrar (Administration), Punjab University, and the University Engineer. It was inter alia resolved:— “After discussing the pros and cons of the proposal, it was unanimously decided that the proposed site beyond Muslim Town, between Multan and Ferozepur Roads, comprising 3000 acres be acquired. The Chairman of the Improvement Trust was instructed to proceed with the acquisition of the land. It was decided that out,of this total area of 3000 acres, approximately, 2200 acres will be for the University Campus and the rest will be developed by the Improvement Trust as a modern residential area under their own Scheme.” It has been mentioned earlier that the Scheme was revised by the Trust in the light of the objections raised by the Provincial Government and resubmitted by the Chairman to the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): and the rest will be developed by the Improvement Trust as a modern residential area under their own Scheme.” It has been mentioned earlier that the Scheme was revised by the Trust in the light of the objections raised by the Provincial Government and resubmitted by the Chairman to the Commissioner, Lahore Division, on the 8th December, 1956. In his covering letter the Chairman proceeded to say:— Sr. I have the honor to refer to the West Pakistan Government Memo. No. 495 C AT dated the 25th February 1956, to your address a copy of which was also endorsed to me under No. 495-C&T- of even date and to state as under:—. Vide this office letter No. SB-153-7145 dated the 7th December, 1955, the sanction of the Government was sought to the acquisition of the land included in the scheme shown on the plan and described in the notification sent herewith. Para. of this letter clearly lays down the reasons for not preparing a layout. Oat of the land included in the scheme an area measuring approximately 320 acres has been utilised by the P. W. D. for the construction of the colony known as “What Colony”. A portion of the land included in the Scheme measuring approximately 1500 acres was proposed to be developed as a Satellite Town by the Urban Development Department, but as will be evident from D. O. letter No. E. S. P. A- dated the 20th November 1956, from the Secretary to Government, West Pakistan, Education Department, to my address and his Memo. No. A- -56 dated the 6th November 1956, to the address of Secretary to Government, West Pakistan, Social Welfare and Local Government Department (Copies attached) the Government have now decided to drop the scheme for building a Satellite Town in this area. Now, therefore, after excluding the area taken by the P. W. D. under the “What Colony” and the contiguous area along the Kacha Multan Road the boundary of the scheme has been changed as shown on Drawing No. D. S. -54 attached herewith. The remaining area after excluding the What Colony will be developed as under : (1) Land measuring 1650 acres for setting up the New University Campus. (2) Land measure 221.84 acres to be developed as a Trust development scheme as framed by the Trust in its Resolution No. 23 dated 23-3-1954 which was noticed by the Trust on 31-3-1954 a copy of which was sent to you and the Government under endorsement No. SB- dated 21-3-1954. 3. Proposals for the development of the remaining area measuring about 606.76 acres which is mostly composed of Muslim ownership will be formulated later. As a matter of fact it is contemplated to leave this land with the owners after its development by the Trust at their (owners) cost on exemption basis. (i) The University authorities are arranging to obtain the necessary funds for the acquisition of the land through the Trust. (1) SME the area under the University Campus will

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): contemplated to leave this land with the owners after its development by the Trust at their (owners) cost on exemption basis. (i) The University authorities are arranging to obtain the necessary funds for the acquisition of the land through the Trust. (1) SME the area under the University Campus will be developed by the University itself, the Trust has not drawn up any lay out plan for the Campus at this stage. The finalization of such a lay-out will take some considerable time and the Vice-Chancellor is very anxious to have the foundation stone of the New University Campus laid at a very early date. This would not be possible until the land is acquired and placed at the disposal of the University Authorities and the case is BMG submitted without a lay-out plan for the areas. (hi) As stated in (1) (i) above the Trust contemplates to develop an area measuring 221.84 acres and when forwarding separately that scheme for Government sanction it will submit the rough cost estimate on the lines of P. W. D. giving specifications, of works to be done, the streets to be paved, the schedules of rates on which the expenditure will be incurred etc. "For the renaming area a separate scheme will be prepared under section 28 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, later on and submitted with the desired cost estimates as required under section 40 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922. (TV) The'land taken by the P. W. D. under “Washday Colony” and contiguous land along the Kacha Multan Road not required by the Trust has been excluded, and Public Notice is being issued accordingly. ’ (v) The land measuring 221.84 acres will be developed by the Trust from its own resources within the next two years and their renaming areas will Be developed after another two years thereafter. (vi) University Authorities and the Government are press mg hard for the immediate possession of the land and therefore a notification by Government under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, is an absolute necessity. D. O. No. A-3-61-5 dated -10- 56 from the Secretary to Government, West Pakistan Education Department speaks for itself (vi) The Trust has vide Resolution No. dated 15-9-1955 decided to give freely, exemptions to Muslim Owners in all its scheme. The land falling with the New University Campus is mostly composed of evacuee land and Government land under the Artillery Rifle Range (an application for the transfer of which free of cost has since been made vide my letter No. SB- dated 8- 7-1954 to your address-correspondence resting with late Punjab Government endorsement No. 3613-C P- dated 19- 4-1956 to you refers). IPI) After the sanction of the scheme the Land Acquisition Collector will be advised to deal with the land of the Corporation under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Punjab Town Improvement Act or the land will be acquired by private treaty. ' (ix) A revised draft notification is enclosed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): sanction of the scheme the Land Acquisition Collector will be advised to deal with the land of the Corporation under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by the Punjab Town Improvement Act or the land will be acquired by private treaty. ' (ix) A revised draft notification is enclosed herewith as desired. It is now requested that the Government may. kindly be approached to sanction at a date as early as possible the acquisition of the land by the Lahore Improvement Trust also authorize the L. I. T. to take possession of the land under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act. 1894. ' Your obedient servant -. (SD.). Abdul Rahim, Chairman, Lahore Improvement Trust.” The Scheme thus included not only the construction of a New I Campus for the University, but also development of two housing) colonies. This was in accordance with the decision taken in the meeting held by the Chief Minister on 16-2-1954 to which reference has been made above. Under section 24 of the Town Improvement Act the Trust may inter alia prepare a scheme for the purpose of development of any locality within the municipal limits. Construction of a new campus for the University and development of housing colonies in the area included Sn the scheme was thus amply covered by the provisions of section 24. Mr. Mahmood Haman, appearing for the Trust maintained and rightly so that construction of a new campus for the University was for the development of the city of Lahore and that the real beneficiaries of the scheme were the citizens of Lahore generally and the students' community in particular. We will now examine the two other grounds on which the acquisition proceedings were invalidated by the High Court (1) that the scheme framed by the Trust was no scheme at all under sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act and* therefore, no notice under section 36 could be given MN respect of it; and (u) the Trust could not acquire land for another corporate body. Earlier we have reproduced in extensor the provisions of sections 24 and 28 which inter alia authorize the Trust to frame a development scheme within a municipal area. A plain reading of these sections makes out that a scheme framed under section 24 may provide for all or any one of the matters provided in it. A scheme may thus provide for acquisition of land only and that seems to be the case here. The University Campus was to be developed by the University, the scheme for developing a housing colony in 221.84 acres had been prepared separately and submitted to the Government for sanction as mentioned in the letter of the Chairman, reproduced earlier, while the scheme for development of 608.70 acres was to be prepared at a later stage. It would not, therefore, be said that the scheme prepared! by the Trust was no scheme in the eye of law at all, because it)c did not provide for relay

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): the Chairman, reproduced earlier, while the scheme for development of 608.70 acres was to be prepared at a later stage. It would not, therefore, be said that the scheme prepared! by the Trust was no scheme in the eye of law at all, because it)c did not provide for relay mg out of land comprised in the scheme or laying out and alteration of streets, earmarking open spaces,' raising, lowering or reclamation of land, drainage, water supply and lighting. The learned Judges posted out that no estimate of costs was prepared, but that was necessary only in respect of that part of the scheme which was to be executed by the Trust itself, The University Campus was to be constructed by the University Authorities. No estimate of costs for this part of the scheme was, therefore, necessary. Estimate of costs of the housing scheme in 221.84 acres had been submit Ted along with the scheme. The third part of the scheme had yet to be prepared. The omission to submit an estimate of cost for, the entire scheme was, therefore, no fatal defect in the scheme as held by the learned Judges. In dealing with section 28 of the Town Improvement Act, reproduced above, the learned Judges again fell in error in making the assumption that a scheme which did not make provision for all the matters enumerated in the section was no scheme at all under the Act. The section expressly provides that the scheme may provide for all or any of the matters set out therein. The scheme in respect of which notice was given was. thus amply covered by’ the provisions of ’sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act and the notice issued in respect of it under section 36 of that Act was quite valid in law. A word may be said about the observations by the learned Judges that in acquiring the land for the University the Trust did not act bona fide and that the scheme was a fraud on the Town Improvement Act. It has been noticed that while compensation for evacuee land was fixed by the Collector at the rate of Rs. 550, per canal, and the Custodian of Evacuee Property accepted this price grudgingly, the portion of the same land was sold by him to the Society, seven years later, when prices had _ appreciated - considerably, at "Rs: 250, "per Etihad. Could it, therefore, be said that in acquiring the land for the University the Trust wanted to confer a wrongful gain on the University or that it was an abuse of the Town Improvement Act. On the contrary in their letter dated 18th April 1957, the Central Government had expressly provided that approval was accorded to the acquisition of evacuee land by the Government of West Pakistan under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by Second Schedule to the Town Improvement Act. It has also been seen that a scheme for shifting the University Campus was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): Government had expressly provided that approval was accorded to the acquisition of evacuee land by the Government of West Pakistan under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as modified by Second Schedule to the Town Improvement Act. It has also been seen that a scheme for shifting the University Campus was first framed by the Trust in 1944 which was abandoned because of Partition in 1947. The Trust had thus acted in accordance with law and not male FIDE in acquiring land inter Asia for the construction of a new campus for the University. The last ground that the Trust could not acquire land under the Town Improvement Act for another corporate body is equally untenable. The decided cases on which they have relied have been mentioned earlier. The entire reasoning on this part of the cases proceeded on an erroneous assumption. As seen the Trust was required by the Provincial Government to prepare a scheme inter alia for the construction of a new campus for the University. Possession of the land was given under the orders of the Collector to the Trust and thereupon title in 'the land passed to it under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The total area of land acquired by the Collector m the four villages of Khanewal, Devisable, Diana Singh Walk and Chara as given in the chart at page 601 of the Collector’s Files 1192.67 acres. The rest of the land belonged to the Government. It had been used in the past as Rifle Range by Armed Forces. At the request of the Punjab Government, the Government of Pakistan surrendered it for construction of the University Campus. The letter of the Central Government is in the records of the Trust. The learned Judges have themselves emphasized that the University did not claim any title in the land in dispute. It was therefore, correct to say that the Trust had acted as an agent of the University in acquiring the land comprised in the scheme. The University paid Rs. 20 lacs to reimburse the Trust for the compensation payable by it to the Custodian of Evacuee Property, but that is true in all cases m which the Trust acquires land Included in a development scheme and subsequently transfers it to others for build mg houses, shops, factories, etc. It does not mean that land is acquired by the Trust for those individuals as an agent. In the instant case the land was acquired for a development scheme as envisaged in sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act and its legality could not be challenged on the ground that it was subsequently disposed of to other persons including a corporate body. As held earlier the acquisition of land by the Trust was within the purposes of the Act and on that ground alone the acquisition of the land comprised in the scheme was valid. None of the decided cases on which the learned Judges of the High Court have relied in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): As held earlier the acquisition of land by the Trust was within the purposes of the Act and on that ground alone the acquisition of the land comprised in the scheme was valid. None of the decided cases on which the learned Judges of the High Court have relied in support of this ground is, therefore, applicable to the facts of the present case. After the arguments were concluded and judgment was reserved Mr. GhiasMohammad filed a miscellaneous petition forrehearmg the appeals on the ground that his clients had succeeded in laying their hands on two housing colony schemes framed by the Trust on part of the land acquired under the scheme with which we are concerned at later dates. It was intended to show that the original scheme included only the construction of a campus for the University, the assumption made by the petitioners is palpably incorrect. We have reproduced for this purpose in this order the letter of the Chairman of the Trust No. SB- dated the 8th December 1956, written to the Commissioner, Lahore Division, under which he submitted the revised scheme for sanction of the Provincial Government. The plan accompanying the scheme shows in different colors the areas earmarked for the two housing colonies and the University Campus. The area of each sector is mentioned in the plan and is referred to in the letter. The proposals of the two housing colonies schemes at later dates on which the respondents rely, therefore, has no bearing on the decision of these appeals. We did not, therefore, consider it necessary to reopen the hearing of these appeals. It remains to mention one more ground urged by Mr. Goiás Mohammad. During the hearings of the appeals, he made a grievance that this Court should not make reference to any document of which copy was not produced in the High Court by the Trust and of which he had no notice. As the matter raised is of substance, we will examine it in detail. In its writ petition the Trust relied among others on the Resolution passed by the Trustees approving the scheme framed under sections 24 and 28 of the Town Improvement Act, the Notification issued by it under section 36 of the Town Improvement Act in which the boundaries of the land included in the scheme were delineated; the No-Objection Certificate issued by the Rehabilitation authorities for acquisition of evacuee Land included in the scheme ; Notification issued by the Provincial Government according sanction to the scheme under section 42 of the Town Improvement Act ; the permission granted by the Central Government under section 12 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of 1949 ; orders passed by the Governor declaring that the scheme for which laud was to be acquired was covered by section 50 of the Land Acquisition Act and application of section 17 to the acquisition proceedings under which the Collector could take possession of arable" and wasteland before delivery of award

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): orders passed by the Governor declaring that the scheme for which laud was to be acquired was covered by section 50 of the Land Acquisition Act and application of section 17 to the acquisition proceedings under which the Collector could take possession of arable" and wasteland before delivery of award ; order given by the. Provin-cial Government to the Collector to enter upon acquisition proceedings ; notices issued by the Collector under sections 9 and 10 of the Land Acquisition Act ; entry in the Roznamcha of the Atari recording delivery of possession to the Trust on 26-6-1957; the concurrence given by the Custodian to the tentative award drawn up by the Collector ; and finally the awards delivered by the Collector and payment of Rs. 20. lacs by the University to'the Custodian of Evacuee Property as compensation for evacuee land acquired by the Trust. Copies of these documents formed appendixes to the writ petition. Nothing Moore was needed, on the part of the Trust to make "out its "case that "the Custodian of Evacuee Property as well as the evacuee owners having been divested of title in the laud acquired by the Trust, the Custodian could not in law resell the same land to the Society. The onus was thereafter on the Society to show that the acquisition proceedings in which the land sold to it was acquired earlier by the Trust was illegal and void. The Society filed documents to show that it had acquired the land after obtain No- Objection Certificates from the Rehabilitation Department and the Town Planner of the Trust though the latter had nonlegal authority to issue such a certificate and that permission of the Central Government was obtained under section 12 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of 1949 for acquisition of evacuee land. Copy of the sale deed executed; by the Custodian and-the receipt showing payment of Rs. 6,27,037.50 by the Society to the Custodian as price of the land were also placed on record. None of these documents, however, reflected on the legality of the acquisition proceedings in which the same land had been earlier acquired by the Trust. The pleas taken up by the Society in their written statement were different from the pleas urged during the hearing of the writ petition. Initially the Society maintained that the land, MN dispute, was withdrawn from the scheme prepared by the Trust, that the approval given by the Central Government under section 12 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance XV of*1949 for acquisition of evacuee land by the Trust was revoked, that no price for the land, in dispute, was paid by the Trust to the Custodian, that the Trust having issued a No-Objection Certificate to the purchase of the land, in dispute, by it was stopped from challenging the legality of the sale of that land and finally that the writ petition filed six years after the sale in favor of the Society had been completed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): that the Trust having issued a No-Objection Certificate to the purchase of the land, in dispute, by it was stopped from challenging the legality of the sale of that land and finally that the writ petition filed six years after the sale in favor of the Society had been completed washable to be dismissed on grounds of laches. The last ground was factually correct. Sale deed in favor of the Society was executed in March 1964, and the writ petition was filed on 1965. On perusal of the pleadings of the parties the learned Judges \m the High Court directed counsel for the Trust to produce the -1a relating to the acquisition of the disputed land by the Trust. This fact is mentioned in clause (d) of the replication hied by the Trust to the preliminary objections raised by the Society. It reads: “However, in view of the objections raised by respondent No. and as directed by this Hon’BLE Court, the record relating to acquisition of the land, IA dispute, has been produced. All the grounds on which the acquisition proceedings were later on declared by the High Court to be illegal thus arose from the perusal of the record by the learned Judges of the High Court and not on the basis of the written statement filed by the Society or any document produced by it. The learned Judges themselves make mention of the fact that they had perused the records of acquisition of the land by the Trust on which their conclusions are based. In summoning the record and using it for the purpose of determine the legality of the acquisition proceedings, the learned Judges acted with jurisdiction. This, however, does not mean that examination of the record by this Court should be Limited only to those documents on which the learned Judges have relied. The entire record was before the High Court and a fortiori the same is open to examination by this Court. Another principle attracted in the case is that before an order passed by a public authority is struck d.own it is the duty of the Court to explore every possible explanation for its validity and examine the entire field of powers conferred on the authority in pursuance to which the impugned order has been passed. See The Chairman, East Pakistan Railway Board, Chittagong and another v. Abdul Majid Vardar, Ticket Collector It was remarked in this judgment : “Acts performed and orders made by public authorities deserve due regard by Courts and every possible explanation for their validity should be explored and the whole field of powers in pursuance to which the public authorities act or perform their functions examined and only then if it is found that the act done, order made or proceeding undertaken is without lawful authority should the Courts declare them to be of no legal effect.” To satisfy the requirement of this rule it is the duty of the Court to exam me the entire record pertaining to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1971 PLD 811?
Answer: From case 1971 PLD 811 (SUPREME COURT, 1971-10-20): if it is found that the act done, order made or proceeding undertaken is without lawful authority should the Courts declare them to be of no legal effect.” To satisfy the requirement of this rule it is the duty of the Court to exam me the entire record pertaining to the action taken, order passed and proceedings undertaken which are challenged as without lawful authority under Article 98 of the Constitution. Otherwise grave miscarriage of justice may take place in the exercise of this beneficial jurisdiction. The objection raised by Mr. Goiás Mohammad that the appellants or the Court so moth could not make resort to any document on the record of the Collector, the Trust and the University which was not relied upon in the High Court has, therefore, no substance. For the forego mg reasons we allow both the appeals, set aside the judgment and order of the High Court passed in Writ Petition No. 1142 of 1965 on 26th May 1969, and declare that the sale of the land describe din the writ petition by the Custodian of Evacuee Property to the Society under the sale deed executed by him on IST of May 1964, was without lawful authority and direct him to cancel the sale-deed and to refund to the Society the sum of Rs. 6,27,037.50 paid by-the-Society to -him* as‘sale price. _ In the circumstances of the case, we refrain from burdening the respondents with the costs of these proceedings. - Appeals accepted.

Question: What is case 1978 PLD 931 about?
Answer: Case 1978 PLD 931 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1978-03-12. The case involved MUHAMMAD ABDUL MAJID AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS SETTLEMENT, AND REHABILITATION COMMISSIONER AND ADDITIONAL CUSTODIAN,EVACUEE PROPERTY,HYDERABAD DIVISION, ETC.AND ANOTHER—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include . The case was heard by ABDUL HAFEEZ MEMON.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 1978 PLD 931?
Answer: In case 1978 PLD 931, the court applied the following statutes: . This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1978-03-12.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 1978 PLD 931?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 1978 PLD 931 were: JMM'MMSM-FOR PETITIONER NO. 1. '"..;3$BDUI MQFEETIKTUM FOR R&P6N~DCIITS.. The judges presiding were: ABDUL HAFEEZ MEMON.

Question: Who were the parties in case 1978 PLD 931?
Answer: The parties in case 1978 PLD 931 were: MUHAMMAD ABDUL MAJID AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS SETTLEMENT, AND REHABILITATION COMMISSIONER AND ADDITIONAL CUSTODIAN,EVACUEE PROPERTY,HYDERABAD DIVISION, ETC.AND ANOTHER—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 1978 PLD 931.
Answer: Judgment This petition iadtrctsd'Tait'. Ilia.'.order.' dated 23rl the revision filed by.the;petitioner. TUefactsformiag the. Background of:'this petition ate that; an’, industrial concert known reis‘“Patel Engineer mg. Works, Hyderabad” was-auctioned: on. 29-11-1959 to. One Mr. A. Rehman Khan for Rs. lacs. However. before the auction could hie confirmed, it transpired that the half of the-' concern had bees, declared as non-evacuee "property and, _ consequently,- the'auction in favor of Mr.;-Abdul Rehman- Khan.was-not approved/ Thereafter* one’ -Mohammad'. Abdul: Majid,’ who-was in -occupation of the remaining half of the evacuee, portion of the concern as an allottee, made an application to the. Settiement-Department requesting for transfer of the evacuee portion cf collar to him for Rs. lac at 50% of the bid previously offered by the said Mr. A. Rehman 'Khan. His request was granted and the 50%. evacuee, portion’ of the concern was transferred to the applicant by tho: Chief Settlement Commissioner for Rs. lac on negotiation basis. Late; on, Muhammad Abdul Majid made a representation to the Settlement, authorities that daring-the. Period of allotment he had carried, repairs-in the build mg and invested considerable amount; of money’ in it for which he had already informed the Custodian of Evacuee Property at Hyderabad and accordingly,] claimed that the amount incurred by him may be adjusted towards the sale price of Rs. lac under para: 15(3) of the Schedule. to the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. His prayer was, however, rejected by the Department on the ground that, as the factory bad been transferred to him on negotiation basis, he was. not entitled to the deduction. As; however, the order Was passed by the ‘learned Chief Settlement Commissioner without bearing Mohammad Abdul Majid, the latter filed a petition in the High Court, being Constitutional Petition No. 266 of 1965 which was allowed, and the matter was. Remanded to the Settlement Commissioner vide order dated 16-12-1969 for fresh decision with the following directions ‘,'’ “(1) That they should determine whether the petitioner had made any investments the'DAE- half portion of theindustnal concern transferred* to him ¢ r' (2) 'Whether these investments are deductible under the Schedule to the'. Displaced. Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958;. and ' "f*! (3).if the investments, are so deductible, then, an order should be made to the effect that these investments would be deducted, from the price of Rs, lakh, or the balance remaining unpaid as the case ' may,be.”'. On remand, the matter was heard by the learned Additional Settlement Commissioner (Mr, Mascot Adam) who dismissed the application and refused to allow the deduction on the same ground that the factory haying been transferred - to Mohammad Abdul Marked on negotiation basis. he was not entitled to any deduction under the law-under section 15(3) of. the Schedule to the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Against this order, Abdul Majid went in revision, before, the Settlement. _ Commissioner who dismissed the revision by, his order dated -23- 10-1971: Hence this petition. During the pendency of the petition, Mr. -Mohammad Abdul Majid died, and his legal heirs were brought on record as petitioners (a) and (b) vide this Court’s order passed. On 4-10-1976. The ‘first contention raised by Mr. Ismail Sushi, learned counsel for the petitioner, was that SME Mr. S. Wasm Hamid Ravi, learned. Settlement Commissioner had earlier appeared as a counsel for the Settlement Department in Petition No. and opposed the said 'petition'filed'.;by Mohammad Abdul Maid, the predecessor-in-title of the petitioners, he ought not to have sat on the revision application and decided it, as he. could ; not have decided the matter with unbiased'mind, human nature being what it 1s, more so, when such an objection was expressly taken before, him; u' : The learned counsel next contended that the High. Court had given a clear direction, being the direction No. 1, that the Settlement Department. Should first determine, whether Mohammad Abdul. Majid had made any investment in the one-half portion of the industrial once transferred to, but the Settlement authorities made no effort to determine the investments made by Mohammad Abdul Majid, and thereby-had failed to comply with the direction of the High Court. Mr. Abdul’ Marked Khan, learned counsel for the respondents, taking a very fair stand, submitted that, although the learned Settlement “Commissioner (Mr. S. Wasm Hamid Ravi) was not legally barred from deciding the revision in his-capacity as a Settlement Commissioner, TT would have been more appropriate if be had not. sat on the revision, in view of the admitted position that he had earlier appeared in tho High Court in the Writ Petition as a counsel for the Settlement Department who had opposed the petition filed by Mohammad Abdul Majid and, therefore, he would have no objection if the impugned order is set aside and the matter is remanded for fresh adjudication by a Settlement Commissioner other than Mr. S. Wasm Hamid, Ravi. He went on to add. That he was making this concession only to honor the well-known maxim that justice should not only be done but seen to be done, as otherwise, impartiality and integrity of the learned Settlement Commissioner is too well known to be questioned and Mr. Ismail Sushi fully agreed with him. I agree with both the learned counsel that Mr. S; Wasm Hamid Ravi, for whom I have enormous regard, having appeared as a counsel in Petition No. on behalf of the Settlement Department and opposed the petition on their behalf, he ought not have sat on the revision and decided it for the reason firstly, that it is quite. Possible that having formed bis views in the case while appearing. &3 a-counsel for a party, he may well have bees subconsciously influenced in his decision, secondly, it contravened the old established maxim, namely justice should not only be done but seem to be done, particularly when such an objection was raised before him. There is no substance in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners ( that the direction given by the Court in its order dated 16-12-1969, whereby it directed the Settlement Department to determine whether the predecessor-in-title of the petitioners had made Tony investment in the concern in question, had not been complied with as there is nothing on the record, nor does the impugned order show, that any effort was made by the Department to determine whether any investment had been made by Mr. Mohammad Abdul Majid, the predecessor-in-title of the petitioners, 1. For the aforesaid reasons, allow this petition and quash the impugned order dated 23*10–1971 passed by the learned Settlement Commissioner and, with the consent of both the learned. Counsel, remand the matter for deciding the revision afresh MN terms of the. directions given by the High Court in it J order dated 16-12-1969. Since this petition is being allowed only on the ground that the Settlement Commissioner ought not to. have sat on ANDs decided the revision, it is directed that the revision be decided by a Settlement Commissioner, other - than Mr. S. Wasm Hamid Ravi. Before parting, I would, however, like to. Make it clear that this order shall not be understood to mean, in any manner whatsoever, as to be casting any reflection on the impartiality and integrity of the Settlement’ Commissioner for whom I have the greatest regards. There will be no order as to costs. Petition allowed. S AIH.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1978 PLD 931?
Answer: From case 1978 PLD 931 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1978-03-12): Judgment This petition iadtrctsd'Tait'. Ilia.'.order.' dated 23rl the revision filed by.the;petitioner. TUefactsformiag the. Background of:'this petition ate that; an’, industrial concert known reis‘“Patel Engineer mg. Works, Hyderabad” was-auctioned: on. 29-11-1959 to. One Mr. A. Rehman Khan for Rs. lacs. However. before the auction could hie confirmed, it transpired that the half of the-' concern had bees, declared as non-evacuee "property and, _ consequently,- the'auction in favor of Mr.;-Abdul Rehman- Khan.was-not approved/ Thereafter* one’ -Mohammad'. Abdul: Majid,’ who-was in -occupation of the remaining half of the evacuee, portion of the concern as an allottee, made an application to the. Settiement-Department requesting for transfer of the evacuee portion cf collar to him for Rs. lac at 50% of the bid previously offered by the said Mr. A. Rehman 'Khan. His request was granted and the 50%. evacuee, portion’ of the concern was transferred to the applicant by tho: Chief Settlement Commissioner for Rs. lac on negotiation basis. Late; on, Muhammad Abdul Majid made a representation to the Settlement, authorities that daring-the. Period of allotment he had carried, repairs-in the build mg and invested considerable amount; of money’ in it for which he had already informed the Custodian of Evacuee Property at Hyderabad and accordingly,] claimed that the amount incurred by him may be adjusted towards the sale price of Rs. lac under para: 15(3) of the Schedule. to the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. His prayer was, however, rejected by the Department on the ground that, as the factory bad been transferred to him on negotiation basis, he was. not entitled to the deduction. As; however, the order Was passed by the ‘learned Chief Settlement Commissioner without bearing Mohammad Abdul Majid, the latter filed a petition in the High Court, being Constitutional Petition No. 266 of 1965 which was allowed, and the matter was. Remanded to the Settlement Commissioner vide order dated 16-12-1969 for fresh decision with the following directions ‘,'’ “(1) That they should determine whether the petitioner had made any investments the'DAE- half portion of theindustnal concern transferred* to him ¢ r' (2) 'Whether these investments are deductible under the Schedule to the'. Displaced. Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958;. and ' "f*! (3).if the investments, are so deductible, then, an order should be made to the effect that these investments would be deducted, from the price of Rs, lakh, or the balance remaining unpaid as the case ' may,be.”'. On remand, the matter was heard by the learned Additional Settlement Commissioner (Mr, Mascot Adam) who dismissed the application and refused to allow the deduction on the same ground that the factory haying been transferred - to Mohammad Abdul Marked on negotiation basis. he was not entitled to any deduction under the law-under section 15(3) of. the Schedule to the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Against this order, Abdul Majid went in revision, before, the Settlement. _ Commissioner who dismissed the revision by, his order dated -23- 10-1971: Hence this petition. During the pendency of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1978 PLD 931?
Answer: From case 1978 PLD 931 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1978-03-12): any deduction under the law-under section 15(3) of. the Schedule to the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958. Against this order, Abdul Majid went in revision, before, the Settlement. _ Commissioner who dismissed the revision by, his order dated -23- 10-1971: Hence this petition. During the pendency of the petition, Mr. -Mohammad Abdul Majid died, and his legal heirs were brought on record as petitioners (a) and (b) vide this Court’s order passed. On 4-10-1976. The ‘first contention raised by Mr. Ismail Sushi, learned counsel for the petitioner, was that SME Mr. S. Wasm Hamid Ravi, learned. Settlement Commissioner had earlier appeared as a counsel for the Settlement Department in Petition No. and opposed the said 'petition'filed'.;by Mohammad Abdul Maid, the predecessor-in-title of the petitioners, he ought not to have sat on the revision application and decided it, as he. could ; not have decided the matter with unbiased'mind, human nature being what it 1s, more so, when such an objection was expressly taken before, him; u' : The learned counsel next contended that the High. Court had given a clear direction, being the direction No. 1, that the Settlement Department. Should first determine, whether Mohammad Abdul. Majid had made any investment in the one-half portion of the industrial once transferred to, but the Settlement authorities made no effort to determine the investments made by Mohammad Abdul Majid, and thereby-had failed to comply with the direction of the High Court. Mr. Abdul’ Marked Khan, learned counsel for the respondents, taking a very fair stand, submitted that, although the learned Settlement “Commissioner (Mr. S. Wasm Hamid Ravi) was not legally barred from deciding the revision in his-capacity as a Settlement Commissioner, TT would have been more appropriate if be had not. sat on the revision, in view of the admitted position that he had earlier appeared in tho High Court in the Writ Petition as a counsel for the Settlement Department who had opposed the petition filed by Mohammad Abdul Majid and, therefore, he would have no objection if the impugned order is set aside and the matter is remanded for fresh adjudication by a Settlement Commissioner other than Mr. S. Wasm Hamid, Ravi. He went on to add. That he was making this concession only to honor the well-known maxim that justice should not only be done but seen to be done, as otherwise, impartiality and integrity of the learned Settlement Commissioner is too well known to be questioned and Mr. Ismail Sushi fully agreed with him. I agree with both the learned counsel that Mr. S; Wasm Hamid Ravi, for whom I have enormous regard, having appeared as a counsel in Petition No. on behalf of the Settlement Department and opposed the petition on their behalf, he ought not have sat on the revision and decided it for the reason firstly, that it is quite. Possible that having formed bis views in the case while appearing. &3 a-counsel for a party, he may well have bees subconsciously influenced

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 1978 PLD 931?
Answer: From case 1978 PLD 931 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1978-03-12): Department and opposed the petition on their behalf, he ought not have sat on the revision and decided it for the reason firstly, that it is quite. Possible that having formed bis views in the case while appearing. &3 a-counsel for a party, he may well have bees subconsciously influenced in his decision, secondly, it contravened the old established maxim, namely justice should not only be done but seem to be done, particularly when such an objection was raised before him. There is no substance in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners ( that the direction given by the Court in its order dated 16-12-1969, whereby it directed the Settlement Department to determine whether the predecessor-in-title of the petitioners had made Tony investment in the concern in question, had not been complied with as there is nothing on the record, nor does the impugned order show, that any effort was made by the Department to determine whether any investment had been made by Mr. Mohammad Abdul Majid, the predecessor-in-title of the petitioners, 1. For the aforesaid reasons, allow this petition and quash the impugned order dated 23*10–1971 passed by the learned Settlement Commissioner and, with the consent of both the learned. Counsel, remand the matter for deciding the revision afresh MN terms of the. directions given by the High Court in it J order dated 16-12-1969. Since this petition is being allowed only on the ground that the Settlement Commissioner ought not to. have sat on ANDs decided the revision, it is directed that the revision be decided by a Settlement Commissioner, other - than Mr. S. Wasm Hamid Ravi. Before parting, I would, however, like to. Make it clear that this order shall not be understood to mean, in any manner whatsoever, as to be casting any reflection on the impartiality and integrity of the Settlement’ Commissioner for whom I have the greatest regards. There will be no order as to costs. Petition allowed. S AIH.

Question: What is case 2016 CLC 1268 about?
Answer: Case 2016 CLC 1268 was decided by ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT on 2016-04-01. The case involved SYEDA DABEER FATIMA AND OTHERS—PETITIONERS VERSUS MST. BILQEES AKHTAR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) - S. 12 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908), - ARTICLE 113. The case was heard by BEFORE AAMER FAROOQ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: In case 2016 CLC 1268, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) - S. 12 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908), - ARTICLE 113. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT and decided on 2016-04-01.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2016 CLC 1268 were: MUHAMMAD MUNIR PARACHA AND NAUMAN MUNIR PARACHA FOR APPELLANT. MUHAMMAD ILYAS SHEIKH AND HAFEEZ-UR-REHM AN FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: BEFORE AAMER FAROOQ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: The parties in case 2016 CLC 1268 were: SYEDA DABEER FATIMA AND OTHERS—PETITIONERS VERSUS MST. BILQEES AKHTAR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2016 CLC 1268.
Answer: AAMER FAROOQ, J.— Through the instant appeal, the appellants have impugned the judgment and decree dated 14.2.2015 whereby the suit for Specific Performance filed by the appellants was dismissed. 2. The facts, in brief, are that respondents Nos.1 and 2 being owners of Property measuring 1500 sq. Ft (western side) located on the roof of shop No.4 to 7, first floor, Commercial building constructed on plot No.B-R, Markan F-7, Islamabad (the property), allegedly entered in an agreement to sell with appellant No.l In the agreement appellant No.2 was made the nominee of appellants Nos.1 and respondents Nos.l and 2 executed a general power of attorney in his favor which was registered in accordance with law. The alleged agreement to sell was executed on 14.3.2000. The appellants filed a suit for Specific Performance of the referred agreement on the ground that respondents Nos. and 2 are refusing to adhere to the terms of the same and transfer the property in favor of appellant No.l It was also alleged in the plaint that the total consideration for the sale of above-mentioned property was settled as Rs. 1,400,000/- and out of the same the entire consideration except Rs.32000/-, was paid. Respondents Nos.I and 2 denied the agreement to sell and claim of the appellants. The suit filed by the appellants was dismissed by the learned trial court vide judgment and decree dated 3.1.2013 and the appeal filed by them was also dismissed vide judgment dated 14.2.2015. 3. Learned counsel for the appellants, inter alia, submitted that the appeal filed by the appellants was dismissed on the issue of limitation and no findings have been rendered with respect to other issues; that under second part of Article 113 of first schedule to Limitation Act, 1908 the period of limitation is three years from the date of knowledge of refusal on part of the vendors to transfer the property. It was further contended that respondents Nos.l and 2 did not specifically refuse to transfer the property till filing of the suit, therefore, limitation period shall be taken from the referred date; that suit filed by the appellants was within the period of limitation, therefore, the appellate judgment should be set-aside and matter be remanded to the appellate court for findings on other issues. 4. Learned counsel for respondents Nos.] and 2, inter alia, submitted under the second part of Article 113 of the Schedule to Limitation Act, 1908 the refusal to transfer does not have to be specific, and the limitation runs when the Vendée has noted that the vendor is not transferred the property. Learned counsel pointed out that in the mutant case by virtue of alleged agreement to sell the rights in the property were transferred to the appellants, however, subsequently, respondents Nos.l and 2 continued to deal with the property as their own by receiving the rent; filing of eviction application as well as execution petition against tenants and had the property transferred MN their favor MN CDA record which was sufficient to apprise the appellants regarding the state of affairs. In support of his contention learned counsel placed reliance on case titled Heidi Abdul Karim v Florida Builders Private Limited (PLD 2012 SC 247), Muhammad Ashraf v. MST. Rashida Bibi (2006 YLR 1626) and Paco Limited v. F.O.P. etc. (PLD 2011 SC 44). Learned counsel also pleaded that no ground was taken before the first appellate court regarding the finding of the trial court on issue of limitation, therefore, they have no right to agitate the same before this court. 5. The appellants filed a suit for Specific Performance of agreement to sell dated 14.3.2000 on 17.12.2005. Respondents Nos.| and 2 resisted the claim of the appellant and denied entering into the referred agreement. Out of the divergent pleadings of the parties following issues were framed: (i) Whether defendants Nos.! and 2 MN pursuance of settlement decree dated 1.6.1999 entered into agreement to sell dated 14,3.2000 with plaintiff No.1 regarding suit house in consideration of Rs. 1400000/- OPP (ii) Whether defendants Nos.] and 2 have executed general power of attorney No.693 dated 14,3.2000 regarding the suit property in the name of plaintiff No.2 on the formation of plaintiff No.] after receiving the sale consideration? OPP (i) Whether plaintiffs are entitled to decree for specific performance as prayed for? OPP (iv) Whether defendant No.2 was Moor on 14.3.2000 and the defendant No, was appointed as guardian of the defendant No.2 by the guardian vide order of guardian judge dated 6.3.1993 and there was no permission to sell the minor's property if so its effect? OPD and 2. (v) Whether agreement to sell dated 4.3.2000 and general power of same date are void ab initio, result of fraud, misrepresentation, fabrication and under influence and is under illegal disability? OPD and 2, (vi) Whether the agreement dated 14.3,2000 is illegal against the terms of conditions of lease against CDA ordnance and rules made their especially when lease deed was executed but 21.1.2003, hence the suit is barred by law? OPD and 2. (Oil) Whether the plaintifffhave no cause and locus standi to file the instant suit? OPD (it) Whether the plaintiffs have not come to the court with clean hands? OPD (ix) Whether the suit of the plastic is not main tamable in its present form? OPD (x) Whether the suit of the plaintiff'is time-barred? OPD (xi) Whether the plaintiffs have concealed material facts from the court and suit being false and frivolous is liable to be dismissed with special cost under section 35-A, C.P.C.? OPD (xi) Relief. 6. Learned trial court dismissed the suit of the appellants on merits as well as the issue of limitation and appellate court dismissed the appeal filed by the appellants while confining itself on issue No. 10 the. the issue of limitation. The sole controversy before this court in the instant appeal is that whether the suit filed by the appellants against respondents Nos.| and 2 was barred by Imitation. Admittedly in the alleged agreement to sell no date was. Prescribed for transfer of the property. Under Article 113 of the Schedule of Limitation Act, 1908 the limitation period for suit for specific performance of contract is three years from the date fixed for the performance or if no such date is fixed when the plaintiff has noticed that performance is refused as mentioned above. As date for performance of the agreement has been given in the agreement between the parties in the present case, therefore, the period of limitation is to be computed from notice to the appellants regarding refusal of performance of the agreement. The Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan in case titled Heidi Abdul Karim v. Florida Builders Private Limited (PLD 2012 SC 247) held that limitation was a command of law prescribing statutory period within which a right is to be exercised or enforced. It was also observed as follows In the context of interpreting Article 113 of the Act, the provisions for the facility of reference are reproduced below:— Description of suit ] of Period limitation 2 Time from which period begins to run 3 113. For specific performance of contract. Three years The date fixed for the performance, or, if no such date is fixed, when the plaintiffs notice that performance is refused. And for the purpose of the above, it seems expedient to touch upon the legislative history of the Article. The prior Limitation Acts of 1871 and 1877, had in each of them the corresponding provision as in Article 113. However, the words in 1871 Act, were "when the plaintiff has noticed that his right is denied", postulating that the second pan of Article 113 was the only provision then regulating the limitation for the suits for specific performance and the commencement of three years period was dependent on the proof of the fact of notice of denial and the question of limitation was accordingly to be decided, having no nexus with the date even if fixed by the parties for the performance of the contract. The said provision however WCU expanded, and these words were substituted in the subsequent Act of 1877, as are also found in the third column of the present Act. The change brought by the Legislature in 1877 Act was retained in Article 113 of the Act, by including the first part that the time would run from the ‘date fixed' for the performance is thus purposive and salutary in nature, which contemplates and reflects the clear intention of the legislature to prescribe the same (three years) period of limitation, however, providing that the parties who otherwise have a right to fix a date of their own choice in the agreement for the performance thereof, such date in consequence of law shall also govern the period of limitation as well for the suits failing in this category. Thus now the three years period mentioned in Column No. of the Article runs in two parts:— (i) from the date fixed for the performance; or (ii) where no such date is fixed when the plaintiff has noticed that the reason for the said change as stated above is obvious. In the first part, the date is certain, it is fixed by the parties, BMG conscious and aware of the mandate of law i.e. Article 113, with the intention that the time for the specific performance suit should run therefrom. And so the time shall run forthwith from that date, irrespective and notwithstanding there being a default, lapse or inability on part of either party to the contract to perform his/its obligation in relation thereto. The object and rationale of enforcing the first part is to exclude and eliminate the element of resolving the factual controversy which may arise in a case pertaining to the proof or otherwise of the notice of denial and the time thereof In the second part, the date is not certain and so the date of refusal of the performance is the only basis for computation of time. These two parts of Article 113 are altogether independent and segregated in nature and are meant to cater two different sorts of specific performance clams, m relation to the limitation attracted to those. A case. squarely falling within the ambit of the first part cannot be adjudged or considered on the touchstone of the second part, notwithstanding any set of facts mentioned in the plaint to bring the case within the purview of the later part. 7. In the plant the appellants have claimed that cause of action accrued mm the favor. When respondents Nos.l and 2 expressed their intention regarding cancellation of their irrecoverable general power of attorney a month ago and finally on 16,12.2005 when the referred respondents approached respondent No.3 for the same. The agreement to sell dated 14.3.2000 was tendered in evidence as Ex. PI and the salient terms of the same are as follows:— (5) That the first party has delivered the vacant possession to the second party who is in now possession of the same. (6) That the first party has created an agency coupled with merest of this agreement by executing a general power of attorney in the name of Mr. Mohammad Asif Meh boob son of late Dr. Mehboob Elah, as nominated by the second party. (7) That the first party has left no merest with the said portion of the property which is subject of this agreement and Hereby agrees to transfer all those rights in the said portion of the property which has been acquired by the first party through the above said decree dated 1.6.1999. (8) That hereafter the second party is entitled to lease out the above said property to receive rent, to get vacate and enjoy all the incidents, privileges and rights as an owner. All the fittings and fixtures in the above said portion is also included mm this transaction. 8. The bare reading of the above terms show that the agreement created an agency and in this behalf a power of attorney was executed in favor of appellant No.2. It was also agreed that the first party shall have no interest in the property and the appellants had the right to lease out the property in question; receive rent; to get the property vacated and enjoy the benefits and rights as an owner. However, despite the referred terms,- the property after the alleged agreement, was got transferred by respondents Nos.1 and 2 in their favor independently of appellant No.2 who is the son of respondent No.2. In this behalf vide EX.P32.e. letter dated 3.4.2000 addressed to Deputy Director Estate Management CDA, Islamabad, the co-owners of the entire property made an application for transfer the same in their names and a Specific request was made for the transfer separately. In this behalf respondent No.1 executed the letter in her personal capacity whereas appellant No.2 being son of respondent No.| executed the letter as one of the legal heirs of deceased Dr. Mehboob Elah and attorney of Shaft Basin. Similarly, the execution application to get the property vacated from the tenant was filed by respondents Nos.] and 2 and the possession was taken by them and likewise rent is being received by them. In this behalf execution application for vacation of rented property was filed by respondent No.I (Ex. D4). The settlement between the respondent No.1 and tenant was executed by her (Ex. D5) and the application for receiving rent was also filed by respondent No.l These actions on part of respondent No.l were after alleged agreement to sell and in negation of the terms of the same. 9. Though Article 113 ibid does not specifically provide the form of the notice of refusal, however, the notice may be explicit or implied. In this behalf reliance is placed on case titled Mean v. Ghulam Hussain (PLD 1985 Karachi 674). In Muhammad Ship etc. v. Tapir Shahid etc. (PLD 1998 Lahore 444) it was held as follows Under Article 113 of Limitation Act, if date for performance of agreement is given in the agreement, then a suit for specific performance can be filed within three years from the date recorded in the agreement. If no date is provided, the suit can be filed within three years from the date when the purchaser had notice of refusal. In Janardhanam Prasad v. RAMDAC (Appeal Civil ), the Supreme Court of India held as follows "For specific performance of contract Three years the date fixed for the performance, or, info such date TS fixed, when the plaintiff has noticed that performance is refused." The Court in applying the period of Imitation, would first inquire whether any time was fixed for performance of agreement of sale. It is so fixed, the suit must be filed within the period of three years, failing which the same would be barred by limitation. Here, however, no time for performance was fixed, It was for the Courts to find out the date on which the plaintiff "had notice that the performance was refused and on arriving at a finding in that behalf, to see whether the suit was filed within three years thereafter. The question was considered in R. Kparvatharaj Gupta v. K.C. Pasadena Reddy [(2006) 2 SCC 428], which in terms was noticed and applied in Gunwantbhai Mulch and Shah and ORS. v. Anton Et's Farl and ORS. [(2006) 3 SCC 634]. [See also Bukhara D. Jam and ORS. v. G. Gopalakrishna [(2004) 7 SCC 251]. The. first Defendant was a friend of the 2nd Defendant. Admittedly, the usual stipulations were knowingly not made in the agreement of sale dated 11.4.83. The IST Defendant may or may not be aware about the agreement entered by and between the respondent harm. But he cannot raise a plea of absence of notice of the deed of sale dated 4.9.1985, which was a registered document. Possession of the suit land by the appellant also stands admitted. Registration of a document as well as possession would constitute notice, as is evidence from Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, which is in the following terms: "a person Is said to have notice" of a fact when he actually knows that fact, or when, but for willful abstention from an inquiry or search which he sought to have made, or gross negligence, he would have known TT. Similarly, Pacha man Dhaka etc. v. Monteith Path Marty (Appeal Civil 5187 of 2001), the Supreme Court of India held as follows:- It is not in dispute that the suit for specific performance of contract would be governed by Article 54 of the Limitation Act, 1964. While determining the applicability of the first or the second part of the said provision, the court will firstly see whether any time was fixed for performance of the agreement of sale and if it was fixed, whether the suit was filed beyond the prescribed period unless any case of extension of time for performance was pleaded and established. When, however, no time is fixed for performance of contract, the court may determine the date on which the plaintiff had notice of refusal on the part of the defendant to perform the contract and in that event the suit is required to be filed within a period of three years wherefrom. ' 10, In the mutant case since certain rights were specifically granted to appellants vide the above-mentioned agreement to sell, therefore, any action on part of respondents Nos.1| and 2 which was adverse to those rights shall tantamount to notice with respect to refusal to transfer and the period of limitation shall start therefrom. In this behalf the application to CDA EX.P32 was made on 4.3.2000 to which appellant No.2 as nominee of appellant No.l and Attorney of respondents Nos.] and 2 was also signatory had knowledge and notice that respondent No.] is executing the letter in violation of terms of agreement to sell. Similarly the filing of execution application; taking of the possession of the property in question from the tenant and receipt of rent are the actions on part of respondent No.1] were acts adverse to the rights granted to the appellants under the alleged agreement to sell. In this behalf reliance is placed on case titled Muhammad Sheaf v. MST. Rashida Bibi (2006 YLR 1626) wherein the honorable Lahore High Court held as follows:-- Since the question of limitation in the above circumstances, was a mixed question of law and fact, it was incumbent upon the respondent/plaintiff to state, firstly as to when she became aware of the dismissal of C.R. and, secondly, as to when she first sought and was refused execution of a sale deed pursuant to the agreement EX. P2. At this juncture, it is relevant to note that the onus of proving that the suit was within time, was rightly placed on the respondent/plaintiff, and it was for her to lead affirmative evidence of all relevant facts to show that the suit had been filed within the period prescribed under Article 113 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. Since she failed to do so, he suits was liable to be dismissed as being time-barred. The appellants did not plead specifically the knowledge about the acts adverse to their rights and vaguely asserted that they came to know about the refusal when the general power of attorney was sought to be cancelled. There is no explanation in the evidence by the appellants regard mg the acts by respondents Nos.] and 2 which are adverse to the rights of the appellants. In light of the referred facts and circumstances there is no misreading or non-reading of evidence by the courts below or otherwise any legal infirmity in the. impugned judgment calling for interference in the instant second appeal. 11. For the foregoing reasons, the instant appeal is without merit and is therefore, dismissed. Ap peal dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1268 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-04-01): AAMER FAROOQ, J.— Through the instant appeal, the appellants have impugned the judgment and decree dated 14.2.2015 whereby the suit for Specific Performance filed by the appellants was dismissed. 2. The facts, in brief, are that respondents Nos.1 and 2 being owners of Property measuring 1500 sq. Ft (western side) located on the roof of shop No.4 to 7, first floor, Commercial building constructed on plot No.B-R, Markan F-7, Islamabad (the property), allegedly entered in an agreement to sell with appellant No.l In the agreement appellant No.2 was made the nominee of appellants Nos.1 and respondents Nos.l and 2 executed a general power of attorney in his favor which was registered in accordance with law. The alleged agreement to sell was executed on 14.3.2000. The appellants filed a suit for Specific Performance of the referred agreement on the ground that respondents Nos. and 2 are refusing to adhere to the terms of the same and transfer the property in favor of appellant No.l It was also alleged in the plaint that the total consideration for the sale of above-mentioned property was settled as Rs. 1,400,000/- and out of the same the entire consideration except Rs.32000/-, was paid. Respondents Nos.I and 2 denied the agreement to sell and claim of the appellants. The suit filed by the appellants was dismissed by the learned trial court vide judgment and decree dated 3.1.2013 and the appeal filed by them was also dismissed vide judgment dated 14.2.2015. 3. Learned counsel for the appellants, inter alia, submitted that the appeal filed by the appellants was dismissed on the issue of limitation and no findings have been rendered with respect to other issues; that under second part of Article 113 of first schedule to Limitation Act, 1908 the period of limitation is three years from the date of knowledge of refusal on part of the vendors to transfer the property. It was further contended that respondents Nos.l and 2 did not specifically refuse to transfer the property till filing of the suit, therefore, limitation period shall be taken from the referred date; that suit filed by the appellants was within the period of limitation, therefore, the appellate judgment should be set-aside and matter be remanded to the appellate court for findings on other issues. 4. Learned counsel for respondents Nos.] and 2, inter alia, submitted under the second part of Article 113 of the Schedule to Limitation Act, 1908 the refusal to transfer does not have to be specific, and the limitation runs when the Vendée has noted that the vendor is not transferred the property. Learned counsel pointed out that in the mutant case by virtue of alleged agreement to sell the rights in the property were transferred to the appellants, however, subsequently, respondents Nos.l and 2 continued to deal with the property as their own by receiving the rent; filing of eviction application as well as execution petition against tenants and had the property transferred MN their favor MN CDA record which was sufficient

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1268 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-04-01): property were transferred to the appellants, however, subsequently, respondents Nos.l and 2 continued to deal with the property as their own by receiving the rent; filing of eviction application as well as execution petition against tenants and had the property transferred MN their favor MN CDA record which was sufficient to apprise the appellants regarding the state of affairs. In support of his contention learned counsel placed reliance on case titled Heidi Abdul Karim v Florida Builders Private Limited (PLD 2012 SC 247), Muhammad Ashraf v. MST. Rashida Bibi (2006 YLR 1626) and Paco Limited v. F.O.P. etc. (PLD 2011 SC 44). Learned counsel also pleaded that no ground was taken before the first appellate court regarding the finding of the trial court on issue of limitation, therefore, they have no right to agitate the same before this court. 5. The appellants filed a suit for Specific Performance of agreement to sell dated 14.3.2000 on 17.12.2005. Respondents Nos.| and 2 resisted the claim of the appellant and denied entering into the referred agreement. Out of the divergent pleadings of the parties following issues were framed: (i) Whether defendants Nos.! and 2 MN pursuance of settlement decree dated 1.6.1999 entered into agreement to sell dated 14,3.2000 with plaintiff No.1 regarding suit house in consideration of Rs. 1400000/- OPP (ii) Whether defendants Nos.] and 2 have executed general power of attorney No.693 dated 14,3.2000 regarding the suit property in the name of plaintiff No.2 on the formation of plaintiff No.] after receiving the sale consideration? OPP (i) Whether plaintiffs are entitled to decree for specific performance as prayed for? OPP (iv) Whether defendant No.2 was Moor on 14.3.2000 and the defendant No, was appointed as guardian of the defendant No.2 by the guardian vide order of guardian judge dated 6.3.1993 and there was no permission to sell the minor's property if so its effect? OPD and 2. (v) Whether agreement to sell dated 4.3.2000 and general power of same date are void ab initio, result of fraud, misrepresentation, fabrication and under influence and is under illegal disability? OPD and 2, (vi) Whether the agreement dated 14.3,2000 is illegal against the terms of conditions of lease against CDA ordnance and rules made their especially when lease deed was executed but 21.1.2003, hence the suit is barred by law? OPD and 2. (Oil) Whether the plaintifffhave no cause and locus standi to file the instant suit? OPD (it) Whether the plaintiffs have not come to the court with clean hands? OPD (ix) Whether the suit of the plastic is not main tamable in its present form? OPD (x) Whether the suit of the plaintiff'is time-barred? OPD (xi) Whether the plaintiffs have concealed material facts from the court and suit being false and frivolous is liable to be dismissed with special cost under section 35-A, C.P.C.? OPD (xi) Relief. 6. Learned trial court dismissed the suit of the appellants on merits as well as the issue of limitation and appellate court dismissed the appeal filed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1268 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-04-01): from the court and suit being false and frivolous is liable to be dismissed with special cost under section 35-A, C.P.C.? OPD (xi) Relief. 6. Learned trial court dismissed the suit of the appellants on merits as well as the issue of limitation and appellate court dismissed the appeal filed by the appellants while confining itself on issue No. 10 the. the issue of limitation. The sole controversy before this court in the instant appeal is that whether the suit filed by the appellants against respondents Nos.| and 2 was barred by Imitation. Admittedly in the alleged agreement to sell no date was. Prescribed for transfer of the property. Under Article 113 of the Schedule of Limitation Act, 1908 the limitation period for suit for specific performance of contract is three years from the date fixed for the performance or if no such date is fixed when the plaintiff has noticed that performance is refused as mentioned above. As date for performance of the agreement has been given in the agreement between the parties in the present case, therefore, the period of limitation is to be computed from notice to the appellants regarding refusal of performance of the agreement. The Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan in case titled Heidi Abdul Karim v. Florida Builders Private Limited (PLD 2012 SC 247) held that limitation was a command of law prescribing statutory period within which a right is to be exercised or enforced. It was also observed as follows In the context of interpreting Article 113 of the Act, the provisions for the facility of reference are reproduced below:— Description of suit ] of Period limitation 2 Time from which period begins to run 3 113. For specific performance of contract. Three years The date fixed for the performance, or, if no such date is fixed, when the plaintiffs notice that performance is refused. And for the purpose of the above, it seems expedient to touch upon the legislative history of the Article. The prior Limitation Acts of 1871 and 1877, had in each of them the corresponding provision as in Article 113. However, the words in 1871 Act, were "when the plaintiff has noticed that his right is denied", postulating that the second pan of Article 113 was the only provision then regulating the limitation for the suits for specific performance and the commencement of three years period was dependent on the proof of the fact of notice of denial and the question of limitation was accordingly to be decided, having no nexus with the date even if fixed by the parties for the performance of the contract. The said provision however WCU expanded, and these words were substituted in the subsequent Act of 1877, as are also found in the third column of the present Act. The change brought by the Legislature in 1877 Act was retained in Article 113 of the Act, by including the first part that the time would run from the ‘date fixed' for the performance

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1268 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-04-01): subsequent Act of 1877, as are also found in the third column of the present Act. The change brought by the Legislature in 1877 Act was retained in Article 113 of the Act, by including the first part that the time would run from the ‘date fixed' for the performance is thus purposive and salutary in nature, which contemplates and reflects the clear intention of the legislature to prescribe the same (three years) period of limitation, however, providing that the parties who otherwise have a right to fix a date of their own choice in the agreement for the performance thereof, such date in consequence of law shall also govern the period of limitation as well for the suits failing in this category. Thus now the three years period mentioned in Column No. of the Article runs in two parts:— (i) from the date fixed for the performance; or (ii) where no such date is fixed when the plaintiff has noticed that the reason for the said change as stated above is obvious. In the first part, the date is certain, it is fixed by the parties, BMG conscious and aware of the mandate of law i.e. Article 113, with the intention that the time for the specific performance suit should run therefrom. And so the time shall run forthwith from that date, irrespective and notwithstanding there being a default, lapse or inability on part of either party to the contract to perform his/its obligation in relation thereto. The object and rationale of enforcing the first part is to exclude and eliminate the element of resolving the factual controversy which may arise in a case pertaining to the proof or otherwise of the notice of denial and the time thereof In the second part, the date is not certain and so the date of refusal of the performance is the only basis for computation of time. These two parts of Article 113 are altogether independent and segregated in nature and are meant to cater two different sorts of specific performance clams, m relation to the limitation attracted to those. A case. squarely falling within the ambit of the first part cannot be adjudged or considered on the touchstone of the second part, notwithstanding any set of facts mentioned in the plaint to bring the case within the purview of the later part. 7. In the plant the appellants have claimed that cause of action accrued mm the favor. When respondents Nos.l and 2 expressed their intention regarding cancellation of their irrecoverable general power of attorney a month ago and finally on 16,12.2005 when the referred respondents approached respondent No.3 for the same. The agreement to sell dated 14.3.2000 was tendered in evidence as Ex. PI and the salient terms of the same are as follows:— (5) That the first party has delivered the vacant possession to the second party who is in now possession of the same. (6) That the first party has created an agency coupled with merest of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1268 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-04-01): in evidence as Ex. PI and the salient terms of the same are as follows:— (5) That the first party has delivered the vacant possession to the second party who is in now possession of the same. (6) That the first party has created an agency coupled with merest of this agreement by executing a general power of attorney in the name of Mr. Mohammad Asif Meh boob son of late Dr. Mehboob Elah, as nominated by the second party. (7) That the first party has left no merest with the said portion of the property which is subject of this agreement and Hereby agrees to transfer all those rights in the said portion of the property which has been acquired by the first party through the above said decree dated 1.6.1999. (8) That hereafter the second party is entitled to lease out the above said property to receive rent, to get vacate and enjoy all the incidents, privileges and rights as an owner. All the fittings and fixtures in the above said portion is also included mm this transaction. 8. The bare reading of the above terms show that the agreement created an agency and in this behalf a power of attorney was executed in favor of appellant No.2. It was also agreed that the first party shall have no interest in the property and the appellants had the right to lease out the property in question; receive rent; to get the property vacated and enjoy the benefits and rights as an owner. However, despite the referred terms,- the property after the alleged agreement, was got transferred by respondents Nos.1 and 2 in their favor independently of appellant No.2 who is the son of respondent No.2. In this behalf vide EX.P32.e. letter dated 3.4.2000 addressed to Deputy Director Estate Management CDA, Islamabad, the co-owners of the entire property made an application for transfer the same in their names and a Specific request was made for the transfer separately. In this behalf respondent No.1 executed the letter in her personal capacity whereas appellant No.2 being son of respondent No.| executed the letter as one of the legal heirs of deceased Dr. Mehboob Elah and attorney of Shaft Basin. Similarly, the execution application to get the property vacated from the tenant was filed by respondents Nos.] and 2 and the possession was taken by them and likewise rent is being received by them. In this behalf execution application for vacation of rented property was filed by respondent No.I (Ex. D4). The settlement between the respondent No.1 and tenant was executed by her (Ex. D5) and the application for receiving rent was also filed by respondent No.l These actions on part of respondent No.l were after alleged agreement to sell and in negation of the terms of the same. 9. Though Article 113 ibid does not specifically provide the form of the notice of refusal, however, the notice may be explicit or implied. In this behalf reliance is placed on case titled

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1268 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-04-01): respondent No.l were after alleged agreement to sell and in negation of the terms of the same. 9. Though Article 113 ibid does not specifically provide the form of the notice of refusal, however, the notice may be explicit or implied. In this behalf reliance is placed on case titled Mean v. Ghulam Hussain (PLD 1985 Karachi 674). In Muhammad Ship etc. v. Tapir Shahid etc. (PLD 1998 Lahore 444) it was held as follows Under Article 113 of Limitation Act, if date for performance of agreement is given in the agreement, then a suit for specific performance can be filed within three years from the date recorded in the agreement. If no date is provided, the suit can be filed within three years from the date when the purchaser had notice of refusal. In Janardhanam Prasad v. RAMDAC (Appeal Civil ), the Supreme Court of India held as follows "For specific performance of contract Three years the date fixed for the performance, or, info such date TS fixed, when the plaintiff has noticed that performance is refused." The Court in applying the period of Imitation, would first inquire whether any time was fixed for performance of agreement of sale. It is so fixed, the suit must be filed within the period of three years, failing which the same would be barred by limitation. Here, however, no time for performance was fixed, It was for the Courts to find out the date on which the plaintiff "had notice that the performance was refused and on arriving at a finding in that behalf, to see whether the suit was filed within three years thereafter. The question was considered in R. Kparvatharaj Gupta v. K.C. Pasadena Reddy [(2006) 2 SCC 428], which in terms was noticed and applied in Gunwantbhai Mulch and Shah and ORS. v. Anton Et's Farl and ORS. [(2006) 3 SCC 634]. [See also Bukhara D. Jam and ORS. v. G. Gopalakrishna [(2004) 7 SCC 251]. The. first Defendant was a friend of the 2nd Defendant. Admittedly, the usual stipulations were knowingly not made in the agreement of sale dated 11.4.83. The IST Defendant may or may not be aware about the agreement entered by and between the respondent harm. But he cannot raise a plea of absence of notice of the deed of sale dated 4.9.1985, which was a registered document. Possession of the suit land by the appellant also stands admitted. Registration of a document as well as possession would constitute notice, as is evidence from Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, which is in the following terms: "a person Is said to have notice" of a fact when he actually knows that fact, or when, but for willful abstention from an inquiry or search which he sought to have made, or gross negligence, he would have known TT. Similarly, Pacha man Dhaka etc. v. Monteith Path Marty (Appeal Civil 5187 of 2001), the Supreme Court of India held as follows:- It is not

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1268 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-04-01): or when, but for willful abstention from an inquiry or search which he sought to have made, or gross negligence, he would have known TT. Similarly, Pacha man Dhaka etc. v. Monteith Path Marty (Appeal Civil 5187 of 2001), the Supreme Court of India held as follows:- It is not in dispute that the suit for specific performance of contract would be governed by Article 54 of the Limitation Act, 1964. While determining the applicability of the first or the second part of the said provision, the court will firstly see whether any time was fixed for performance of the agreement of sale and if it was fixed, whether the suit was filed beyond the prescribed period unless any case of extension of time for performance was pleaded and established. When, however, no time is fixed for performance of contract, the court may determine the date on which the plaintiff had notice of refusal on the part of the defendant to perform the contract and in that event the suit is required to be filed within a period of three years wherefrom. ' 10, In the mutant case since certain rights were specifically granted to appellants vide the above-mentioned agreement to sell, therefore, any action on part of respondents Nos.1| and 2 which was adverse to those rights shall tantamount to notice with respect to refusal to transfer and the period of limitation shall start therefrom. In this behalf the application to CDA EX.P32 was made on 4.3.2000 to which appellant No.2 as nominee of appellant No.l and Attorney of respondents Nos.] and 2 was also signatory had knowledge and notice that respondent No.] is executing the letter in violation of terms of agreement to sell. Similarly the filing of execution application; taking of the possession of the property in question from the tenant and receipt of rent are the actions on part of respondent No.1] were acts adverse to the rights granted to the appellants under the alleged agreement to sell. In this behalf reliance is placed on case titled Muhammad Sheaf v. MST. Rashida Bibi (2006 YLR 1626) wherein the honorable Lahore High Court held as follows:-- Since the question of limitation in the above circumstances, was a mixed question of law and fact, it was incumbent upon the respondent/plaintiff to state, firstly as to when she became aware of the dismissal of C.R. and, secondly, as to when she first sought and was refused execution of a sale deed pursuant to the agreement EX. P2. At this juncture, it is relevant to note that the onus of proving that the suit was within time, was rightly placed on the respondent/plaintiff, and it was for her to lead affirmative evidence of all relevant facts to show that the suit had been filed within the period prescribed under Article 113 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. Since she failed to do so, he suits was liable to be dismissed as being time-barred. The appellants did not plead specifically

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1268?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1268 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-04-01): affirmative evidence of all relevant facts to show that the suit had been filed within the period prescribed under Article 113 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. Since she failed to do so, he suits was liable to be dismissed as being time-barred. The appellants did not plead specifically the knowledge about the acts adverse to their rights and vaguely asserted that they came to know about the refusal when the general power of attorney was sought to be cancelled. There is no explanation in the evidence by the appellants regard mg the acts by respondents Nos.] and 2 which are adverse to the rights of the appellants. In light of the referred facts and circumstances there is no misreading or non-reading of evidence by the courts below or otherwise any legal infirmity in the. impugned judgment calling for interference in the instant second appeal. 11. For the foregoing reasons, the instant appeal is without merit and is therefore, dismissed. Ap peal dismissed

Question: What is case 2016 CLC 1838 about?
Answer: Case 2016 CLC 1838 was decided by ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT on 2016-06-20. The case involved MUHAMMAD ANWAR—PETITIONER VERSUS ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include ISLAMABAD RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (IV OF 2001) S. 17 REGISTRATION ACT (XVI OF 1908) S. 17 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN ART. 199. The case was heard by BEFORE AAMER FAROOQ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: In case 2016 CLC 1838, the court applied the following statutes: ISLAMABAD RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (IV OF 2001) S. 17 REGISTRATION ACT (XVI OF 1908) S. 17 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN ART. 199. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT and decided on 2016-06-20.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2016 CLC 1838 were: CH. ABDUR REHMAN BAJWA FOR PETITIONER. MUHAMMAD WAIID HUSSAIN MUGHAL FOR RESNONRIENT NO 2.. The judges presiding were: BEFORE AAMER FAROOQ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: The parties in case 2016 CLC 1838 were: MUHAMMAD ANWAR—PETITIONER VERSUS ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2016 CLC 1838.
Answer: AAMER FAROOQ, J.— Through the instant petition the petitioner has assailed judgment dated 18.11.2015 passed by respondent No.] whereby the appeal filed by the petitioner WW. against order dated 30.07.2015 passed by respondent No.3 was dismissed. 2. The facts, in brief, are that respondent No.2 filed an eviction application under section 17 of Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 against the petitioner with respect to the properties comprising. shops Nos.|, 2 and 3, first floor, IST floor and 2nd floor, Block No.2-K, G- 7 Markan, Islamabad (the property). The eviction application was filed on the grounds of default in payment of rent, expiry of lease, violation of terms and conditions of lease and personal bona fide need. The petitioner in his reply denied the relationship of landlord and tenant between himself and respondent No.2, and it was alleged that the property was obtained on lease from the father of respondent No.2. Out of the pleadings of the parties, respondent No.3 framed issues including issue of relationship. The eviction application of respondent No.2 was allowed vide order dated 30.07.2015. The appeal was filed by the petitioner which was dismissed vide the impugned judgment dated 18.11.2015. 3. Learned counsel for the petitioner inter alia submitted that the case of respondent No.2 is of no evidence inasmuch as the affidavit tendered during evidence before respondent No.3 is not in the prescribed form and did not qualify as an affidavit. In this behalf it was further contended that in the affidavit the name of the Court; title of the case is not mentioned and even the same is not verified. In support of his referred argument learned counsel placed reliance on the case titled Bashir Ahmed v. Abdul Zahid (PLD 1995 Lahore 98), Master Muhammad Bashir v. Moinuddin (1990 CLC 703), Habit BUX v. Yahoo UL Hasan (1986 CLC 1119), Mughees up Din Mira v. MST. Maryam' Mascot and 3 others (2008 CLC 1287). It was further contended that respondent No.2 had filed the petition through power of attorney which is neither registered nor is on the stamp paper. Learned counsel in this behalf further submitted that the power of attorney is required to be compulsorily registered under section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 and since it is not, therefore, does not confer a valid authority to Muhammad Bathroom/attorney. It was also contended that neither the power of attorney is on the stamp paper nor any revenue stamps are appended on it, therefore, it is of no value. In support of his contention learned counsel placed reliance on the case titled Rafael Islam v. Mrs. Aura Malik (PLD 1991 Karachi 377). Learned counsel also posted out that the case of respondent No.2 in the eviction application was that he had purchased the property in question from his father, however, it was contended that under the provisions of Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 notice of change WW. in ownership was required to be served which was not done in the instant case, hence the petitioner has no notice of change in the ownership and cannot be held responsible for default and also has no relationship with respondent No.2. Lastly, it was contended that the attorney of respondent No.2 appearing in the witness box conceded that he was also the attorney of father of respondent No.2 and received rent in that capacity. 4. Learned counsel for respondent No.2 inter alia submitted that ' the property in question was transferred to respondent No.2 by his father and notice of change in ownership was duly given to the petitioner; that even otherwise, it is an established principle that filing of eviction application is a sufficient notice. It was further contended that where in a power of attorney power to sale or transfer the rights m an immovable property is not granted the same is not required to be compulsorily registered under section 17 of Registration Act, 1908. In this behalf it was contended that the bare reading of the power of attorney shows that no power to sell or transfer ownership rights in the property have been granted to the attorney, therefore, power of attorney is not required to be registered. It was also submitted that the non-payment of stamp duty does not render a document ineffective and at the best the Court before. which such document has been presented can impound the same and impose penalty in addition to the stamp duty under section 35B of the referred Act. In support of his contentions learned counsel placed reliance on the case titled Abdul HAI v. Muhammad Aladdin (PLD 1967 Karachi 424), Muhammad Yousuf v. Asif Kiddie and another(PLD 1987 Lahore 659), Sultan Saundra alias Saundra Khan through Legal heirs v. Muhammad Bashir and others (2015 MLD 378), Mrs. Scholastic and 3 others v. Peter D'Souza and 2 others(1986 CLC 1472), Kawabata Mir Banach Khan Marry through Attorney v. Appellate Election Tribunal, Balochistan through Registrar, Balochistan High Court and 2 others (PLD 2003 Quetta 35) and Sahibzada Anwar Hamid v. Messes Top worth Investments (Macau) Ltd. through Chairman and 5.others (2003 YLR 2843). It was also emphasized that the arguments advanced in the writ petition were neither agitated before the learned Rent Controller nor Appellate Authority, hence cannot be raised in the instant writ petition. It was further contended that the title document is a proof of ownership of a person. In this behalf reliance was placed on the case titled Hair Muhammad Shahid Nawab v. Hair Muhammad Saeed (2010 CLC 1941) and Sh ajar Islam v. Muhammad Kiddie and 2 others (PLD 2007 Supreme Court 45). With respect WW. to the affidavit, TT innuendo™! that it : SN established imam TUC affidavit when tendered in evidence, even if it is not MN prescribed form, becomes part of the evidence as examination in chief of deponent, therefore, even if it is not in prescribed form the same TS immaterial. 5. Respondent No.2 filed an eviction application against the petitioner on the ground that the lease agreement was executed between father of respondent No.2 and the petitioner on 20.04.2009 and the monthly rent was fixed as Rs. 120,000/- per month which after enhancement the respondent was paying Rs. 145,000/- per month till 20.06.2013. It was also alleged that the lease expired on 30,06.2013 and the petitioner did not pay monthly rent from July to November 2013. It was also alleged that the property was transferred in the name of respondent No.2 on 07.10.2010 vide CDA letter No.CDA/EM- 27(520)/ and the change in the ownership of the property was duly. Intimated to the petitioner on 08.11.2010, hence respondent No.2 in eviction application alleged expiry of lease agreement on 30.06.2013, default in payment of rent from July to November 2013, violation of lease agreement by way of structural changes without consent of respondent No.2 and personal bona fide need. The petitioner denied relationship with respondent No.2 as tenant. It was further alleged that the lease was renewed by Dr. Must Ahmed Guffaw (father of the petitioner) through an oral arrangement with the petitioner. Learned Rent Controller framed issues and recorded evidence after which the eviction application of respondent No.2 was allowed. Appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed vide impugned judgment. 6. the basic thrust of the arguments by the petitioner before this Court is that the case against the petitioner is of no evidence inasmuch as the affidavit tendered in evidence of the attorney of respondent No.2 is not duly attested, does not bear the name of the Court and also the title of the parties. In this behalf learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the case titled Habit BUX v. Yahoo UL Hasan (1986 CLC 1119) wherein the Hon'BLE Sindh High Court observed that the affidavit verified as true to knowledge and belief of deponent, without clearly stating how much of statements were true to knowledge of deponents and how much on information or belief, and without stating source of information or belief would be valueless and could be ignored. Similarly, in case titled Master WW. Muhammad Bashir v. Moinuddin (1990 CLC 703) the Hon'BLE Sindh High Court held that non-appearance of deponent before Oath Commissioner or before anybody or have statement on Oath makes the affidavit inadmissible in evidence as such. Similarly, in Bashir Ahmed v. Abdul Zahid (PLD 1995 Lahore 98) the Hon'BLE Lahore High Court reproduced the requirements of the affidavit according to High Court (Lahore) Rules and Orders Volume-IV Part-B Chapter 12-B Rules 8, 9, 14 and 15 whereby the affidavit is required to be verified in accordance with the verification in the form in Rule 16 of the High Court Rules and Orders and also to contain the name of the Court and title of the proceedings. 7. On the contrary it has been submitted by the learned counsel for respondent No.2 that the proceedings before the learned Rent Controller are in the capacity as quasi judicial and not a Court. Reliance was placed on the case titled Karim Moby up Din and Mrs. S. Mahmud v. Ch. Reheat Ali Agra and MST. Aziz Begum (PLD 1965 Supreme Court 459). Moreover, in Hammed Milan Tirana v. Abdul Aziz Harbor Khan and 2 others (2005 MLD 1232) the Hon'BLE High Court observed that the proceedings before the learned Rent Controller are not judicial proceedings and Code of Civil Procedure and QAnon-e-Shahadat are not strictly applicable. The Hon'BLE Lahore High Court in case titled Muhammad Yahoo through legal heirs v. Sh. Muhammad Anwar through legal heirs (PLD 2011 Lahore 446) examined the nature of the affidavit submitted in the proceedings before the learned Rent Controller and observed that it is a settled principle of law that if an objection was ‘not taken before original Court of jurisdiction it could not be allowed at the appellate stage. It was further observed as follows; "No doubt affidavits in this case are not as per High Court Rules and Order Volume IV Part B Chapter 12-B Rules 8, 9, 12, 14 and 15 but this irregularity stands cured in the circumstances of this case. The witnesses when appeared before the learned trial Court they made a statement on oath that they have submitted their affidavit and contents of affidavit are correct, this means that the contents of affidavit have been admitted by the deponent before the court on oath and as such it will be deemed the examination-in-chief of the witness on oath. The appellants cross-examined, all the witnesses without raising the objection that affidavits are not according to law and rules and rightly so because the WW. witnesses have taken oath before the court accepting the contents of affidavits. The admission on the part of witnesses about the contents on oath is sufficient to negate the objection of learned counsel for appellant. Learned counsel for appellants has failed to post out any authoritative judgment whereby the admission on oath by the witnesses before the court about the contents of affidavit was refused on the sole ground that contents of statement are not attested by an Oath Commissioner. 6. The affidavits, if were not attested by the Oath Commissioner maximum ti can be said that it was written examination-in-chief 0} window puppies Io until. All'-he witness after, taking oath before the court states that he accepts the contents of his written statement, it will be considered the examination-in-chief of witnesses in the absence of any objection. The appellants have cross-examined all witnesses in detail but on merits they lost their case before two courts below, It is also an admitted fact on record that appellants have not taken this objection before the learned First Appellate Court and continued to build their case on the basis of available evidence. Now they have suddenly somersaulted and tried to wriggle out from the ejectment orders. In these circumstances the appellants could not be allowed to take this objection in second appeal in violation of his earlier stance. ” 8. In light of above judgment of the Hon'BLE Lahore High Court even if an affidavit is not in the prescribed form and the deponent enters the witness box on Oath and presents himself for cross-examination then the affidavit is taken as a written examination in chief of the deponent. In the instant case the attorney of respondent No.2 entered the witness box for cross-examination, however, at the time of evidence no objection regarding the form of affidavit was taken by the petitioner. The affidavit was tendered in evidence as Ex.A-1, therefore, became part of his examination in chief and the petitioner cross-examined him on the basis thereof In this behalf notwithstanding the principles laid down in the case law relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner they are distinguishable in the facts and circumstances of the case. Even otherwise, the judgment of the Hon'BLE Lahore High Court is later in time and holds the field. 9. The petitioner has also challenged the power of attorney in favor of Muhammad Bathroom on the ground that the same is neither registered nor bears the stamp duty. Reliance was placed on Zafarullslam v. Mrs, Aura Malik (PLD 1991 Karachi 377). Under section 17 of Registration Act, 1908 where a document creates right, title or interest whether vested or contingent in movable property of value of Rs. 100/onwards the same is required to be registered compulsorily besides] payment of stamp duty. The bare reading of the power of attorney in the instant case shows that it does not confer on the attorney any right, title or interest m the immovable property, rather it has been given in order to mitigate legal proceedings or defend the same with respect to the property in question. Such like documents are not compulsorily registerable. Moreover, the power of attorney is duly attested by the Consulate of Pakistan in UK, therefore, is in accordance with the mandate of the law. Reliance is placed on the case titled Mrs. Scholastic. And 3 others v. Peter D'Souza and 2 others(1986 CLC 1472), Kawabata Mir Banach Khan Marry through Attorney v. Appellate Election Tribunal, Balochistan through Registrar, Balochistan High Court and 2 others (PLD 2003 Quetta 35) and Abdul HAI v. Muhammad Aladdin (PLD 1967 Karachi 424). " 10. The petitioner in reply to the eviction application as well as appeal had not taken these legal objections and for the first time has raised in this Court. In response to the objections taken by respondent No.2 as well as query of the Court it was contended that since the questions are legal, therefore, can be taken. In the interest of justice, the petitioner was allowed to raise such objections and findings thereon have been given hereinabove. 11. Respondent No.2 had filed the eviction application on the basis/ground mentioned above and had duly proved the same. The petitioner in the mutant petition has failed to point out any legal or factual infirmity in the findings, of the Courts below which calls for interference by this Court in its jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution. It is an established principle that the findings on facts rendered by the Courts below cannot be interfered with under Article 199 of the Constitution unless there is some illegality or jurisdictional error or findings are otherwise perverse. No such infirmity exists in the mutant case. 12. For the foregoing reasons, the mutant petition is without merit and is accordingly dismissed. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1838 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-06-20): AAMER FAROOQ, J.— Through the instant petition the petitioner has assailed judgment dated 18.11.2015 passed by respondent No.] whereby the appeal filed by the petitioner WW. against order dated 30.07.2015 passed by respondent No.3 was dismissed. 2. The facts, in brief, are that respondent No.2 filed an eviction application under section 17 of Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 against the petitioner with respect to the properties comprising. shops Nos.|, 2 and 3, first floor, IST floor and 2nd floor, Block No.2-K, G- 7 Markan, Islamabad (the property). The eviction application was filed on the grounds of default in payment of rent, expiry of lease, violation of terms and conditions of lease and personal bona fide need. The petitioner in his reply denied the relationship of landlord and tenant between himself and respondent No.2, and it was alleged that the property was obtained on lease from the father of respondent No.2. Out of the pleadings of the parties, respondent No.3 framed issues including issue of relationship. The eviction application of respondent No.2 was allowed vide order dated 30.07.2015. The appeal was filed by the petitioner which was dismissed vide the impugned judgment dated 18.11.2015. 3. Learned counsel for the petitioner inter alia submitted that the case of respondent No.2 is of no evidence inasmuch as the affidavit tendered during evidence before respondent No.3 is not in the prescribed form and did not qualify as an affidavit. In this behalf it was further contended that in the affidavit the name of the Court; title of the case is not mentioned and even the same is not verified. In support of his referred argument learned counsel placed reliance on the case titled Bashir Ahmed v. Abdul Zahid (PLD 1995 Lahore 98), Master Muhammad Bashir v. Moinuddin (1990 CLC 703), Habit BUX v. Yahoo UL Hasan (1986 CLC 1119), Mughees up Din Mira v. MST. Maryam' Mascot and 3 others (2008 CLC 1287). It was further contended that respondent No.2 had filed the petition through power of attorney which is neither registered nor is on the stamp paper. Learned counsel in this behalf further submitted that the power of attorney is required to be compulsorily registered under section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 and since it is not, therefore, does not confer a valid authority to Muhammad Bathroom/attorney. It was also contended that neither the power of attorney is on the stamp paper nor any revenue stamps are appended on it, therefore, it is of no value. In support of his contention learned counsel placed reliance on the case titled Rafael Islam v. Mrs. Aura Malik (PLD 1991 Karachi 377). Learned counsel also posted out that the case of respondent No.2 in the eviction application was that he had purchased the property in question from his father, however, it was contended that under the provisions of Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 notice of change WW. in ownership was required to be served which was not done in the instant case, hence the petitioner

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1838 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-06-20): eviction application was that he had purchased the property in question from his father, however, it was contended that under the provisions of Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 notice of change WW. in ownership was required to be served which was not done in the instant case, hence the petitioner has no notice of change in the ownership and cannot be held responsible for default and also has no relationship with respondent No.2. Lastly, it was contended that the attorney of respondent No.2 appearing in the witness box conceded that he was also the attorney of father of respondent No.2 and received rent in that capacity. 4. Learned counsel for respondent No.2 inter alia submitted that ' the property in question was transferred to respondent No.2 by his father and notice of change in ownership was duly given to the petitioner; that even otherwise, it is an established principle that filing of eviction application is a sufficient notice. It was further contended that where in a power of attorney power to sale or transfer the rights m an immovable property is not granted the same is not required to be compulsorily registered under section 17 of Registration Act, 1908. In this behalf it was contended that the bare reading of the power of attorney shows that no power to sell or transfer ownership rights in the property have been granted to the attorney, therefore, power of attorney is not required to be registered. It was also submitted that the non-payment of stamp duty does not render a document ineffective and at the best the Court before. which such document has been presented can impound the same and impose penalty in addition to the stamp duty under section 35B of the referred Act. In support of his contentions learned counsel placed reliance on the case titled Abdul HAI v. Muhammad Aladdin (PLD 1967 Karachi 424), Muhammad Yousuf v. Asif Kiddie and another(PLD 1987 Lahore 659), Sultan Saundra alias Saundra Khan through Legal heirs v. Muhammad Bashir and others (2015 MLD 378), Mrs. Scholastic and 3 others v. Peter D'Souza and 2 others(1986 CLC 1472), Kawabata Mir Banach Khan Marry through Attorney v. Appellate Election Tribunal, Balochistan through Registrar, Balochistan High Court and 2 others (PLD 2003 Quetta 35) and Sahibzada Anwar Hamid v. Messes Top worth Investments (Macau) Ltd. through Chairman and 5.others (2003 YLR 2843). It was also emphasized that the arguments advanced in the writ petition were neither agitated before the learned Rent Controller nor Appellate Authority, hence cannot be raised in the instant writ petition. It was further contended that the title document is a proof of ownership of a person. In this behalf reliance was placed on the case titled Hair Muhammad Shahid Nawab v. Hair Muhammad Saeed (2010 CLC 1941) and Sh ajar Islam v. Muhammad Kiddie and 2 others (PLD 2007 Supreme Court 45). With respect WW. to the affidavit, TT innuendo™! that it : SN established imam TUC affidavit when tendered in evidence, even

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1838 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-06-20): the case titled Hair Muhammad Shahid Nawab v. Hair Muhammad Saeed (2010 CLC 1941) and Sh ajar Islam v. Muhammad Kiddie and 2 others (PLD 2007 Supreme Court 45). With respect WW. to the affidavit, TT innuendo™! that it : SN established imam TUC affidavit when tendered in evidence, even if it is not MN prescribed form, becomes part of the evidence as examination in chief of deponent, therefore, even if it is not in prescribed form the same TS immaterial. 5. Respondent No.2 filed an eviction application against the petitioner on the ground that the lease agreement was executed between father of respondent No.2 and the petitioner on 20.04.2009 and the monthly rent was fixed as Rs. 120,000/- per month which after enhancement the respondent was paying Rs. 145,000/- per month till 20.06.2013. It was also alleged that the lease expired on 30,06.2013 and the petitioner did not pay monthly rent from July to November 2013. It was also alleged that the property was transferred in the name of respondent No.2 on 07.10.2010 vide CDA letter No.CDA/EM- 27(520)/ and the change in the ownership of the property was duly. Intimated to the petitioner on 08.11.2010, hence respondent No.2 in eviction application alleged expiry of lease agreement on 30.06.2013, default in payment of rent from July to November 2013, violation of lease agreement by way of structural changes without consent of respondent No.2 and personal bona fide need. The petitioner denied relationship with respondent No.2 as tenant. It was further alleged that the lease was renewed by Dr. Must Ahmed Guffaw (father of the petitioner) through an oral arrangement with the petitioner. Learned Rent Controller framed issues and recorded evidence after which the eviction application of respondent No.2 was allowed. Appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed vide impugned judgment. 6. the basic thrust of the arguments by the petitioner before this Court is that the case against the petitioner is of no evidence inasmuch as the affidavit tendered in evidence of the attorney of respondent No.2 is not duly attested, does not bear the name of the Court and also the title of the parties. In this behalf learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the case titled Habit BUX v. Yahoo UL Hasan (1986 CLC 1119) wherein the Hon'BLE Sindh High Court observed that the affidavit verified as true to knowledge and belief of deponent, without clearly stating how much of statements were true to knowledge of deponents and how much on information or belief, and without stating source of information or belief would be valueless and could be ignored. Similarly, in case titled Master WW. Muhammad Bashir v. Moinuddin (1990 CLC 703) the Hon'BLE Sindh High Court held that non-appearance of deponent before Oath Commissioner or before anybody or have statement on Oath makes the affidavit inadmissible in evidence as such. Similarly, in Bashir Ahmed v. Abdul Zahid (PLD 1995 Lahore 98) the Hon'BLE Lahore High Court reproduced the requirements of the affidavit according to High

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1838 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-06-20): Court held that non-appearance of deponent before Oath Commissioner or before anybody or have statement on Oath makes the affidavit inadmissible in evidence as such. Similarly, in Bashir Ahmed v. Abdul Zahid (PLD 1995 Lahore 98) the Hon'BLE Lahore High Court reproduced the requirements of the affidavit according to High Court (Lahore) Rules and Orders Volume-IV Part-B Chapter 12-B Rules 8, 9, 14 and 15 whereby the affidavit is required to be verified in accordance with the verification in the form in Rule 16 of the High Court Rules and Orders and also to contain the name of the Court and title of the proceedings. 7. On the contrary it has been submitted by the learned counsel for respondent No.2 that the proceedings before the learned Rent Controller are in the capacity as quasi judicial and not a Court. Reliance was placed on the case titled Karim Moby up Din and Mrs. S. Mahmud v. Ch. Reheat Ali Agra and MST. Aziz Begum (PLD 1965 Supreme Court 459). Moreover, in Hammed Milan Tirana v. Abdul Aziz Harbor Khan and 2 others (2005 MLD 1232) the Hon'BLE High Court observed that the proceedings before the learned Rent Controller are not judicial proceedings and Code of Civil Procedure and QAnon-e-Shahadat are not strictly applicable. The Hon'BLE Lahore High Court in case titled Muhammad Yahoo through legal heirs v. Sh. Muhammad Anwar through legal heirs (PLD 2011 Lahore 446) examined the nature of the affidavit submitted in the proceedings before the learned Rent Controller and observed that it is a settled principle of law that if an objection was ‘not taken before original Court of jurisdiction it could not be allowed at the appellate stage. It was further observed as follows; "No doubt affidavits in this case are not as per High Court Rules and Order Volume IV Part B Chapter 12-B Rules 8, 9, 12, 14 and 15 but this irregularity stands cured in the circumstances of this case. The witnesses when appeared before the learned trial Court they made a statement on oath that they have submitted their affidavit and contents of affidavit are correct, this means that the contents of affidavit have been admitted by the deponent before the court on oath and as such it will be deemed the examination-in-chief of the witness on oath. The appellants cross-examined, all the witnesses without raising the objection that affidavits are not according to law and rules and rightly so because the WW. witnesses have taken oath before the court accepting the contents of affidavits. The admission on the part of witnesses about the contents on oath is sufficient to negate the objection of learned counsel for appellant. Learned counsel for appellants has failed to post out any authoritative judgment whereby the admission on oath by the witnesses before the court about the contents of affidavit was refused on the sole ground that contents of statement are not attested by an Oath Commissioner. 6. The affidavits, if were not attested by the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1838 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-06-20): has failed to post out any authoritative judgment whereby the admission on oath by the witnesses before the court about the contents of affidavit was refused on the sole ground that contents of statement are not attested by an Oath Commissioner. 6. The affidavits, if were not attested by the Oath Commissioner maximum ti can be said that it was written examination-in-chief 0} window puppies Io until. All'-he witness after, taking oath before the court states that he accepts the contents of his written statement, it will be considered the examination-in-chief of witnesses in the absence of any objection. The appellants have cross-examined all witnesses in detail but on merits they lost their case before two courts below, It is also an admitted fact on record that appellants have not taken this objection before the learned First Appellate Court and continued to build their case on the basis of available evidence. Now they have suddenly somersaulted and tried to wriggle out from the ejectment orders. In these circumstances the appellants could not be allowed to take this objection in second appeal in violation of his earlier stance. ” 8. In light of above judgment of the Hon'BLE Lahore High Court even if an affidavit is not in the prescribed form and the deponent enters the witness box on Oath and presents himself for cross-examination then the affidavit is taken as a written examination in chief of the deponent. In the instant case the attorney of respondent No.2 entered the witness box for cross-examination, however, at the time of evidence no objection regarding the form of affidavit was taken by the petitioner. The affidavit was tendered in evidence as Ex.A-1, therefore, became part of his examination in chief and the petitioner cross-examined him on the basis thereof In this behalf notwithstanding the principles laid down in the case law relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner they are distinguishable in the facts and circumstances of the case. Even otherwise, the judgment of the Hon'BLE Lahore High Court is later in time and holds the field. 9. The petitioner has also challenged the power of attorney in favor of Muhammad Bathroom on the ground that the same is neither registered nor bears the stamp duty. Reliance was placed on Zafarullslam v. Mrs, Aura Malik (PLD 1991 Karachi 377). Under section 17 of Registration Act, 1908 where a document creates right, title or interest whether vested or contingent in movable property of value of Rs. 100/onwards the same is required to be registered compulsorily besides] payment of stamp duty. The bare reading of the power of attorney in the instant case shows that it does not confer on the attorney any right, title or interest m the immovable property, rather it has been given in order to mitigate legal proceedings or defend the same with respect to the property in question. Such like documents are not compulsorily registerable. Moreover, the power of attorney is duly attested by the Consulate of Pakistan

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1838?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1838 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-06-20): right, title or interest m the immovable property, rather it has been given in order to mitigate legal proceedings or defend the same with respect to the property in question. Such like documents are not compulsorily registerable. Moreover, the power of attorney is duly attested by the Consulate of Pakistan in UK, therefore, is in accordance with the mandate of the law. Reliance is placed on the case titled Mrs. Scholastic. And 3 others v. Peter D'Souza and 2 others(1986 CLC 1472), Kawabata Mir Banach Khan Marry through Attorney v. Appellate Election Tribunal, Balochistan through Registrar, Balochistan High Court and 2 others (PLD 2003 Quetta 35) and Abdul HAI v. Muhammad Aladdin (PLD 1967 Karachi 424). " 10. The petitioner in reply to the eviction application as well as appeal had not taken these legal objections and for the first time has raised in this Court. In response to the objections taken by respondent No.2 as well as query of the Court it was contended that since the questions are legal, therefore, can be taken. In the interest of justice, the petitioner was allowed to raise such objections and findings thereon have been given hereinabove. 11. Respondent No.2 had filed the eviction application on the basis/ground mentioned above and had duly proved the same. The petitioner in the mutant petition has failed to point out any legal or factual infirmity in the findings, of the Courts below which calls for interference by this Court in its jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution. It is an established principle that the findings on facts rendered by the Courts below cannot be interfered with under Article 199 of the Constitution unless there is some illegality or jurisdictional error or findings are otherwise perverse. No such infirmity exists in the mutant case. 12. For the foregoing reasons, the mutant petition is without merit and is accordingly dismissed. WW.

Question: What is case 2016 CLC 896 about?
Answer: Case 2016 CLC 896 was decided by ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT on 2016-02-03. The case involved SAJJAD AHMED—PETITIONER VERSUS CHAIRMAN, CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ORDINANCE (XXIII OF 1960) -S 49- C CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) -O. XXXIX RR.LAND CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) -O. XXXIX RR. AND CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) -S. 115. The case was heard by BEFORE MIAN GUL HASSAN AURANGZEB.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: In case 2016 CLC 896, the court applied the following statutes: CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ORDINANCE (XXIII OF 1960) -S 49- C CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) -O. XXXIX RR.LAND CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) -O. XXXIX RR. AND CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) -S. 115. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT and decided on 2016-02-03.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2016 CLC 896 were: UMAR HANIF KHICHI FOR PETITIONER. MIAN M. FAISAL IRFAN FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: BEFORE MIAN GUL HASSAN AURANGZEB.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: The parties in case 2016 CLC 896 were: SAJJAD AHMED—PETITIONER VERSUS CHAIRMAN, CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2016 CLC 896.
Answer: MIANGUL HASS AN AURANGZEB, J— Through the instant Civil Revision Petition, the petitioner, Salad Ahmed, seeks to challenge the Order dated 04.01.2016, passed by the court of the learned Additional District Judgeship Islamabad (East), whereby the petitioner's appeal against the Order dated 12.12.2015, passed by the court of learned Civil Judge 1st Class, Islamabad (East), was dismissed. Vide the said order dated 12.12.2015, the learned Civil Court dismissed the petitioner's application for interim injunction under Order XXXIX, Rules and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ("C.P.C."), The civil suit filed by the petitioner is still pending. 2, The facts, briefly stated, are that the petitioner was a transferee of Plot No,272, measuring 283, Sq. yards situated at Gala Colony, Ramal Town, Islamabad. The petitioner obtained possession of the said plot on 05,11.1991. Thereafter, the petitioner applied to the Capital Development Authority ("CDA") for the approval of the building plan. It appears that on 24.06, 1992, the petitioner swore an affidavit and applied to the CDA for the issuance of a completion certificate with respect to the house constructed on the said Plot, Furthermore, on 28,09.1992 another affidavit was sworn by the petitioner in which the petitioner undertook that whenever the CDA orders and directs the petitioner would, at his own, cost, demolish the windows and shades made in violation of the building plan. Based on the said affidavits, the CDA on 25.11.1992, approved the building plans and issued a completion certificate in favor of the petitioner. Vide order dated 10.12.2009 passed by the Building Control Directorate, CDA, under Section 49-C(l) of the CDA Ordinance, 1960, the petitioner was directed to remove the following unauthorized construction from the said plot-—— (i) "First floor and mummy constructed without approval. (11) Construction of unauthorized foots taller. (i) Reference your undertaking dated 28-09-1992, all roof projection, hajjis and opening of window towards plot No.271, have to be removed. (iv) Wall on roof of first floor." 3. The said order dated 10.12, 2009 was impugned by the petitioner in a suit for declaration and permanent injunction filed before the court of Civil Judge IST Class, Islamabad, Vide order dated 24.12.2009, the learned civil court rejected the plaint under Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. The appeal against the said order was dismissed, vide judgment dated 29.01.2010, by the court of Additional District Judge, Islamabad. Paragraph 6 of the said judgment is reproduced herein below:— "6. Stance of the appellant as per his own plait (para-4) is that prior to issuance of notice dated 10.12.2009, the concerned officials of the CDA had visited the site and noted some violations which were mentioned in the said notice which were later negotiated between the parties (as per para-5 of the plaint) and the respondent department compounded the same while imposing the fine, but the fact remains that this fine and the affidavit of the appellant pertains to the violations committed by him while completing the single storey as is evident from completion certificate dated 25,11.1992 whereas according to the impugned notice, he has constructed another flour along with multi without approval besides construction of an unauthorized food staler(sic) etc. but no explanation whatsoever is borne out from the contents of the plait itself nor could be elaborated during arguments by learned counsel for the appellant. It appears that in the garb of payment of fine in respect of the violations in construction of the single storey, the appellant has now resorted to file the suit to cover the unauthorized construction of another floor etc. without approval/sanctioned site plan and has rather suppressed the actual facts while seeking the equitable relief! He has, thus, not approached the Court with clean hands either and has rightly been non-suited by the learned Trial Court since he had no cause of action to bring the suit in hand." 4. On 10.05.2010, the petitioner applied to the CDA for a provision of a lane between Plot No. 272 and Plot No.271. This application was made so as to accommodate the unauthorized windows and shades constructed on Plot No.272. 5. The petitioner's request for the provision of a lane between Plot No.271 and Plot No.272 was considered by the CDA Board in its 6th Meeting held on 05.05, 2010. In this meeting, the Director General (Planning), CDA explained the background of the case to the Board. He was of the view that the provision for a lane between Plot No.271 and Plot No.272 to accommodate the open mg of unauthorized windows by the allottee of Plot No.272 was not technically feasible. The decision taken by the CDA Board in the said meeting, is reproduced herein below: — "The allottee was given an opportunity of explaining his case and the Board observed that the opening of windows was granted by the CDA on submission of undertaking by the allottee at the time of start of construction that whenever required by allottee of plot No.271, he will close the windows and remove the shades. As far as the issue of charging the compounding of other construction is concerned, CDA will look into the reasons for the grant of this permission and fix responsibility. The allottee of Plot No.271 has serious objection to the proposal and both the parties are in litigation. Therefore, the proposal for the provision of lane between Plot No.271 and Plot No.272 was not approved by the Board." 6. The CDA Board mm TTS 7th Meeting held on 26.05.2010 made the following decision: "The allottee of Plot No.271 presented his case before the Board and after taking the view point of allottee Board decided to suspend its earlier decision dated 05-05-2010 and further decided that the detailed equity be conducted on allegations of allottee regarding corruption and MAL- administration of CDA staff while examining his case. Meantime, the staff of Planning Wing to visit the site and come up with a proposal regarding provision of passage between Plot Nos.271 and 272." 7. The record is silent as to the developments between 26.05.2010 when the 7th Meeting of the CDA Board was held, and on 14.09.2015 when the Building Control Directorate of the CDA requested the Director Enforcement, CDA to take immediate action and remove/demolish the violations of the Building and Zoning Regulations on Plot No.272, Ramal Town, Islamabad. Furthermore, on 14.10.2015, the Enforcement Directorate issued letter No. CDA-12(43)(71 )/ENF/, captioned, "removal of violation of Building and Zoning Regulations m rest of plot No.272, Ramal Town, Islamabad". Perusal of the said letter reveals that the competent authority had accorded approval for demolishing the following violations in the building constructed on the said Plot No.272-— 1. "Construction of unauthorized foods taller(sic). u. Unauthorized / illegal roof projection/hajj and opening of window towards Plot No.271." 8. According to the said letter, the Enforcement Directorate of the CDA had planned a demolition operation on 16.10.2015 and for this purpose, a request was made for the provision of a magisterial cover to the Enforcement Staff to avoid any complication in the course of action. 9. On 15.10, 2015, the petitioner instituted a suit for permanent and mandatory injunction before the court of learned Civil Judge, Islamabad, praying for a decree for permanent injunction restrain the CDA from demolishing the projections constructed by the petitioner towards the eastern side of the house, and from closing the windows/exhaust. Additionally, the petitioner prayed for a direction to the respondents to act upon the decision of the CDA Board dated 26.05, 2010, Along with the said suit, the petitioner filed an application, under Order XXXIX, Rules and 2, C.P.C. praying for an injunction restrain the respondents from demolishing the said projection/canopy over the windows/exhaust of the house of the petitioner on the eastern side. The respondents contested this suit by filing a written statement/written reply, wherein details of the earlier litigation between the petitioner and the CDA were given. In the said written statement, the respondents maintained that the unauthorized construction made by the petitioner on Plot No.272 was label to be removed. The construction which the petitioner raised unauthorized on Plot No,272 was stated to be as follows: - (i) "Construction of First Floor and mummy without approval of map plan from CDA, (it) Construction of unauthorized foods taller(sic). (it) Construction/opening of window and Hajjis towards plot No.271. (iv) Wall on roof of first floor." 10, Vide order dated 12.12.2015, the court of the learned Civil Judge IST Class, Islamabad, dismissed the petitioner's application under Order XXXIX, Rules and 2, C.P.C. intervalic, on the ground that the petitioner has no prima-face case in his favor. Against the said Order, petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Islamabad, which too met the same fate, vide judgment dated 04.01.2016, Paragraph 7 of the said judgment is reproduced herein below:-*. "7. The learned trial court has misconstrued the decision taken in 6th board meeting of CDA held on 16,05, 2010 by saying that the proposal for provision of lane between plots Nos.271 and 272 was not approved, as the said decision was taken on 05,05, 2010 against which a review application was filed, upon which in 7th board meeting held on 26,05.2010, the earlier decision taken on 05,05.2010 was suspended, and it was directed that an inquiry to be conducted on the allegations of allottee regarding the corruption of CDA staff, In the said meeting, it was also directed that the staff of planning wing to visit the spot and come up with proposal regarding provision of passage between plots Nos.271 and 272. When confronted the learned counsel for the respondents produced the copies of complete "noting record" carried out by the department. The said notion'GS shows that in para No. 116 it has been mentioned that response from the planning wings has not yet been received, however, para No. 117 shows that Affair Iqbal Affair Deputy Director Zone-4 along with Director RP has suggested regretting the request of the petitioner regarding leaving of passage between the two plots. In para No. 122, the chairman has ordered for the implementation of the orders regarding inquiry and the said referred noting shows that Chairman CDA who is competent authority has not accepted the review application of the petitioner. Moreover, the affidavit submitted by the appellant for getting NOC from the department on 28.09.1992 clearly suggests that he has undertaken to remove the windows and shed whenever asked by the department." 11. The petitioner, in the instant civil revision petition, has impugned these concurrent decisions. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that on account of the decision taken by the CDA Board on 26,05.2010, the petitioner was entitled to the provision of a lane between the plot owned by him and plot No.271. He did not dispute the fact that an affidavit was sworn by the petitioner on 28.09.1992, wherein he had undertaken to demolish the violations at his cost whenever ordered by the CDA. However, the learned counsel submitted that the provision of a lane between the said two plots would leave no reason for the CDA to demolish the said violations, which even otherwise had been compounded. 12. Learned counsel for the respondents placed emphasis on the petitioner's undertaking contained in his affidavit dated 28.09.1992, and submitted that as the petitioner had not removed the said violations, the respondents were left with no option, but to demolish the same. He drew the attention of the court to the earlier litigation between the petitioner and CDA, which had been decided against the petitioner. Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that at no material stage had any decision been taken by the respondents or the CDA Board to allow a lane to be created between the plot owned by the petitioner and plot No.271. 13. I have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record with their able assistance. 14. I find myself fully in agreement with the findings and the reasoning of the learned appellate court. The petitioner had sworn an affidavit m which he had categorically undertaken to demolish the violations at his cost as and when ordered by the CDA. Thus, the petitioner cannot wriggle out of his undertaking by expecting the CDA to create a lane between plot No.271 and plot No.272 just so that the violations committed by the petitioner remain untouched. In. the case of Mid East Medical Centre Limited v. Government of Pakistan, reported as 1986 CLC 1607, it was held that breach of an undertaking would disentitle an importer from invoking the Constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution. I feel that the same principle will apply to a litigant who breaches his own undertaking and then tries to seek protection by seeking an equitable remedy like a junction from a court. In the mutant matter, the petitioner neither has a prima facie case for the grant of a junction, nor is the balance of convenience in his favor. The loss that the petitioner would suffer on account of the demolition of the violations in the construction raised by him is most definitely not irreparable. Hence, the essential ingredients for the grant of an injunction under Order XXXIX, Rules and 2, C.P.C. have not been satisfied in this case. 15. When the facts and circumstances of the present case are examined in the light of reasoning adopted by the learned courts below, I am of the considered opinion that it is expedient and in the interests of justice not to interfere m the concurrent orders of the learned courts below. 16. Before parting with this judgment, it is essential to note that in the second suit instituted by the petitioner, not a word has been mentioned the earlier litigation between the petitioner and the CDA with respect to the violations of Building and Zoning Regulations on the plot in question. This concealment was reason enough for the learned courts below to have denied the equitable/discretionary relief of injunction to the petitioner without further ado. 17. It is an age-old maxim that "he who seeks equity must come to the court with clean hands." The relief of junction is a discretionary and equitable relief, which a party cannot claim as a matter of right. Before the grant of such a relief, the conscience of the court has to be satisfied that the party seeking such a relief has not acted inequitably. The petitioner by concealing the fac tum of the earlier litigation, appears to have acted contumaciously and inequitably and has, thereby disentitled himself to the relief of junction. Section 56() of Specific Relief Act, 1877, also postulates that a junction cannot be granted when the conduct of the applicant has been such as to disentitle him to the assistance of the court. The concealment of the fac tum as to the earlier litigation between the same parties, in the subsequent suit, is a conduct which disentitles a party to the grant of the discretionary relief of an injunction. 18. Although, the 6th and 7th decisions of the CDA Board were not in the field when the earlier litigation between the petitioner and CDA came to an end, the affidavits sworn by the petitioner undertaking to remove the violations in the construction on Plot No.272 were very much there. In the earlier and the subsequent litigation between the petitioner and the CDA the essential dispute was with respect to the requirement to remove the violations’ of the Building and Zoning Regulations in the construction carried out by the petitioner on Plot No.272, Gala Colony, Ramal Town, Islamabad. 19. The subsequent suit bears a certificate, which reads: "It is certified that no matter 1s pending adjudication between the same parties before any court of law". This is a crafty and a nefarious design by the petitioner to have the subsequent suit enter tamed without making disclosure of the earlier litigation, which had been decided in favor of CDA. The purpose behind the requirement of a certificate from a plaintiff for his counsel requiring disclosure of any pending or previous litigation between the parties is to prevent the defendant from being vexed twice. Even though, there had not been a full-fledged trial in the earlier litigation and the learned civil court had rejected the petitioner's plant under Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. it was nonetheless obligatory upon the petitioner to have disclosed this fact in the certificate as well as the pleadings in the subsequent suit. 20. Concealment of material fact in the pleadings, is akin to an abuse of the process of the Court. It is an elementary principle of law that a party, who approaches the court for discretionary relief, should candidly and forthrightly narrate all material facts in the plat and/or the application for the grant of a temporary junction. A litigant who had failed to make complete disclosure of an earlier litigation in the subsequent suit between the same parties, can be held to have abused the process of law and such an action was considered to be a deliberate attempt to hamper and obstruct due course of judicial proceedings in administration of justice, The petitioner, m the subsequent suit, ought to have disclosed the fac tum about the earlier litigation between the parties and the result thereof, 21. In the ease of Canada v. Province a civil revision, petition, held, at Paragraph 10 of the report, as follows 10, It is also a settled principle of law that besides the above factors the Courts in the facts and circumstances of a case have to take MITO consideration certain other factors such as whether the Court has been approached promptly or not; whether the grant of an injunction will be against public interest/policy; whether grant of an injunction to a party shall result into an undue advantage being given to him which would perpetuate injustice and whether a party approaching the Court for interim relief has concealed material facts and/or acted Ina male FIDE manner. In case the answer of any of the questions is in the affirmative then the relief of an injunction being discretionary in nature can be declined. Reliance I'm this regard is placed on a judgment reported as ATCO Lab. (Pvt.) Limited v. PFIZER Limited and others (2002 CLD 120)". 22. Writ jurisdiction, which has certain features common to revisional jurisdiction under Section 115, C.P.C. has consistently not been exercised MN favor of a litigant who has concealed dr suppressed a material fact from the court. Reference in this regard may be made to the following cases: (i) Roman v. Chief Settlement Commission (PLD 1968 LAH. 258); (UI) Abdul Rashid v. Pakistan (1969 SCMR 141); (1) Principal, King Edward Medical College v. Ghulam Mustafa(1983 SCMR 196); (iv) Lahore Development Authority v. MST. Shame Akhtar (2003 MLD 1543); (v) Nazi Ahmad v. Faisalabad Development Authority (2003 CLC.359); and (vi) Delaware Hussain v. District Coordination Officer, Kara (2004 CLC 324). 23. By turning down the petitioner's application for interim injunction and his appeal, I do not find that the learned lower courts have exercised jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. Resultantly, the petition is dismissed. Revision dismissed P#*!¢84ldatabase.com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 896 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-02-03): MIANGUL HASS AN AURANGZEB, J— Through the instant Civil Revision Petition, the petitioner, Salad Ahmed, seeks to challenge the Order dated 04.01.2016, passed by the court of the learned Additional District Judgeship Islamabad (East), whereby the petitioner's appeal against the Order dated 12.12.2015, passed by the court of learned Civil Judge 1st Class, Islamabad (East), was dismissed. Vide the said order dated 12.12.2015, the learned Civil Court dismissed the petitioner's application for interim injunction under Order XXXIX, Rules and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ("C.P.C."), The civil suit filed by the petitioner is still pending. 2, The facts, briefly stated, are that the petitioner was a transferee of Plot No,272, measuring 283, Sq. yards situated at Gala Colony, Ramal Town, Islamabad. The petitioner obtained possession of the said plot on 05,11.1991. Thereafter, the petitioner applied to the Capital Development Authority ("CDA") for the approval of the building plan. It appears that on 24.06, 1992, the petitioner swore an affidavit and applied to the CDA for the issuance of a completion certificate with respect to the house constructed on the said Plot, Furthermore, on 28,09.1992 another affidavit was sworn by the petitioner in which the petitioner undertook that whenever the CDA orders and directs the petitioner would, at his own, cost, demolish the windows and shades made in violation of the building plan. Based on the said affidavits, the CDA on 25.11.1992, approved the building plans and issued a completion certificate in favor of the petitioner. Vide order dated 10.12.2009 passed by the Building Control Directorate, CDA, under Section 49-C(l) of the CDA Ordinance, 1960, the petitioner was directed to remove the following unauthorized construction from the said plot-—— (i) "First floor and mummy constructed without approval. (11) Construction of unauthorized foots taller. (i) Reference your undertaking dated 28-09-1992, all roof projection, hajjis and opening of window towards plot No.271, have to be removed. (iv) Wall on roof of first floor." 3. The said order dated 10.12, 2009 was impugned by the petitioner in a suit for declaration and permanent injunction filed before the court of Civil Judge IST Class, Islamabad, Vide order dated 24.12.2009, the learned civil court rejected the plaint under Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. The appeal against the said order was dismissed, vide judgment dated 29.01.2010, by the court of Additional District Judge, Islamabad. Paragraph 6 of the said judgment is reproduced herein below:— "6. Stance of the appellant as per his own plait (para-4) is that prior to issuance of notice dated 10.12.2009, the concerned officials of the CDA had visited the site and noted some violations which were mentioned in the said notice which were later negotiated between the parties (as per para-5 of the plaint) and the respondent department compounded the same while imposing the fine, but the fact remains that this fine and the affidavit of the appellant pertains to the violations committed by him while completing the single storey as is evident from completion certificate dated 25,11.1992 whereas according

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 896 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-02-03): para-5 of the plaint) and the respondent department compounded the same while imposing the fine, but the fact remains that this fine and the affidavit of the appellant pertains to the violations committed by him while completing the single storey as is evident from completion certificate dated 25,11.1992 whereas according to the impugned notice, he has constructed another flour along with multi without approval besides construction of an unauthorized food staler(sic) etc. but no explanation whatsoever is borne out from the contents of the plait itself nor could be elaborated during arguments by learned counsel for the appellant. It appears that in the garb of payment of fine in respect of the violations in construction of the single storey, the appellant has now resorted to file the suit to cover the unauthorized construction of another floor etc. without approval/sanctioned site plan and has rather suppressed the actual facts while seeking the equitable relief! He has, thus, not approached the Court with clean hands either and has rightly been non-suited by the learned Trial Court since he had no cause of action to bring the suit in hand." 4. On 10.05.2010, the petitioner applied to the CDA for a provision of a lane between Plot No. 272 and Plot No.271. This application was made so as to accommodate the unauthorized windows and shades constructed on Plot No.272. 5. The petitioner's request for the provision of a lane between Plot No.271 and Plot No.272 was considered by the CDA Board in its 6th Meeting held on 05.05, 2010. In this meeting, the Director General (Planning), CDA explained the background of the case to the Board. He was of the view that the provision for a lane between Plot No.271 and Plot No.272 to accommodate the open mg of unauthorized windows by the allottee of Plot No.272 was not technically feasible. The decision taken by the CDA Board in the said meeting, is reproduced herein below: — "The allottee was given an opportunity of explaining his case and the Board observed that the opening of windows was granted by the CDA on submission of undertaking by the allottee at the time of start of construction that whenever required by allottee of plot No.271, he will close the windows and remove the shades. As far as the issue of charging the compounding of other construction is concerned, CDA will look into the reasons for the grant of this permission and fix responsibility. The allottee of Plot No.271 has serious objection to the proposal and both the parties are in litigation. Therefore, the proposal for the provision of lane between Plot No.271 and Plot No.272 was not approved by the Board." 6. The CDA Board mm TTS 7th Meeting held on 26.05.2010 made the following decision: "The allottee of Plot No.271 presented his case before the Board and after taking the view point of allottee Board decided to suspend its earlier decision dated 05-05-2010 and further decided that the detailed equity be conducted on allegations

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 896 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-02-03): mm TTS 7th Meeting held on 26.05.2010 made the following decision: "The allottee of Plot No.271 presented his case before the Board and after taking the view point of allottee Board decided to suspend its earlier decision dated 05-05-2010 and further decided that the detailed equity be conducted on allegations of allottee regarding corruption and MAL- administration of CDA staff while examining his case. Meantime, the staff of Planning Wing to visit the site and come up with a proposal regarding provision of passage between Plot Nos.271 and 272." 7. The record is silent as to the developments between 26.05.2010 when the 7th Meeting of the CDA Board was held, and on 14.09.2015 when the Building Control Directorate of the CDA requested the Director Enforcement, CDA to take immediate action and remove/demolish the violations of the Building and Zoning Regulations on Plot No.272, Ramal Town, Islamabad. Furthermore, on 14.10.2015, the Enforcement Directorate issued letter No. CDA-12(43)(71 )/ENF/, captioned, "removal of violation of Building and Zoning Regulations m rest of plot No.272, Ramal Town, Islamabad". Perusal of the said letter reveals that the competent authority had accorded approval for demolishing the following violations in the building constructed on the said Plot No.272-— 1. "Construction of unauthorized foods taller(sic). u. Unauthorized / illegal roof projection/hajj and opening of window towards Plot No.271." 8. According to the said letter, the Enforcement Directorate of the CDA had planned a demolition operation on 16.10.2015 and for this purpose, a request was made for the provision of a magisterial cover to the Enforcement Staff to avoid any complication in the course of action. 9. On 15.10, 2015, the petitioner instituted a suit for permanent and mandatory injunction before the court of learned Civil Judge, Islamabad, praying for a decree for permanent injunction restrain the CDA from demolishing the projections constructed by the petitioner towards the eastern side of the house, and from closing the windows/exhaust. Additionally, the petitioner prayed for a direction to the respondents to act upon the decision of the CDA Board dated 26.05, 2010, Along with the said suit, the petitioner filed an application, under Order XXXIX, Rules and 2, C.P.C. praying for an injunction restrain the respondents from demolishing the said projection/canopy over the windows/exhaust of the house of the petitioner on the eastern side. The respondents contested this suit by filing a written statement/written reply, wherein details of the earlier litigation between the petitioner and the CDA were given. In the said written statement, the respondents maintained that the unauthorized construction made by the petitioner on Plot No.272 was label to be removed. The construction which the petitioner raised unauthorized on Plot No,272 was stated to be as follows: - (i) "Construction of First Floor and mummy without approval of map plan from CDA, (it) Construction of unauthorized foods taller(sic). (it) Construction/opening of window and Hajjis towards plot No.271. (iv) Wall on roof of first floor." 10, Vide order dated 12.12.2015, the court of the learned Civil Judge IST Class, Islamabad,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 896 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-02-03): "Construction of First Floor and mummy without approval of map plan from CDA, (it) Construction of unauthorized foods taller(sic). (it) Construction/opening of window and Hajjis towards plot No.271. (iv) Wall on roof of first floor." 10, Vide order dated 12.12.2015, the court of the learned Civil Judge IST Class, Islamabad, dismissed the petitioner's application under Order XXXIX, Rules and 2, C.P.C. intervalic, on the ground that the petitioner has no prima-face case in his favor. Against the said Order, petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Islamabad, which too met the same fate, vide judgment dated 04.01.2016, Paragraph 7 of the said judgment is reproduced herein below:-*. "7. The learned trial court has misconstrued the decision taken in 6th board meeting of CDA held on 16,05, 2010 by saying that the proposal for provision of lane between plots Nos.271 and 272 was not approved, as the said decision was taken on 05,05, 2010 against which a review application was filed, upon which in 7th board meeting held on 26,05.2010, the earlier decision taken on 05,05.2010 was suspended, and it was directed that an inquiry to be conducted on the allegations of allottee regarding the corruption of CDA staff, In the said meeting, it was also directed that the staff of planning wing to visit the spot and come up with proposal regarding provision of passage between plots Nos.271 and 272. When confronted the learned counsel for the respondents produced the copies of complete "noting record" carried out by the department. The said notion'GS shows that in para No. 116 it has been mentioned that response from the planning wings has not yet been received, however, para No. 117 shows that Affair Iqbal Affair Deputy Director Zone-4 along with Director RP has suggested regretting the request of the petitioner regarding leaving of passage between the two plots. In para No. 122, the chairman has ordered for the implementation of the orders regarding inquiry and the said referred noting shows that Chairman CDA who is competent authority has not accepted the review application of the petitioner. Moreover, the affidavit submitted by the appellant for getting NOC from the department on 28.09.1992 clearly suggests that he has undertaken to remove the windows and shed whenever asked by the department." 11. The petitioner, in the instant civil revision petition, has impugned these concurrent decisions. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that on account of the decision taken by the CDA Board on 26,05.2010, the petitioner was entitled to the provision of a lane between the plot owned by him and plot No.271. He did not dispute the fact that an affidavit was sworn by the petitioner on 28.09.1992, wherein he had undertaken to demolish the violations at his cost whenever ordered by the CDA. However, the learned counsel submitted that the provision of a lane between the said two plots would leave no reason for the CDA to demolish the said violations, which even otherwise had been compounded. 12. Learned counsel for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 896 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-02-03): to demolish the violations at his cost whenever ordered by the CDA. However, the learned counsel submitted that the provision of a lane between the said two plots would leave no reason for the CDA to demolish the said violations, which even otherwise had been compounded. 12. Learned counsel for the respondents placed emphasis on the petitioner's undertaking contained in his affidavit dated 28.09.1992, and submitted that as the petitioner had not removed the said violations, the respondents were left with no option, but to demolish the same. He drew the attention of the court to the earlier litigation between the petitioner and CDA, which had been decided against the petitioner. Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that at no material stage had any decision been taken by the respondents or the CDA Board to allow a lane to be created between the plot owned by the petitioner and plot No.271. 13. I have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record with their able assistance. 14. I find myself fully in agreement with the findings and the reasoning of the learned appellate court. The petitioner had sworn an affidavit m which he had categorically undertaken to demolish the violations at his cost as and when ordered by the CDA. Thus, the petitioner cannot wriggle out of his undertaking by expecting the CDA to create a lane between plot No.271 and plot No.272 just so that the violations committed by the petitioner remain untouched. In. the case of Mid East Medical Centre Limited v. Government of Pakistan, reported as 1986 CLC 1607, it was held that breach of an undertaking would disentitle an importer from invoking the Constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution. I feel that the same principle will apply to a litigant who breaches his own undertaking and then tries to seek protection by seeking an equitable remedy like a junction from a court. In the mutant matter, the petitioner neither has a prima facie case for the grant of a junction, nor is the balance of convenience in his favor. The loss that the petitioner would suffer on account of the demolition of the violations in the construction raised by him is most definitely not irreparable. Hence, the essential ingredients for the grant of an injunction under Order XXXIX, Rules and 2, C.P.C. have not been satisfied in this case. 15. When the facts and circumstances of the present case are examined in the light of reasoning adopted by the learned courts below, I am of the considered opinion that it is expedient and in the interests of justice not to interfere m the concurrent orders of the learned courts below. 16. Before parting with this judgment, it is essential to note that in the second suit instituted by the petitioner, not a word has been mentioned the earlier litigation between the petitioner and the CDA with respect to the violations of Building and Zoning

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 896 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-02-03): orders of the learned courts below. 16. Before parting with this judgment, it is essential to note that in the second suit instituted by the petitioner, not a word has been mentioned the earlier litigation between the petitioner and the CDA with respect to the violations of Building and Zoning Regulations on the plot in question. This concealment was reason enough for the learned courts below to have denied the equitable/discretionary relief of injunction to the petitioner without further ado. 17. It is an age-old maxim that "he who seeks equity must come to the court with clean hands." The relief of junction is a discretionary and equitable relief, which a party cannot claim as a matter of right. Before the grant of such a relief, the conscience of the court has to be satisfied that the party seeking such a relief has not acted inequitably. The petitioner by concealing the fac tum of the earlier litigation, appears to have acted contumaciously and inequitably and has, thereby disentitled himself to the relief of junction. Section 56() of Specific Relief Act, 1877, also postulates that a junction cannot be granted when the conduct of the applicant has been such as to disentitle him to the assistance of the court. The concealment of the fac tum as to the earlier litigation between the same parties, in the subsequent suit, is a conduct which disentitles a party to the grant of the discretionary relief of an injunction. 18. Although, the 6th and 7th decisions of the CDA Board were not in the field when the earlier litigation between the petitioner and CDA came to an end, the affidavits sworn by the petitioner undertaking to remove the violations in the construction on Plot No.272 were very much there. In the earlier and the subsequent litigation between the petitioner and the CDA the essential dispute was with respect to the requirement to remove the violations’ of the Building and Zoning Regulations in the construction carried out by the petitioner on Plot No.272, Gala Colony, Ramal Town, Islamabad. 19. The subsequent suit bears a certificate, which reads: "It is certified that no matter 1s pending adjudication between the same parties before any court of law". This is a crafty and a nefarious design by the petitioner to have the subsequent suit enter tamed without making disclosure of the earlier litigation, which had been decided in favor of CDA. The purpose behind the requirement of a certificate from a plaintiff for his counsel requiring disclosure of any pending or previous litigation between the parties is to prevent the defendant from being vexed twice. Even though, there had not been a full-fledged trial in the earlier litigation and the learned civil court had rejected the petitioner's plant under Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. it was nonetheless obligatory upon the petitioner to have disclosed this fact in the certificate as well as the pleadings in the subsequent suit. 20. Concealment of material fact in the pleadings, is akin to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 896?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 896 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-02-03): the learned civil court had rejected the petitioner's plant under Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. it was nonetheless obligatory upon the petitioner to have disclosed this fact in the certificate as well as the pleadings in the subsequent suit. 20. Concealment of material fact in the pleadings, is akin to an abuse of the process of the Court. It is an elementary principle of law that a party, who approaches the court for discretionary relief, should candidly and forthrightly narrate all material facts in the plat and/or the application for the grant of a temporary junction. A litigant who had failed to make complete disclosure of an earlier litigation in the subsequent suit between the same parties, can be held to have abused the process of law and such an action was considered to be a deliberate attempt to hamper and obstruct due course of judicial proceedings in administration of justice, The petitioner, m the subsequent suit, ought to have disclosed the fac tum about the earlier litigation between the parties and the result thereof, 21. In the ease of Canada v. Province a civil revision, petition, held, at Paragraph 10 of the report, as follows 10, It is also a settled principle of law that besides the above factors the Courts in the facts and circumstances of a case have to take MITO consideration certain other factors such as whether the Court has been approached promptly or not; whether the grant of an injunction will be against public interest/policy; whether grant of an injunction to a party shall result into an undue advantage being given to him which would perpetuate injustice and whether a party approaching the Court for interim relief has concealed material facts and/or acted Ina male FIDE manner. In case the answer of any of the questions is in the affirmative then the relief of an injunction being discretionary in nature can be declined. Reliance I'm this regard is placed on a judgment reported as ATCO Lab. (Pvt.) Limited v. PFIZER Limited and others (2002 CLD 120)". 22. Writ jurisdiction, which has certain features common to revisional jurisdiction under Section 115, C.P.C. has consistently not been exercised MN favor of a litigant who has concealed dr suppressed a material fact from the court. Reference in this regard may be made to the following cases: (i) Roman v. Chief Settlement Commission (PLD 1968 LAH. 258); (UI) Abdul Rashid v. Pakistan (1969 SCMR 141); (1) Principal, King Edward Medical College v. Ghulam Mustafa(1983 SCMR 196); (iv) Lahore Development Authority v. MST. Shame Akhtar (2003 MLD 1543); (v) Nazi Ahmad v. Faisalabad Development Authority (2003 CLC.359); and (vi) Delaware Hussain v. District Coordination Officer, Kara (2004 CLC 324). 23. By turning down the petitioner's application for interim injunction and his appeal, I do not find that the learned lower courts have exercised jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. Resultantly, the petition is dismissed. Revision dismissed P#*!¢84ldatabase.com

Question: What is case 2016 CLC 1051 about?
Answer: Case 2016 CLC 1051 was decided by ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT on 2016-03-01. The case involved NADEEM RAZA ABBASI—PETITIONER VERSUS. SARDAR ABU BAKAR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include ISLAMABAD RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (IV OF 2001) SS. 17 AND ISLAMABAD RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (IV OF 2001) S. 17 EVIDENCE. The case was heard by BEFORE MUHAMMAD ANWAR KHAN KASI, CJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: In case 2016 CLC 1051, the court applied the following statutes: ISLAMABAD RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (IV OF 2001) SS. 17 AND ISLAMABAD RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE (IV OF 2001) S. 17 EVIDENCE. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT and decided on 2016-03-01.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2016 CLC 1051 were: RAJA ALEEM KHAN ABBASI ASC FOR PETITIONER. SARDAR ASHFAQ AHMED ABBASI ASC FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: BEFORE MUHAMMAD ANWAR KHAN KASI, CJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: The parties in case 2016 CLC 1051 were: NADEEM RAZA ABBASI—PETITIONER VERSUS. SARDAR ABU BAKAR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2016 CLC 1051.
Answer: MUHAMMAD ANWAR KHAN KASI, C.J.— This writ petition as well as Writ Petitions 962 and contain common question of facts and law, therefore, BMG decided through this single Judgment. 2. Brief facts of the case are that respondents [landlords] leased out shops 1, 2, 3 and as well as Flat No.2, Block 4, Reyna Market, Sector F- Islamabad, through separate lease agreements dated 29.12.2009 for the period ending on 31.12.2010. However, it was mentioned that w.e.f 01.01.2011 settled rent of Rs.35,000/-, Rs.25,000/- and 27,500/respectively, would be increased by 10%. Subsequently on 15.02.2Q13 landlords [Vardar Abu Baker, Vardar Ar shad and Vardar Saleem] filed three separate eviction petitions on the grounds of personal bona fide need to demolish and reconstruct the building and expiry of lease agreement. Petitioners/tenants [Nadeem Raza Abbassi, Shake Ahmed Abbassi and Imran Abbassi] filed their respective replies refuting personal need with claim that rent agreement was extended to 31.12.2014; actually landlords have sold the premises to one Muhammad Cultivar and in order, to provide vacant possession to the vendor, created false story of personal need and filed the eviction petitions. Out of divergent pleadings, learned Rent Controller dealt with three eviction petitions separately and framed the same issues except the one indicated; ISSUES (i) Whether the petitioners have cause of action? OPA (ii) Whether the lease agreement between the parties got expired? OPA MOT framed in eviction petition titled Vardar Abu Baker v. Nadeem Raza Abbassi, W.P. No. ] (1) Whether the demised premises are required for personal. Bona fide need of the petitioners? OPA (iv) Whether the ground of bona fide personal need for dismantling the existing building and raising new construction over it is available to the petitioners, keeping in view the assertions of respondent that vide agreement to sell dated 02.10.2012 and 26.05.2013, the petitioner sold out the demised premises to one Muhammad Cultivar? OPR (v) Whether after the expiry of written lease agreement between the parties dated 29.12.2009, the tenancy between the parties further extended from 01.01.2012 to 31.12.2014 ? OPR (vi) Whether the petition has been filed with malaise intentions to. harass the Respondent ? OPR (vii) Relief: 3. The respondents/landlords Vardar Muhammad Saleem Khan and Vardar Abu Baker Sajid got themselves examined as AW.] in respective petitions and produced Ex.All their affidavits, lease agreement Ex. A2, copy of agreement to sell Mark AW-, copy of extended agreement to sell, Mark AW-, copy of suit titled Muhammad Cultivar v. SardarMuhammad Saleem Khan as Mark AW-, Copy of CDA letter dated 04.01.2013 as Mark A. The tenants/petitioners themselves appeared as RW-1 and produced witnesses Muhammad Tapir (RW-2), Muhammad Jahangir (RW-3), Ashley Ali Senior Assistant (RW-4). They produced affidavits in evidence Ex.R-1 to Ex.R-3, certified copy of suit titled Muhammad Cultivar v. Vardar Muhammad Saleem Khan etc. as Ex.R-4, certified copy of stay order as Ex.R-5, Original receipts of rent as Ex.R-6 to Ex.R-21. 4. Petitioners moved application for summoning of witness Muhammad Cultivar [purported vendor of demised premises] but the same was rejected by learned Trial Court, however in writ petition application was allowed, but the said witness after having appeared refused to depose and moved application for exemption to give evidence. His application was allowed vide Orders dated 15,11.2014 and 19.11.2014. 5. After recording evidence and hearing arguments learned Rent Controller vide Judgments and Decrees dated 26.11.2014 accepted the eviction petitions. Petitioners/tenants filed appeals under Section 21 of IRRO, 2001 which were dismissed vide impugned Judgments and Decrees dated 14.03.2015. 6. Learned Counsel argued that respondents failed to establish personal need by proving intention to dismantle the building as they did not obtain requisite approval of site plan from CDA as evident from statement of RW-4 [Ash fag Ali, Senior Assistant BCS CDA]. It is further averred that distinction between residential and commercial property was ignored and contention of tenants with regard to sale of demised premises was left undecided. 7. It is next submitted that respondents concealed fac tum with regard to sale in favor of Muhammad Cultivar while fact of the matter is that they sold the premises vide agreement to> sell dated 02.10, 2012 and 26.05.2013 but learned trial Court 'decided the matter without recording evidence of vendor despite the fact that name of the said witness was mentioned in the list and summoned through Order of this Court. Learned counsel further averred that petitions were filed on 15.02.2013 at a time when the respondents had already alienated the title, therefore, eviction petitions were not maintainable. 8. It is further submitted that respondents never issued any change. of ownership notice under Section 19 of IRRO, 2001 and amended their version without any justification and took an unwarranted claim with regard to expiry of lease agreement despite having knowledge that the lease agreement stood extended on 01.1.2012 unto 31.12.2014. He further averred that tenants never committed any default although during pendency of proceeding respondents refused to accept rent in order to establish default due to which petitioners had to deposit rent in Court while the said application was allowed with consent of learned counsel for landlords and the rent was deposited in Court at enhanced rate. 9. It is also averred that mere expiry of lease agreement itself is no ground for eviction of tenant as the same has not been mentioned under Section 17 of IRRO, 2001. In support of this Contention learned Counsel relied on Order of the Hon'BLE Supreme Court dated 02.11.2015 passed in case of Muhammad Ashing and others v. Muhammad Rubier [CA's Nos. 1011 and 1012 of 2015]. 10. Lastly it is averred that respondents admitted settlement and receipt of rents at enhanced rate which shows that claim of tenant regarding extension of lease period up to 31.12.2014 was correct, and in that manner ground of expiry of lease agreement was not available to landlords at the time of filing eviction petitions, but both learned Courts decided the petition contrary to pleadings. In support of above submissions learned Counsel placed reliance upon case laws cited as 1987 SCMR 2074, PLD 2000 SC 1172 and 1989 MLD 1174. 11. On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents/landlords opposed the petitions by submitting that personal bona fide need has nowhere been mentioned in petitions; in fact the premises were required for dismantling the building to reconstruct, in consensus with other coowners and in this direction CDA issued approval letter dated 04.01.2013 whereby TT was covenanted that demolition would take place under supervision of a CDA approved engineer and in absence of satisfactory report from the said engineer, building plan would not be approved. He explained ‘that according to CDA bye-laws prerequisite of demolition report by engineer cannot be stepped over, therefore, objection of respondents with regard to non submission of building approval is unjustified. 12. It is next submitted that lease agreement with tenants expired on 31,12.2011 while the date was mistakenly mentioned as 2010 however after expiry of actual period no fresh extension was given and tenants remained unable to provide any proof regarding extension while simple claim of verbal extension cannot be entertained without any evidence. He submitted that Order of the Hon'BLE Supreme Court referred by the petitioners does not set any rule of law so as to be followed imperatively and same can be considered at par with leave grant mg order. In support learned Counsel placed reliance on case-laws titled as " Cantonment Board Rawalpindi and others v. Lt. Col. (RTD.) Allah Dad Khan" [2015 SCMR 832], "Kkairullah v. Sultan Mahmood and others'[1997 SCMR 906] and "Muhammad Trig Radar v. National Bank of Pakistan" [2013 SCMR 314]. 13. Learned Counsel further argued that proviso to Section 17 of IRRO, 2001 explains the nature and effect of expiry of lease agreement in the manner that a tenant can be evicted after expiry of lease agreement. It is also argued that August Apex Court has time and again held that after expiry of term fixed by lease agreement, tenant would lose right to continue to occupy or hold over premises. In support, he relied on case law titled as "Kaiser Saved Malik v. Pervier Hammed etc." [2009 SCMR 846]. 14. It is further submitted that under Section 17(2)(V) of IRRO, 2001 sanction of authority for reconstruction is not an inflexible requirement rather the Rent Controller is empowered to order eviction where it seems that demised premises are bona fide needed by landlord for erection or reconstruction which has been sufficiently proved. He added that personal bona fide need and plea of reconstruction are not mutually destructive and where plea with regard to reconstruction is proved remain grounds would become inconsequential. In support learned Counsel placed reliance on case laws titled as "Heidi Allah Pitta v. MST. Saadi Bilges and another" [1980 SCMR 41], "Muhammad Shafiguev. S.M. Hurrah etc." [1983 SCMR 1227], "MST, Nazi Begum and others v. ADJ and others" [1983 CLC 2045 Lahore]. 15. Learned Counsel also argued that litigation between landlords and purported vendor is pending and at present ownership cannot be considered to have been changed. He added that even otherwise change in ownership does not carry fatal effect to eviction proceedings and the new as well as previous owner can carry on the proceedings. In support, he relied on case law titled as "MST. Humeral Sajid v. Murray Khanpur etc." [2008 CLC 650 Lahore] wherein it was held that "definition of word ’landlord’ is further expanded to include beneficiary, guardian, receiver, executor, administrator or any other person, it even includes tenant who sublets the property and also includes every person who derives title from landlord" It was further held in the same judgment that "definition was not in fact to put embargo upon landlord's unfettered right to sell property during any legal proceedings and TT was not repulsive to the rule of natural justice and equity. new owner had a locus standi and cause to continue with execution proceedings in the name of previous owner." 16. Heard and record perused. 17. Fate of present case hinges upon determination of following questions; (a) Whether eviction can be ordered on sole ground of expiry of lease agreement? (b) Whether petitioners/tenants sufficiently proved verbal extension of lease agreement? (c) Whether the landlord after having entered into purported agreement to sell cannot seek eviction? (d) What is import of ground for reconstruction of demised premises and whether eviction petitioners had established the same? 18. There cannot be any cavil to proposition that relationship of landlord and tenant is governed by terms and conditions set in lease agreement. In event of the lapse of lease agreement by afflux of time mentioned there-under, unless extended, the relationship comes to an end with non-existence of contractual obligations. Undoubtedly, occupation of premises by the tenant is not only dependant upon payment of rent but also upon the temporary period mentioned in the lease agreement or extension agreement. There is no force in the argument that expiry of lease agreement has not been mentioned as ground of eviction in Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 because Section 6 clearly mentions that tenancy does not remain valid upon lapse of period mentioned in lease agreement. Section 6 is reproduced for ready reference; "6. Tenure of tenancy. — subject to the provisions of section 17, no tenancy shall be valid beyond such period as the landlord and tenant may, by mutual agreement, fix before or after the commencement of the tenancy: Provided that a tenancy in force before the commencement of this Ordinance for which no period is fixed shall cease to be valid on the expiration of a period of two years from such commencement: Provided further that a tenancy which comes MTO force after the commencement of this Ordinance and for which no period is fixed shall not be valid after expiration of period of six months from the date of the receipt by the tenant of a notice in writing given by the landlord terminating the tenancy." 19. Overall reading of the Ordinance ibid, depicts that two modes of cessation of tenancy have been envisioned, first, through expiry of lease agreement under Section 6 and second, on the grounds mentioned under Section 17 of IRRO, 2001. This observation is supported by the notion with regard to prerequisite for expiry of fixed period of lease agreement mentioned in first proviso of Section 17(4) IRRO, 2001. The relevant portion of Section 17 (4) is reproduced for ready reference; "17. Eviction of Tenant— (4) A landlord may apply to the Controller for an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession.-(a) in the case of OO residential building, if he requires it in good faith for his own occupation or of any member of his family and he or any member of his family, as the case may be, is not occupying any other residential building suitable for his needs at the time in the urban area; Provided that he or the said member of his family has not vacated such building in the Islamabad Capital Territory without sufficient cause after the commencement of this Ordinance; and (6) in the case of a commercial building or rented land, if he requires it in good faith for his own use or for the use of any member of his family: Provided that where the tenancy if for a specified period agreed upon between the landlord and the tenant, the landlord shall not be entitled to apply under this subsection before the expiry of such period: ' Provided further that where the landlord has obtained possession of a residential or commercial building or rented kind under clause (a) or clause he shall not be entitled to apply again under the said clauses for the possession of any other building or rented land unless the building or rented land of which he had previously taken possession has become unsuitable for his needs. 26. The Hon’BLE Supreme Court has consistently held that expiry of lease agreement would be terminal event for tenancy. In case of "QatserJaved Malik v. Pervier Hammed etc." [2009 SCMR 846] the August Apex Court held as follows: "The plain reading of section 6 of the Ordinance commencing with the use of words "subject to the provisions of Section 17" signifies that the provisions of Section 17 continue to apply as grounds for eviction of the tenant in addition to a further condition of existence of a valid tenancy agreement. The words do not affect the mights -conferred upon the parties by Section 6 of the Ordinance but mean as conditional upon the observance of provisions of Section 17 of the Ordinance as held while interpreting the words "subject to" by the Supreme Court in India in the case of RRCS Balkrishna Chatty and Sons and Co. v. The State AIR 1961 SC 1152. The violation of any of the provisions of Section 17 may, therefore, continue to regulate the ground of eviction of the tenant by the landlord. Section 6 further reads "no tenancy shall be valid beyond such period as the landlord and tenant may, by mutual agreement, fix before or after the commencement of the tenancy." The legislature has expressly provided that after expiry of the prescribed period as may be fixed by the mutual agreement agreed or fixed initially at the commencement of the tenancy or after being defined under the said Ordinance. Therefore, reference is to be made to the ordinary dictionary meanings of the word "valid" as under Chambers 21st Century, Dictionary— "Valid. 1. Said of an argument, objection, etc. (a) based on truth or sound reasoning ; (b) well-grounded, having force 2 said of a ticket or official document: a legally acceptable for use", Black's law Dictionary:— "Valid — Having legal strength or force, executed with proper formalities, incapable of being rightfully overthrown or set aside. Legally sufficient or efficacious; authorized by law. Good or sufficient in point of law; efficacious; executed with the proper formalities; incapable of being rightfully overthrown or set aside; sustainable and effective in law, as distinguished from that which exists or took place in fact dr appearance, but has not the requisites to enable it to be recognized and enforced by late A deed, will, or other instrument, which has received all the formalities required by law, is said to be valid." (underline /bold provided). Words and Phrases (permanent edition) Volume 44:— The term "valid" means in law having legal strength, force, and effect, or incapable of being rightfully overthrown or set aside. "valid" means efficient, effective, accomplishing what is claimed or intended. "Valid" means good or sufficient in post of law; sustainable and effective m law." Taking into consideration the above meanings of the word "valid” the intention of the legislature clearly means that the tenancy ceases to have any legal force or strength on expiry of the time fixed by the agreement." 21. Before it can be concluded that expiry of lease agreement inevitably results in cessation of tenancy, it would be pertinent to amplify with reverence that gracious order dated 02.11.2015 passed by the Hon'BLE Supreme Court in case of "Muhammad Ship etc. v. Muhammad Rubier" [C. As. 1011 and 1012 of 2015] placed no embargo to consider and determine the overall tent and purpose of IRRO, 2001 for holding a rent petition maintainable on the grounds other than incorporated and essential under Section 17. It 1s, therefore, incumbent to address this aspect with reference to Ordinance, 2001 ibid where no provision under Section 17 seeking eviction on expiry of tenancy is incorporated parallel to provision contained in Punjab Rented Premises Act, 2009. It would, therefore, not be safe to consider the gracious Order of the Hon'BLE Supreme Court a ratio defend or for that matter obiter dicta to hold that eviction could not be ordered on expiry of tenancy under IRRO, 2001 due to having no place under Section 17 of Ordinance ibid. The Order of the Hon'BLE Apex Court laid a direction to decide that case afresh strictly on merits keeping in view all the grounds of eviction urged by the landlord in that eviction petition against the eviction petition. Expression 'all grounds’ include cessation of tenancy. Relevant portion of the Order of Hon'BLE Supreme Court is reproduced; "2. This being the position, these appeals are allowed, and the cases are remanded to the Islamabad High Court for fresh disposal of Writ Petitions Nos. 853 and 854 of 2015, preferably within three months, strictly on merits and in accordance with law, keeping in view all the grounds of eviction urged by the landlord in his eviction petition against the appellants." [Emphasis added] 22. Another challenge was posed through defense that lease agreement was extended verbally till 31.12.2014. Onus to prove this issue was upon the petitioners/tenants, but they could not produce any documentary evidence, while during cross examination it was admitted that lease agreement got expired, however about the extension no independent evidence could be produced. Intervention through Trade Union Market committee meeting was unsubstantiated as no writing was available. The witnesses Muhammad Tapir and Muhammad Jahangir could not bring on record any document showing their status about trade union or participants of purported meeting for settlement in which the lease agreement was said to be extended. Mere deposit of rent does not reflect extension of lease agreement because a tenant in possession of demised premises after'termination of tenancy cannot be absolved from ability of the payment of rent, specifically where request for payment of rent was made on their part. Respondents/landlords remained unshaken in their claim that they issued eviction notice upon the end of lease agreement period. The initial onus to prove could not be exhausted due to which the lease agreement cannot be called to have been extended. It goes without saying that even the period claimed by tenant has already elapsed on 31.12.2014. 23. Landlord has not denied agreement to sell, but it was claimed that transaction could not be finalized and due to dispute the parties entered into litigation. Pendency of Civil Suit for Specific Performance was admitted by respondents which show that title of demised property cannot be called to have transferred. No notice with regard to change of ownership was issued by the landlords/respondents due to which abilities of tenant were clearly unchanged and there was no lacuna which could be said to fetter right of respondents to seek eviction of tenants. Evidence of purported Vendée [Muhammad Cultivar] cannot be called insurmountable and in such circumstances learned Trial Court had rightly observed that tribunal had no jurisdiction to compel the witness to depose. 24. The most important aspect of the case is ground for reconstruction of demised premises. Landlords had sought eviction in order to undertake reconstruction and placed letter dated 04.01.2013 whereby they were given permission to demolish the building. This permission was naturally issued upon application of the landlord which shows his bona fide. The tenants are not justified to negate the intention of landlord to dismantle the building by arguing that presence of sanction for reconstruction plan was mandatory requirement because this notion is annulled by first part of Section 17(2)(v) IRRO, 2001 whereby landlord is to show requirement of reconstruction reasonably m good faith while these conditions are fulfilled in the present case as landlord had admittedly obtained sanction of CDA to dismantle the building and according to letter of sanction the reconstruction permission was made conditional to satisfactory demolition of the building which is not possible without vacation of building. Section 17(2)(v) is reproduced for ready reference; the building or rented kind is reasonable and in good faith required by the landlord for the reconstruction or erection of a building or the landlord has obtained the necessary sanction for. the said reconstruction or erection from the Authority 25. Element of good faith is also evident from the fact that landlords had exposed themselves to penal consequences reaching up to the imprisonment in case of their failure to dismantle the building within four months of the eviction of tenant as enunciated under Section 17(7) of IRRO, 2001. This shows that no one would casually take ask of Imprisonment without serious need to dismantle the building and reconstruct the same. In this reference the Hon'BLE Supreme Court in case of "Heidi Allah Pitta v. MST. Saadi Bilges and others" [1980 SCMR 41] held as follows: "It was contended secondly that the plea of the respondents' landlady that the shop is sought to be vacated for reconstruction is not bona fide because it has not been proved that the Building was in a dilapidated condition and required reconstruction. We feel that the learned High Court Judge was justified in repelling this contention. It is not necessary that a building must be so old and dilapidated that it is about to fall down before the landlord can be considered justified in wanting to demolish and reconstruct it. Every person has the right to improve his property to utilize the'land on which the building is constructed in the best and most profitable manner and erect a new building if the old building is outdated, although it might yet be habituated or sufficiently strong to last for another few years. The mere fact that the landlord is willing to demolish the old building and invest a large amount of money in constructing a new and notwithstanding the tremendous increase in the cost of construction, and the fact that he is willing to undergo imprisonment on his failure to demolish the Building or to reconstruct it within a specified period is sufficient to establish his confides. " 26. The above discussion leads to hold that; (a) eviction petition under IRRO, 2001 1s maintainable on sole ground of expiry of tenancy; (b) petitioners/tenants failed to prove verbal extension of lease agreement; (c) the agreement to sell does not fetter right to seek eviction of tenant; and (d) cumulative effect of Section 17(2)(v) of Ordinance ibid would be construed in terms that where learned tribunal is satisfied regarding existence of good faith, eviction can be ordered on the ground of ‘requirement for reconstruction]. 27. Findings of THF two learned Courts do not warrant interference. The same are, therefore, upheld. Present petition as well as connected Writ Petitions Nos. 962 and 959 of 2015 are dismissed. Petitioners shall hand over vacant possession of demised premises to the landlords within 30 days from this Order. No Order as to CostSP&btioaralsMinesaom

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): MUHAMMAD ANWAR KHAN KASI, C.J.— This writ petition as well as Writ Petitions 962 and contain common question of facts and law, therefore, BMG decided through this single Judgment. 2. Brief facts of the case are that respondents [landlords] leased out shops 1, 2, 3 and as well as Flat No.2, Block 4, Reyna Market, Sector F- Islamabad, through separate lease agreements dated 29.12.2009 for the period ending on 31.12.2010. However, it was mentioned that w.e.f 01.01.2011 settled rent of Rs.35,000/-, Rs.25,000/- and 27,500/respectively, would be increased by 10%. Subsequently on 15.02.2Q13 landlords [Vardar Abu Baker, Vardar Ar shad and Vardar Saleem] filed three separate eviction petitions on the grounds of personal bona fide need to demolish and reconstruct the building and expiry of lease agreement. Petitioners/tenants [Nadeem Raza Abbassi, Shake Ahmed Abbassi and Imran Abbassi] filed their respective replies refuting personal need with claim that rent agreement was extended to 31.12.2014; actually landlords have sold the premises to one Muhammad Cultivar and in order, to provide vacant possession to the vendor, created false story of personal need and filed the eviction petitions. Out of divergent pleadings, learned Rent Controller dealt with three eviction petitions separately and framed the same issues except the one indicated; ISSUES (i) Whether the petitioners have cause of action? OPA (ii) Whether the lease agreement between the parties got expired? OPA MOT framed in eviction petition titled Vardar Abu Baker v. Nadeem Raza Abbassi, W.P. No. ] (1) Whether the demised premises are required for personal. Bona fide need of the petitioners? OPA (iv) Whether the ground of bona fide personal need for dismantling the existing building and raising new construction over it is available to the petitioners, keeping in view the assertions of respondent that vide agreement to sell dated 02.10.2012 and 26.05.2013, the petitioner sold out the demised premises to one Muhammad Cultivar? OPR (v) Whether after the expiry of written lease agreement between the parties dated 29.12.2009, the tenancy between the parties further extended from 01.01.2012 to 31.12.2014 ? OPR (vi) Whether the petition has been filed with malaise intentions to. harass the Respondent ? OPR (vii) Relief: 3. The respondents/landlords Vardar Muhammad Saleem Khan and Vardar Abu Baker Sajid got themselves examined as AW.] in respective petitions and produced Ex.All their affidavits, lease agreement Ex. A2, copy of agreement to sell Mark AW-, copy of extended agreement to sell, Mark AW-, copy of suit titled Muhammad Cultivar v. SardarMuhammad Saleem Khan as Mark AW-, Copy of CDA letter dated 04.01.2013 as Mark A. The tenants/petitioners themselves appeared as RW-1 and produced witnesses Muhammad Tapir (RW-2), Muhammad Jahangir (RW-3), Ashley Ali Senior Assistant (RW-4). They produced affidavits in evidence Ex.R-1 to Ex.R-3, certified copy of suit titled Muhammad Cultivar v. Vardar Muhammad Saleem Khan etc. as Ex.R-4, certified copy of stay order as Ex.R-5, Original receipts of rent as Ex.R-6 to Ex.R-21. 4. Petitioners moved application for summoning of witness Muhammad Cultivar [purported vendor of demised premises] but the same was rejected

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): certified copy of suit titled Muhammad Cultivar v. Vardar Muhammad Saleem Khan etc. as Ex.R-4, certified copy of stay order as Ex.R-5, Original receipts of rent as Ex.R-6 to Ex.R-21. 4. Petitioners moved application for summoning of witness Muhammad Cultivar [purported vendor of demised premises] but the same was rejected by learned Trial Court, however in writ petition application was allowed, but the said witness after having appeared refused to depose and moved application for exemption to give evidence. His application was allowed vide Orders dated 15,11.2014 and 19.11.2014. 5. After recording evidence and hearing arguments learned Rent Controller vide Judgments and Decrees dated 26.11.2014 accepted the eviction petitions. Petitioners/tenants filed appeals under Section 21 of IRRO, 2001 which were dismissed vide impugned Judgments and Decrees dated 14.03.2015. 6. Learned Counsel argued that respondents failed to establish personal need by proving intention to dismantle the building as they did not obtain requisite approval of site plan from CDA as evident from statement of RW-4 [Ash fag Ali, Senior Assistant BCS CDA]. It is further averred that distinction between residential and commercial property was ignored and contention of tenants with regard to sale of demised premises was left undecided. 7. It is next submitted that respondents concealed fac tum with regard to sale in favor of Muhammad Cultivar while fact of the matter is that they sold the premises vide agreement to> sell dated 02.10, 2012 and 26.05.2013 but learned trial Court 'decided the matter without recording evidence of vendor despite the fact that name of the said witness was mentioned in the list and summoned through Order of this Court. Learned counsel further averred that petitions were filed on 15.02.2013 at a time when the respondents had already alienated the title, therefore, eviction petitions were not maintainable. 8. It is further submitted that respondents never issued any change. of ownership notice under Section 19 of IRRO, 2001 and amended their version without any justification and took an unwarranted claim with regard to expiry of lease agreement despite having knowledge that the lease agreement stood extended on 01.1.2012 unto 31.12.2014. He further averred that tenants never committed any default although during pendency of proceeding respondents refused to accept rent in order to establish default due to which petitioners had to deposit rent in Court while the said application was allowed with consent of learned counsel for landlords and the rent was deposited in Court at enhanced rate. 9. It is also averred that mere expiry of lease agreement itself is no ground for eviction of tenant as the same has not been mentioned under Section 17 of IRRO, 2001. In support of this Contention learned Counsel relied on Order of the Hon'BLE Supreme Court dated 02.11.2015 passed in case of Muhammad Ashing and others v. Muhammad Rubier [CA's Nos. 1011 and 1012 of 2015]. 10. Lastly it is averred that respondents admitted settlement and receipt of rents at enhanced rate which shows that claim of tenant regarding extension of lease period

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): Hon'BLE Supreme Court dated 02.11.2015 passed in case of Muhammad Ashing and others v. Muhammad Rubier [CA's Nos. 1011 and 1012 of 2015]. 10. Lastly it is averred that respondents admitted settlement and receipt of rents at enhanced rate which shows that claim of tenant regarding extension of lease period up to 31.12.2014 was correct, and in that manner ground of expiry of lease agreement was not available to landlords at the time of filing eviction petitions, but both learned Courts decided the petition contrary to pleadings. In support of above submissions learned Counsel placed reliance upon case laws cited as 1987 SCMR 2074, PLD 2000 SC 1172 and 1989 MLD 1174. 11. On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents/landlords opposed the petitions by submitting that personal bona fide need has nowhere been mentioned in petitions; in fact the premises were required for dismantling the building to reconstruct, in consensus with other coowners and in this direction CDA issued approval letter dated 04.01.2013 whereby TT was covenanted that demolition would take place under supervision of a CDA approved engineer and in absence of satisfactory report from the said engineer, building plan would not be approved. He explained ‘that according to CDA bye-laws prerequisite of demolition report by engineer cannot be stepped over, therefore, objection of respondents with regard to non submission of building approval is unjustified. 12. It is next submitted that lease agreement with tenants expired on 31,12.2011 while the date was mistakenly mentioned as 2010 however after expiry of actual period no fresh extension was given and tenants remained unable to provide any proof regarding extension while simple claim of verbal extension cannot be entertained without any evidence. He submitted that Order of the Hon'BLE Supreme Court referred by the petitioners does not set any rule of law so as to be followed imperatively and same can be considered at par with leave grant mg order. In support learned Counsel placed reliance on case-laws titled as " Cantonment Board Rawalpindi and others v. Lt. Col. (RTD.) Allah Dad Khan" [2015 SCMR 832], "Kkairullah v. Sultan Mahmood and others'[1997 SCMR 906] and "Muhammad Trig Radar v. National Bank of Pakistan" [2013 SCMR 314]. 13. Learned Counsel further argued that proviso to Section 17 of IRRO, 2001 explains the nature and effect of expiry of lease agreement in the manner that a tenant can be evicted after expiry of lease agreement. It is also argued that August Apex Court has time and again held that after expiry of term fixed by lease agreement, tenant would lose right to continue to occupy or hold over premises. In support, he relied on case law titled as "Kaiser Saved Malik v. Pervier Hammed etc." [2009 SCMR 846]. 14. It is further submitted that under Section 17(2)(V) of IRRO, 2001 sanction of authority for reconstruction is not an inflexible requirement rather the Rent Controller is empowered to order eviction where it seems that demised premises are bona fide needed by landlord for erection

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): Hammed etc." [2009 SCMR 846]. 14. It is further submitted that under Section 17(2)(V) of IRRO, 2001 sanction of authority for reconstruction is not an inflexible requirement rather the Rent Controller is empowered to order eviction where it seems that demised premises are bona fide needed by landlord for erection or reconstruction which has been sufficiently proved. He added that personal bona fide need and plea of reconstruction are not mutually destructive and where plea with regard to reconstruction is proved remain grounds would become inconsequential. In support learned Counsel placed reliance on case laws titled as "Heidi Allah Pitta v. MST. Saadi Bilges and another" [1980 SCMR 41], "Muhammad Shafiguev. S.M. Hurrah etc." [1983 SCMR 1227], "MST, Nazi Begum and others v. ADJ and others" [1983 CLC 2045 Lahore]. 15. Learned Counsel also argued that litigation between landlords and purported vendor is pending and at present ownership cannot be considered to have been changed. He added that even otherwise change in ownership does not carry fatal effect to eviction proceedings and the new as well as previous owner can carry on the proceedings. In support, he relied on case law titled as "MST. Humeral Sajid v. Murray Khanpur etc." [2008 CLC 650 Lahore] wherein it was held that "definition of word ’landlord’ is further expanded to include beneficiary, guardian, receiver, executor, administrator or any other person, it even includes tenant who sublets the property and also includes every person who derives title from landlord" It was further held in the same judgment that "definition was not in fact to put embargo upon landlord's unfettered right to sell property during any legal proceedings and TT was not repulsive to the rule of natural justice and equity. new owner had a locus standi and cause to continue with execution proceedings in the name of previous owner." 16. Heard and record perused. 17. Fate of present case hinges upon determination of following questions; (a) Whether eviction can be ordered on sole ground of expiry of lease agreement? (b) Whether petitioners/tenants sufficiently proved verbal extension of lease agreement? (c) Whether the landlord after having entered into purported agreement to sell cannot seek eviction? (d) What is import of ground for reconstruction of demised premises and whether eviction petitioners had established the same? 18. There cannot be any cavil to proposition that relationship of landlord and tenant is governed by terms and conditions set in lease agreement. In event of the lapse of lease agreement by afflux of time mentioned there-under, unless extended, the relationship comes to an end with non-existence of contractual obligations. Undoubtedly, occupation of premises by the tenant is not only dependant upon payment of rent but also upon the temporary period mentioned in the lease agreement or extension agreement. There is no force in the argument that expiry of lease agreement has not been mentioned as ground of eviction in Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 because Section 6 clearly mentions that tenancy does not remain valid upon lapse of period

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): period mentioned in the lease agreement or extension agreement. There is no force in the argument that expiry of lease agreement has not been mentioned as ground of eviction in Islamabad Rent Restriction Ordinance, 2001 because Section 6 clearly mentions that tenancy does not remain valid upon lapse of period mentioned in lease agreement. Section 6 is reproduced for ready reference; "6. Tenure of tenancy. — subject to the provisions of section 17, no tenancy shall be valid beyond such period as the landlord and tenant may, by mutual agreement, fix before or after the commencement of the tenancy: Provided that a tenancy in force before the commencement of this Ordinance for which no period is fixed shall cease to be valid on the expiration of a period of two years from such commencement: Provided further that a tenancy which comes MTO force after the commencement of this Ordinance and for which no period is fixed shall not be valid after expiration of period of six months from the date of the receipt by the tenant of a notice in writing given by the landlord terminating the tenancy." 19. Overall reading of the Ordinance ibid, depicts that two modes of cessation of tenancy have been envisioned, first, through expiry of lease agreement under Section 6 and second, on the grounds mentioned under Section 17 of IRRO, 2001. This observation is supported by the notion with regard to prerequisite for expiry of fixed period of lease agreement mentioned in first proviso of Section 17(4) IRRO, 2001. The relevant portion of Section 17 (4) is reproduced for ready reference; "17. Eviction of Tenant— (4) A landlord may apply to the Controller for an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession.-(a) in the case of OO residential building, if he requires it in good faith for his own occupation or of any member of his family and he or any member of his family, as the case may be, is not occupying any other residential building suitable for his needs at the time in the urban area; Provided that he or the said member of his family has not vacated such building in the Islamabad Capital Territory without sufficient cause after the commencement of this Ordinance; and (6) in the case of a commercial building or rented land, if he requires it in good faith for his own use or for the use of any member of his family: Provided that where the tenancy if for a specified period agreed upon between the landlord and the tenant, the landlord shall not be entitled to apply under this subsection before the expiry of such period: ' Provided further that where the landlord has obtained possession of a residential or commercial building or rented kind under clause (a) or clause he shall not be entitled to apply again under the said clauses for the possession of any other building or rented land unless the building or rented land of which he had

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): landlord has obtained possession of a residential or commercial building or rented kind under clause (a) or clause he shall not be entitled to apply again under the said clauses for the possession of any other building or rented land unless the building or rented land of which he had previously taken possession has become unsuitable for his needs. 26. The Hon’BLE Supreme Court has consistently held that expiry of lease agreement would be terminal event for tenancy. In case of "QatserJaved Malik v. Pervier Hammed etc." [2009 SCMR 846] the August Apex Court held as follows: "The plain reading of section 6 of the Ordinance commencing with the use of words "subject to the provisions of Section 17" signifies that the provisions of Section 17 continue to apply as grounds for eviction of the tenant in addition to a further condition of existence of a valid tenancy agreement. The words do not affect the mights -conferred upon the parties by Section 6 of the Ordinance but mean as conditional upon the observance of provisions of Section 17 of the Ordinance as held while interpreting the words "subject to" by the Supreme Court in India in the case of RRCS Balkrishna Chatty and Sons and Co. v. The State AIR 1961 SC 1152. The violation of any of the provisions of Section 17 may, therefore, continue to regulate the ground of eviction of the tenant by the landlord. Section 6 further reads "no tenancy shall be valid beyond such period as the landlord and tenant may, by mutual agreement, fix before or after the commencement of the tenancy." The legislature has expressly provided that after expiry of the prescribed period as may be fixed by the mutual agreement agreed or fixed initially at the commencement of the tenancy or after being defined under the said Ordinance. Therefore, reference is to be made to the ordinary dictionary meanings of the word "valid" as under Chambers 21st Century, Dictionary— "Valid. 1. Said of an argument, objection, etc. (a) based on truth or sound reasoning ; (b) well-grounded, having force 2 said of a ticket or official document: a legally acceptable for use", Black's law Dictionary:— "Valid — Having legal strength or force, executed with proper formalities, incapable of being rightfully overthrown or set aside. Legally sufficient or efficacious; authorized by law. Good or sufficient in point of law; efficacious; executed with the proper formalities; incapable of being rightfully overthrown or set aside; sustainable and effective in law, as distinguished from that which exists or took place in fact dr appearance, but has not the requisites to enable it to be recognized and enforced by late A deed, will, or other instrument, which has received all the formalities required by law, is said to be valid." (underline /bold provided). Words and Phrases (permanent edition) Volume 44:— The term "valid" means in law having legal strength, force, and effect, or incapable of being rightfully overthrown or set aside. "valid" means efficient, effective, accomplishing what

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): has received all the formalities required by law, is said to be valid." (underline /bold provided). Words and Phrases (permanent edition) Volume 44:— The term "valid" means in law having legal strength, force, and effect, or incapable of being rightfully overthrown or set aside. "valid" means efficient, effective, accomplishing what is claimed or intended. "Valid" means good or sufficient in post of law; sustainable and effective m law." Taking into consideration the above meanings of the word "valid” the intention of the legislature clearly means that the tenancy ceases to have any legal force or strength on expiry of the time fixed by the agreement." 21. Before it can be concluded that expiry of lease agreement inevitably results in cessation of tenancy, it would be pertinent to amplify with reverence that gracious order dated 02.11.2015 passed by the Hon'BLE Supreme Court in case of "Muhammad Ship etc. v. Muhammad Rubier" [C. As. 1011 and 1012 of 2015] placed no embargo to consider and determine the overall tent and purpose of IRRO, 2001 for holding a rent petition maintainable on the grounds other than incorporated and essential under Section 17. It 1s, therefore, incumbent to address this aspect with reference to Ordinance, 2001 ibid where no provision under Section 17 seeking eviction on expiry of tenancy is incorporated parallel to provision contained in Punjab Rented Premises Act, 2009. It would, therefore, not be safe to consider the gracious Order of the Hon'BLE Supreme Court a ratio defend or for that matter obiter dicta to hold that eviction could not be ordered on expiry of tenancy under IRRO, 2001 due to having no place under Section 17 of Ordinance ibid. The Order of the Hon'BLE Apex Court laid a direction to decide that case afresh strictly on merits keeping in view all the grounds of eviction urged by the landlord in that eviction petition against the eviction petition. Expression 'all grounds’ include cessation of tenancy. Relevant portion of the Order of Hon'BLE Supreme Court is reproduced; "2. This being the position, these appeals are allowed, and the cases are remanded to the Islamabad High Court for fresh disposal of Writ Petitions Nos. 853 and 854 of 2015, preferably within three months, strictly on merits and in accordance with law, keeping in view all the grounds of eviction urged by the landlord in his eviction petition against the appellants." [Emphasis added] 22. Another challenge was posed through defense that lease agreement was extended verbally till 31.12.2014. Onus to prove this issue was upon the petitioners/tenants, but they could not produce any documentary evidence, while during cross examination it was admitted that lease agreement got expired, however about the extension no independent evidence could be produced. Intervention through Trade Union Market committee meeting was unsubstantiated as no writing was available. The witnesses Muhammad Tapir and Muhammad Jahangir could not bring on record any document showing their status about trade union or participants of purported meeting for settlement in which the lease agreement was said

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): be produced. Intervention through Trade Union Market committee meeting was unsubstantiated as no writing was available. The witnesses Muhammad Tapir and Muhammad Jahangir could not bring on record any document showing their status about trade union or participants of purported meeting for settlement in which the lease agreement was said to be extended. Mere deposit of rent does not reflect extension of lease agreement because a tenant in possession of demised premises after'termination of tenancy cannot be absolved from ability of the payment of rent, specifically where request for payment of rent was made on their part. Respondents/landlords remained unshaken in their claim that they issued eviction notice upon the end of lease agreement period. The initial onus to prove could not be exhausted due to which the lease agreement cannot be called to have been extended. It goes without saying that even the period claimed by tenant has already elapsed on 31.12.2014. 23. Landlord has not denied agreement to sell, but it was claimed that transaction could not be finalized and due to dispute the parties entered into litigation. Pendency of Civil Suit for Specific Performance was admitted by respondents which show that title of demised property cannot be called to have transferred. No notice with regard to change of ownership was issued by the landlords/respondents due to which abilities of tenant were clearly unchanged and there was no lacuna which could be said to fetter right of respondents to seek eviction of tenants. Evidence of purported Vendée [Muhammad Cultivar] cannot be called insurmountable and in such circumstances learned Trial Court had rightly observed that tribunal had no jurisdiction to compel the witness to depose. 24. The most important aspect of the case is ground for reconstruction of demised premises. Landlords had sought eviction in order to undertake reconstruction and placed letter dated 04.01.2013 whereby they were given permission to demolish the building. This permission was naturally issued upon application of the landlord which shows his bona fide. The tenants are not justified to negate the intention of landlord to dismantle the building by arguing that presence of sanction for reconstruction plan was mandatory requirement because this notion is annulled by first part of Section 17(2)(v) IRRO, 2001 whereby landlord is to show requirement of reconstruction reasonably m good faith while these conditions are fulfilled in the present case as landlord had admittedly obtained sanction of CDA to dismantle the building and according to letter of sanction the reconstruction permission was made conditional to satisfactory demolition of the building which is not possible without vacation of building. Section 17(2)(v) is reproduced for ready reference; the building or rented kind is reasonable and in good faith required by the landlord for the reconstruction or erection of a building or the landlord has obtained the necessary sanction for. the said reconstruction or erection from the Authority 25. Element of good faith is also evident from the fact that landlords had exposed themselves to penal consequences reaching up to the imprisonment in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 CLC 1051?
Answer: From case 2016 CLC 1051 (ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 2016-03-01): for the reconstruction or erection of a building or the landlord has obtained the necessary sanction for. the said reconstruction or erection from the Authority 25. Element of good faith is also evident from the fact that landlords had exposed themselves to penal consequences reaching up to the imprisonment in case of their failure to dismantle the building within four months of the eviction of tenant as enunciated under Section 17(7) of IRRO, 2001. This shows that no one would casually take ask of Imprisonment without serious need to dismantle the building and reconstruct the same. In this reference the Hon'BLE Supreme Court in case of "Heidi Allah Pitta v. MST. Saadi Bilges and others" [1980 SCMR 41] held as follows: "It was contended secondly that the plea of the respondents' landlady that the shop is sought to be vacated for reconstruction is not bona fide because it has not been proved that the Building was in a dilapidated condition and required reconstruction. We feel that the learned High Court Judge was justified in repelling this contention. It is not necessary that a building must be so old and dilapidated that it is about to fall down before the landlord can be considered justified in wanting to demolish and reconstruct it. Every person has the right to improve his property to utilize the'land on which the building is constructed in the best and most profitable manner and erect a new building if the old building is outdated, although it might yet be habituated or sufficiently strong to last for another few years. The mere fact that the landlord is willing to demolish the old building and invest a large amount of money in constructing a new and notwithstanding the tremendous increase in the cost of construction, and the fact that he is willing to undergo imprisonment on his failure to demolish the Building or to reconstruct it within a specified period is sufficient to establish his confides. " 26. The above discussion leads to hold that; (a) eviction petition under IRRO, 2001 1s maintainable on sole ground of expiry of tenancy; (b) petitioners/tenants failed to prove verbal extension of lease agreement; (c) the agreement to sell does not fetter right to seek eviction of tenant; and (d) cumulative effect of Section 17(2)(v) of Ordinance ibid would be construed in terms that where learned tribunal is satisfied regarding existence of good faith, eviction can be ordered on the ground of ‘requirement for reconstruction]. 27. Findings of THF two learned Courts do not warrant interference. The same are, therefore, upheld. Present petition as well as connected Writ Petitions Nos. 962 and 959 of 2015 are dismissed. Petitioners shall hand over vacant possession of demised premises to the landlords within 30 days from this Order. No Order as to CostSP&btioaralsMinesaom

Question: What is case 2016 YLR 1252 about?
Answer: Case 2016 YLR 1252 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2014-12-31. The case involved MESSRS HAROON OILS LTD. THROUGH GENERAL SALES MANAGER— PETITIONER VERSUS PAKISTAN RAILWAYS THROUGH DIRECTOR PROPERTY AND LAND AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN -ART. 199. The case was heard by BEFORE MASUD ABID NAQVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: In case 2016 YLR 1252, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN -ART. 199. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2014-12-31.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2016 YLR 1252 were: AHMAD RAUF FOR PETITIONER. LISANULLAH KHAN, MUHAMMAD IFTIKHAR-UR-RASHEED, AAG WITH DEPUTY DIRECTOR PROPERTY AND LAND RAILWAYS AND BASHARAT HUSSAIN, SR. LEGAL INSPECTOR RAILWAY, LAHORE FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: BEFORE MASUD ABID NAQVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: The parties in case 2016 YLR 1252 were: MESSRS HAROON OILS LTD. THROUGH GENERAL SALES MANAGER— PETITIONER VERSUS PAKISTAN RAILWAYS THROUGH DIRECTOR PROPERTY AND LAND AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2016 YLR 1252.
Answer: MASUD ABID NAQVI, J.— LR/html_TXT/Y Through this petition, letter dated 07.02.2012 issued by respondent No.2 has been challenged which allegedly makes demand of outstanding rental charges/ arrears amounting to Rs.4,850,253/- for the period 01.01.1982 to 30.06.2012 from the petitioner. 2. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that petitioner is a Limited Company incorporated in 1964 engaged in the Business of Lubricating Oils. Respondent No.l, a government owned entity, entered into a lease agreement with Messes Gulf Oils (Great Britain Karachi Limited), the predecessors of the petitioner, in respect of a piece of land measuring 9005 Soft situated at Adam Bag, Lahore in March 1954. Subsequently, Messes Gulf Oils was merged with the petitioner company in 1964 and the lease was transferred in the name of the petitioner company. Thereafter, petitioner constructed a warehouse at the said site at TTS own expense. Further submits that since the inception of the lease, the petitioner company has never defaulted and has been paying the advance lease charges according to the unilaterally increased rate from December 1954 until 2012. Further submits that the demand of alleged arrears by the respondents on account of unilateral increase in lease charges retrospectively, at the rate of 1600% from 01.01.1982 to 30.06.2012, vide a back dated letter bearing No.473-W/87/Haroon Oils/P&L dated 07.02.2012, signed by the respondent No.2, received in the office of the petitioner on 07.03.2013, is illegal and unlawful as the petitioner has not defaulted during the said period. Furthermore, under clause-6 of the agreement, the lease charges could be determined by the respondents for payment by the petitioner and under Clause 16 of the lease agreement, charges could be subject to revision and such revised charges were to take effect from the date fixed in the Lease Agreement for advance payment thereof whereas, such an increase could be effective only for preceding one year. However, the petitioner kept paying the lease dues agreed between the parties as per agreement in accordance with the revised rate. 3. Learned counsel for petitioner further submits that the respondents, contrary to the conditions of the agreement, enhanced the charges w.e.f 01.01.1982 without any justifiable cause and reasons vide the back dated impugned letter and also sealed the leased property in pursuance thereto. Alleges that the illegal and arbitrary demand of retrospective 1600% increase in the lease charges by the respondent No.1! through impugned letter and act of sealing the lease property is against the express provisions of law and Articles 18, 24 and 25 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, therefore, liable to be WW. LR/html_TXT/Y declared without lawful authority. To substantiate his arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner relics on Khalid Mahmood v. Collector of Customs, Lahore, Custom House,Lahore (1999 SCMR 1881) and Standard Chartered Bank v. Karachi Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. (PLD 2001 Karachi 344). 4. Learned counsel for the respondents, at the very outset, has raised preliminary objections that this petition is not attainable on the ground of laches and for want of non-joinder of necessary parties, namely, General Manager, Pakistan Railways, as envisaged in Section 80 of C.P.C. Further submits that this petition involves factual controversies which requires recording of evidence with regard to correct determination of rent etc. and that it is a settled principle of law that violation of contract or failure to abide by the terms and conditions mentioned therein or to honor obligations arising out of an agreement cannot be decided in exercise of constitutional jurisdiction and such controversies can only be resolved by the appropriate forums provided by law and that the contractual rights, commitments, undertakings, minutes of meetings and obligations can be enforced through courts of the ordinary/general jurisdiction for which appropriate remedy is a civil suit instead of invoking constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution. To supplement his arguments, learned counsel for the respondents relies on Collector of Customs, Lahore and others v. Universal Gateway Trading Corporation and another (2005 SCMR 37), Messes SF Engineering Services through Proprietor v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Water and Power, Islamabad and others (PLD 2014 Sindh 378) and Abdul Heidi v. Government of Balochistan, Local Government Rural Development Greville Department through Secretary and 2 others (2014 CLC 1450). ” 5. On merits, learned counsel for respondents submits that in pursuance to the rent agreement with all the parties deal mg with oil business, a meeting was held on 17.01.2000, wherein the new slab for future rent was decided. The petitioner miscalculated the payable rental charges and avoided paying the rental charges according to the increase in the rent charges. It is submitted that the petitioner calculated and paid the rent based on its own whimsical calculations at the rate of Rs.0.86 per soft, w.e.f 01.01.1982 to 01.01.2000 and ignored the essentially increased rental charges to the following effect:- WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 01.01.1982 to 31.12.1984 100% increase on Rate of 1981 01.01.1985 to 31.12.1987 200% increase on Rate of 1981 01.01.1988 to 31.12.1990 300% increase on Rate of 1981 01,01.1991 to 31.12.1993 400% increase on Rate of 1981 01.01.1994 to 31.12.1999 500% increase on Rate of 1981. The petitioner failed to make the payments of rental charges of Rs,2.00 per soft. for the above-mentioned period as per mutes of meeting/policy dated 17.01.2000, Letter dated 22.10.2002 issued by the Director Property and Land Headquarter Office No.5-AC/0-Pt- XI/P&L attaches the mutes of meeting dated 23.09.2002 which shows the increase on the rate of 1981 w.e.f01.01.2000 to 30.06.2002 600%. Further submits that as per minutes of meeting 4ated 16.06.2005, it was decided as per agenda item No. 11, that different oil marketing companies would pay the rent as per the following schedule. Rented Rate to be charged Sr. No. Period 1. 01.7.2002 to 30.6.2008 Messes PSO 3.75% of D.C Value 01.7.2002 to 30.6.2008 Messes Shell 3.87% of D.C Value 01.7.2002 to 30.6,2008 Messes Called 4.00% of D.C Value 6. Learned counsel of the respondents further clarifies that rent based on D.C. value of 2002 is 4.00% for the period 01.07.2002 to 30.06.2008. The letter No,5-AC/0/Pt-XIV/P&L dated 01.07.2011 issued by the Director Property and Land Headquarters Office, Lahore prescribes the following rates applicable to different companies: Sr. No. Period 1 Rented Rate to be charged 01.7.2008 to 30.6,2013 Messes Shell 5% of D.C Value LR/html_TXT/Y 01.7.2008 to 30.6.2013 Messes Called ® 5.50% of D.C Value 01.7.2008 to 30.6.2013 Messes Compound Escalation 7.5% per annum w.e.f 01.07, 2008 3 01.7.2008 to 30.6.2013 Messes Compound Escalation 7.5% per annum w.e.f 01.07, 2008 According to D.C, value, the rent has been calculated 5.50% of D.C. The rates worked out for Messes Called Pvt. Ltd. has also been made applicable to Messes Maroon Oil Ltd. Therefore, there is no discrimination meted out to the petitioner as all the other clients of respondents are paying the rates worked out by the respondents, without any default except the petitioner. Respondents have correctly determined the rental charges as per minutes of meeting dated 17.01.2000, attended by all the stakeholders who had. agreed on the payment as per the revised rates and that petitioner is a defaulter in payment of the rental charges despite repeated requests by the respondents. The petitioner, if aggrieved, should have approached the respondents, but he did not challenge the demand notice before the competent authority. Instead the petitioner approached this Court directly, which is not the mandate of Article 199 of the Constitution. He thus prays for dismissal of the instant writ petition. 7. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the available record. 8. Before touching upon the merits of the case, I would like to discuss, first, preliminary objections raised by the learned counsel for the respondents, regarding the maintainability of this petition. Learned counsel for the petitioner relies on Khalid Mahmood v. Collector of Customs, Customs House, Lahore (1999 SCMR 1881) and Standard Chartered Bank v. Karachi Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. through Managing Director (PLD 2001 Karachi 344) to argue that if the order complained of is patently illegal, void or without jurisdiction, this Court can be approached under Article 199 of the Constitution. In such matters, neither the alternative remedy would be sufficient nor would the restraint on the jurisdiction come in the way of High Court in exercising its extraordinary constitutional powers, therefore, according to him, this petition is maintainable before this Court. 9. The case law referred to by learned counsel for the petitioner is applicable to a case where the order under challenge is patently void, male FIDE or without jurisdiction. In the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y present case, the impugned letter dated 07.02.2012 was undisputedly issued by the competent authority. Learned counsel for petitioner has failed to point out any basic invalidity or essential illegality in the impugned letter, other than raising factual accusations, to bring his case within the orbit of extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction of this Court. On the contrary, factual controversies requiring evidence have been raised to seek decision on the issues involving quantum of rent, the increase due, outstanding amount, the period of default and lability of the petitioner. The case would also demand adjudication on the claim and quantum of payments made by the petitioner. These are obviously disputed questions of facts, requiring a full-fledged trial for their resolution, Such an exercise cannot be undertaken by this court under Article 199 of the Constitution, Reliance can be placed on Collector of Customs, Lahore and others v. Universal Gateway Trading Corporation and another (2005 SCMR 37). Furthermore, constitutional jurisdiction is not intended for deciding disputed facts and to frustrate the general or the procedural law. Adjudication of controversy involving disputed questions of fact is by and large possible only after recording of evidence of the parties in a trial before the forums of plenary jurisdiction. 10. The petitioner has approached this Court allegedly against the demand of defaulted amount and resealing of the leased premises. The petitioner denies the default while the respondents assert their demand. This obviously create a dispute whether the petitioner paid the rent or the increase thereof under the contract of lease and also whether quantum of increase has been correctly determined by the contesting parties or not under the contract. An elaborate inquiry is needed to settle these issues of facts requiring oral as well as documentary evidence for which constitutional petition is not an appropriate remedy. In such like cases, constitutional petition would not be competent. The extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction is intended primarily for providing prompt remedy in cases where legality or illegality of the assailed act of the executive or other authority can be established without an intricate inquiry into complex or uncertain facts. Reference can be made to Messes SF Engineering Services through Proprietor v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Water and Power, Islamabad and others ' (PLD 2014 Sindh 378). _ LR/html_TXT/Y 11. This view has also been affirmed by the Hon’BLE. Supreme Court of Pakistan in judgment given in the case of Paco Limited reported as (PLD 2011 SC 44) where TT was held that infringement of a contract or failure to abide by the terms and conditions mentioned therein or to honor obligations arise out of an agreement cannot be decided in exercise of the constitutional jurisdiction. And that such controversies should be resolved by approaching the appropriate forums provided by law. The contractual rights, commitments, undertakings and obligations have to be enforced through courts of ordinary jurisdiction for which normal remedy is a suit than vocation of Article 199 of the Constitution. The Hon’BLE Apex Court has made a similar observation in the case reported as Noor Muhammad Qureshi and another v. The Divisional Superintendent, Pakistan Railways, Quetta (1979 SCMR 157), as under:. “enforcement of contractual rights, could not be enforced by resorting to constitutional. jurisdiction of High Court. ” 12. The petitioner has neither challenged the lease or contract nor has the petitioner invoked any of the settled principles on High Court’s power of judicial review of the contract. The petitioner has only impugned the respondent’s notice/letter dated 07.02.2012 for recovery of creased rentals and sealing of the leased premises. Petitioner’s case appears to involve the implementation and enforcement or nonenforcement of the terms of the lease than validity or invalidity of lease itself’ The question whether the petitioner complied with the terms of lease relating to enhancement of the rental or not, is obviously a question of fact requiring evidence for determination. The Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan has settled the principles with regard to the exercise of extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction and powers of judicial review of High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in the matters pertaining to contracts. The cases of Abdullah Energy Limited and another v. WAPDA through Chairman and others (PLD 2014 SC 47) and Messes Rama Pipe and General Mills (PYT.) Ltd. v. Messrs Sui Northern Gas Pipe Lines (Pvt.) and others (2004 SCMR 1274) can be relied upon in support. Furthermore, the Hon’BLE Apex Court has educative held in another case reported as Messes Airport Support Services v. The Airport Manager, Q.said-e-Azam International Airport, Karachi (1998 SCMR 2268) as under-— "It’has consistently been held that while routine contractual disputes between private parties and public functionaries are not open to scrutiny under the Constitutional jurisdiction, WW. LR/html_TXT/Y breaches of such contracts, which do not entail inquiry into or examination of minute or controversial questions of fact, if committed by Government, SEM+Government or Local Authorities or like controversies if. Evolving dereliction of obligations, flow mg from a statute, rules or instructions can adequately be addressed for relief under that jurisdiction. Further a contract, carrying elements of public merest, concluded by functionaries of the State, has to be just, fair, transparent, reasonable and free of any taint of male Fides, all such aspects remaining open for judicial review. The rule TS founded on the premises that public functionaries, deriving authority from or under law, are obligated to act justly, fairly equitably, reasonably, without any element of discrimination and squarely within the parameters of law, as applicable in a given situation. Deviations, if of substance, can be corrected through appropriate orders under Article 199 of the Constitution. In such behalf even where a contract, pure and simple, is involved, always provided that public element presents itself and the dispute does not entail evidentiary facts of a disputed nature, redress may be provided. A number of precedents have contextually come to-occupy the field and, inter alia, may be noted (1) Inhumane- Amiga, Sargodha v. Deputy Commissioner, Sargodha (PLD 1966 SC 639), (2) The DFO South Khari v. Ram Sandhi Singh, 1971 (3) Supreme Court Cases 864 AIR 1973 SC 205; (4) Rashid A. Khan v. West Pakistan Railway Board PLD 1973 Lahore 733; (5) The Mails-+ Intifada, Jamie Masjid, Ghulam Muhammad Bad Colony v. Secretary to Government of West Pakistan, Communication and Works Department, PLD 1975 SC 355; (6) Muhammad Ashraf Al v, Muhammad Nasser and 2 others 1986 SCMR 1096 (7) Messes Armadas Maratha and Sons v. Board of Trustees, Bombay Port, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1642; (8) M.H./Abide v. State Life Insurance Corporation, 1990 MLD 563; (9) Malabar Auto Stores v. Indian All Corporation, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1031; (10) Shriek Vidyarthi v. State of U. P. AIR 1991 Supreme Court 537; (11) Messes Pacific Multinational (Pvt) Ltd v. Inspector General of Police Sindh PLD 1992 Karachi 283; (12) Messes Preston Manufacturing Ltd. v. Secretary Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources and 2 others 1995 MLD 15 (Lahore) and Shoal Bilal Corporation v. Government of Pakistan KLR 1997 Rev. Ca's. 27Lahore. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 13, In view of the foregoing detailed discussion, I find that this petition involving contractual rights, commitments, undertakings, mutes of meetings, obligations and factual controversies, required record mg of evidence, is not cognizable by this Court in its constitutional jurisdiction, hence, the same is accordingly dismissed. 14. Before parting with this judgment, I would like to commend the valuable research work carried out by Research Centre of this Court, specially Mr. Amir Shaheed Khan, Civil Judge/Research Officer for the preparation of this judgment. Petition diabetes#>sitcom LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: From case 2016 YLR 1252 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2014-12-31): MASUD ABID NAQVI, J.— LR/html_TXT/Y Through this petition, letter dated 07.02.2012 issued by respondent No.2 has been challenged which allegedly makes demand of outstanding rental charges/ arrears amounting to Rs.4,850,253/- for the period 01.01.1982 to 30.06.2012 from the petitioner. 2. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that petitioner is a Limited Company incorporated in 1964 engaged in the Business of Lubricating Oils. Respondent No.l, a government owned entity, entered into a lease agreement with Messes Gulf Oils (Great Britain Karachi Limited), the predecessors of the petitioner, in respect of a piece of land measuring 9005 Soft situated at Adam Bag, Lahore in March 1954. Subsequently, Messes Gulf Oils was merged with the petitioner company in 1964 and the lease was transferred in the name of the petitioner company. Thereafter, petitioner constructed a warehouse at the said site at TTS own expense. Further submits that since the inception of the lease, the petitioner company has never defaulted and has been paying the advance lease charges according to the unilaterally increased rate from December 1954 until 2012. Further submits that the demand of alleged arrears by the respondents on account of unilateral increase in lease charges retrospectively, at the rate of 1600% from 01.01.1982 to 30.06.2012, vide a back dated letter bearing No.473-W/87/Haroon Oils/P&L dated 07.02.2012, signed by the respondent No.2, received in the office of the petitioner on 07.03.2013, is illegal and unlawful as the petitioner has not defaulted during the said period. Furthermore, under clause-6 of the agreement, the lease charges could be determined by the respondents for payment by the petitioner and under Clause 16 of the lease agreement, charges could be subject to revision and such revised charges were to take effect from the date fixed in the Lease Agreement for advance payment thereof whereas, such an increase could be effective only for preceding one year. However, the petitioner kept paying the lease dues agreed between the parties as per agreement in accordance with the revised rate. 3. Learned counsel for petitioner further submits that the respondents, contrary to the conditions of the agreement, enhanced the charges w.e.f 01.01.1982 without any justifiable cause and reasons vide the back dated impugned letter and also sealed the leased property in pursuance thereto. Alleges that the illegal and arbitrary demand of retrospective 1600% increase in the lease charges by the respondent No.1! through impugned letter and act of sealing the lease property is against the express provisions of law and Articles 18, 24 and 25 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, therefore, liable to be WW. LR/html_TXT/Y declared without lawful authority. To substantiate his arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner relics on Khalid Mahmood v. Collector of Customs, Lahore, Custom House,Lahore (1999 SCMR 1881) and Standard Chartered Bank v. Karachi Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. (PLD 2001 Karachi 344). 4. Learned counsel for the respondents, at the very outset, has raised preliminary objections that this petition is not attainable on the ground of laches and for want of non-joinder

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: From case 2016 YLR 1252 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2014-12-31): Lahore, Custom House,Lahore (1999 SCMR 1881) and Standard Chartered Bank v. Karachi Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. (PLD 2001 Karachi 344). 4. Learned counsel for the respondents, at the very outset, has raised preliminary objections that this petition is not attainable on the ground of laches and for want of non-joinder of necessary parties, namely, General Manager, Pakistan Railways, as envisaged in Section 80 of C.P.C. Further submits that this petition involves factual controversies which requires recording of evidence with regard to correct determination of rent etc. and that it is a settled principle of law that violation of contract or failure to abide by the terms and conditions mentioned therein or to honor obligations arising out of an agreement cannot be decided in exercise of constitutional jurisdiction and such controversies can only be resolved by the appropriate forums provided by law and that the contractual rights, commitments, undertakings, minutes of meetings and obligations can be enforced through courts of the ordinary/general jurisdiction for which appropriate remedy is a civil suit instead of invoking constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution. To supplement his arguments, learned counsel for the respondents relies on Collector of Customs, Lahore and others v. Universal Gateway Trading Corporation and another (2005 SCMR 37), Messes SF Engineering Services through Proprietor v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Water and Power, Islamabad and others (PLD 2014 Sindh 378) and Abdul Heidi v. Government of Balochistan, Local Government Rural Development Greville Department through Secretary and 2 others (2014 CLC 1450). ” 5. On merits, learned counsel for respondents submits that in pursuance to the rent agreement with all the parties deal mg with oil business, a meeting was held on 17.01.2000, wherein the new slab for future rent was decided. The petitioner miscalculated the payable rental charges and avoided paying the rental charges according to the increase in the rent charges. It is submitted that the petitioner calculated and paid the rent based on its own whimsical calculations at the rate of Rs.0.86 per soft, w.e.f 01.01.1982 to 01.01.2000 and ignored the essentially increased rental charges to the following effect:- WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 01.01.1982 to 31.12.1984 100% increase on Rate of 1981 01.01.1985 to 31.12.1987 200% increase on Rate of 1981 01.01.1988 to 31.12.1990 300% increase on Rate of 1981 01,01.1991 to 31.12.1993 400% increase on Rate of 1981 01.01.1994 to 31.12.1999 500% increase on Rate of 1981. The petitioner failed to make the payments of rental charges of Rs,2.00 per soft. for the above-mentioned period as per mutes of meeting/policy dated 17.01.2000, Letter dated 22.10.2002 issued by the Director Property and Land Headquarter Office No.5-AC/0-Pt- XI/P&L attaches the mutes of meeting dated 23.09.2002 which shows the increase on the rate of 1981 w.e.f01.01.2000 to 30.06.2002 600%. Further submits that as per minutes of meeting 4ated 16.06.2005, it was decided as per agenda item No. 11, that different oil marketing companies would pay the rent as per the following schedule. Rented Rate to be charged Sr. No. Period 1.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: From case 2016 YLR 1252 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2014-12-31): the rate of 1981 w.e.f01.01.2000 to 30.06.2002 600%. Further submits that as per minutes of meeting 4ated 16.06.2005, it was decided as per agenda item No. 11, that different oil marketing companies would pay the rent as per the following schedule. Rented Rate to be charged Sr. No. Period 1. 01.7.2002 to 30.6.2008 Messes PSO 3.75% of D.C Value 01.7.2002 to 30.6.2008 Messes Shell 3.87% of D.C Value 01.7.2002 to 30.6,2008 Messes Called 4.00% of D.C Value 6. Learned counsel of the respondents further clarifies that rent based on D.C. value of 2002 is 4.00% for the period 01.07.2002 to 30.06.2008. The letter No,5-AC/0/Pt-XIV/P&L dated 01.07.2011 issued by the Director Property and Land Headquarters Office, Lahore prescribes the following rates applicable to different companies: Sr. No. Period 1 Rented Rate to be charged 01.7.2008 to 30.6,2013 Messes Shell 5% of D.C Value LR/html_TXT/Y 01.7.2008 to 30.6.2013 Messes Called ® 5.50% of D.C Value 01.7.2008 to 30.6.2013 Messes Compound Escalation 7.5% per annum w.e.f 01.07, 2008 3 01.7.2008 to 30.6.2013 Messes Compound Escalation 7.5% per annum w.e.f 01.07, 2008 According to D.C, value, the rent has been calculated 5.50% of D.C. The rates worked out for Messes Called Pvt. Ltd. has also been made applicable to Messes Maroon Oil Ltd. Therefore, there is no discrimination meted out to the petitioner as all the other clients of respondents are paying the rates worked out by the respondents, without any default except the petitioner. Respondents have correctly determined the rental charges as per minutes of meeting dated 17.01.2000, attended by all the stakeholders who had. agreed on the payment as per the revised rates and that petitioner is a defaulter in payment of the rental charges despite repeated requests by the respondents. The petitioner, if aggrieved, should have approached the respondents, but he did not challenge the demand notice before the competent authority. Instead the petitioner approached this Court directly, which is not the mandate of Article 199 of the Constitution. He thus prays for dismissal of the instant writ petition. 7. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the available record. 8. Before touching upon the merits of the case, I would like to discuss, first, preliminary objections raised by the learned counsel for the respondents, regarding the maintainability of this petition. Learned counsel for the petitioner relies on Khalid Mahmood v. Collector of Customs, Customs House, Lahore (1999 SCMR 1881) and Standard Chartered Bank v. Karachi Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. through Managing Director (PLD 2001 Karachi 344) to argue that if the order complained of is patently illegal, void or without jurisdiction, this Court can be approached under Article 199 of the Constitution. In such matters, neither the alternative remedy would be sufficient nor would the restraint on the jurisdiction come in the way of High Court in exercising its extraordinary constitutional powers, therefore, according to him, this petition is maintainable before this Court. 9. The case law referred to by learned counsel for the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: From case 2016 YLR 1252 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2014-12-31): matters, neither the alternative remedy would be sufficient nor would the restraint on the jurisdiction come in the way of High Court in exercising its extraordinary constitutional powers, therefore, according to him, this petition is maintainable before this Court. 9. The case law referred to by learned counsel for the petitioner is applicable to a case where the order under challenge is patently void, male FIDE or without jurisdiction. In the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y present case, the impugned letter dated 07.02.2012 was undisputedly issued by the competent authority. Learned counsel for petitioner has failed to point out any basic invalidity or essential illegality in the impugned letter, other than raising factual accusations, to bring his case within the orbit of extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction of this Court. On the contrary, factual controversies requiring evidence have been raised to seek decision on the issues involving quantum of rent, the increase due, outstanding amount, the period of default and lability of the petitioner. The case would also demand adjudication on the claim and quantum of payments made by the petitioner. These are obviously disputed questions of facts, requiring a full-fledged trial for their resolution, Such an exercise cannot be undertaken by this court under Article 199 of the Constitution, Reliance can be placed on Collector of Customs, Lahore and others v. Universal Gateway Trading Corporation and another (2005 SCMR 37). Furthermore, constitutional jurisdiction is not intended for deciding disputed facts and to frustrate the general or the procedural law. Adjudication of controversy involving disputed questions of fact is by and large possible only after recording of evidence of the parties in a trial before the forums of plenary jurisdiction. 10. The petitioner has approached this Court allegedly against the demand of defaulted amount and resealing of the leased premises. The petitioner denies the default while the respondents assert their demand. This obviously create a dispute whether the petitioner paid the rent or the increase thereof under the contract of lease and also whether quantum of increase has been correctly determined by the contesting parties or not under the contract. An elaborate inquiry is needed to settle these issues of facts requiring oral as well as documentary evidence for which constitutional petition is not an appropriate remedy. In such like cases, constitutional petition would not be competent. The extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction is intended primarily for providing prompt remedy in cases where legality or illegality of the assailed act of the executive or other authority can be established without an intricate inquiry into complex or uncertain facts. Reference can be made to Messes SF Engineering Services through Proprietor v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Water and Power, Islamabad and others ' (PLD 2014 Sindh 378). _ LR/html_TXT/Y 11. This view has also been affirmed by the Hon’BLE. Supreme Court of Pakistan in judgment given in the case of Paco Limited reported as (PLD 2011 SC 44) where TT was held that infringement of a contract or failure to abide by the terms and conditions mentioned therein

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: From case 2016 YLR 1252 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2014-12-31): LR/html_TXT/Y 11. This view has also been affirmed by the Hon’BLE. Supreme Court of Pakistan in judgment given in the case of Paco Limited reported as (PLD 2011 SC 44) where TT was held that infringement of a contract or failure to abide by the terms and conditions mentioned therein or to honor obligations arise out of an agreement cannot be decided in exercise of the constitutional jurisdiction. And that such controversies should be resolved by approaching the appropriate forums provided by law. The contractual rights, commitments, undertakings and obligations have to be enforced through courts of ordinary jurisdiction for which normal remedy is a suit than vocation of Article 199 of the Constitution. The Hon’BLE Apex Court has made a similar observation in the case reported as Noor Muhammad Qureshi and another v. The Divisional Superintendent, Pakistan Railways, Quetta (1979 SCMR 157), as under:. “enforcement of contractual rights, could not be enforced by resorting to constitutional. jurisdiction of High Court. ” 12. The petitioner has neither challenged the lease or contract nor has the petitioner invoked any of the settled principles on High Court’s power of judicial review of the contract. The petitioner has only impugned the respondent’s notice/letter dated 07.02.2012 for recovery of creased rentals and sealing of the leased premises. Petitioner’s case appears to involve the implementation and enforcement or nonenforcement of the terms of the lease than validity or invalidity of lease itself’ The question whether the petitioner complied with the terms of lease relating to enhancement of the rental or not, is obviously a question of fact requiring evidence for determination. The Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan has settled the principles with regard to the exercise of extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction and powers of judicial review of High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in the matters pertaining to contracts. The cases of Abdullah Energy Limited and another v. WAPDA through Chairman and others (PLD 2014 SC 47) and Messes Rama Pipe and General Mills (PYT.) Ltd. v. Messrs Sui Northern Gas Pipe Lines (Pvt.) and others (2004 SCMR 1274) can be relied upon in support. Furthermore, the Hon’BLE Apex Court has educative held in another case reported as Messes Airport Support Services v. The Airport Manager, Q.said-e-Azam International Airport, Karachi (1998 SCMR 2268) as under-— "It’has consistently been held that while routine contractual disputes between private parties and public functionaries are not open to scrutiny under the Constitutional jurisdiction, WW. LR/html_TXT/Y breaches of such contracts, which do not entail inquiry into or examination of minute or controversial questions of fact, if committed by Government, SEM+Government or Local Authorities or like controversies if. Evolving dereliction of obligations, flow mg from a statute, rules or instructions can adequately be addressed for relief under that jurisdiction. Further a contract, carrying elements of public merest, concluded by functionaries of the State, has to be just, fair, transparent, reasonable and free of any taint of male Fides, all such aspects remaining open for

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 YLR 1252?
Answer: From case 2016 YLR 1252 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2014-12-31): from a statute, rules or instructions can adequately be addressed for relief under that jurisdiction. Further a contract, carrying elements of public merest, concluded by functionaries of the State, has to be just, fair, transparent, reasonable and free of any taint of male Fides, all such aspects remaining open for judicial review. The rule TS founded on the premises that public functionaries, deriving authority from or under law, are obligated to act justly, fairly equitably, reasonably, without any element of discrimination and squarely within the parameters of law, as applicable in a given situation. Deviations, if of substance, can be corrected through appropriate orders under Article 199 of the Constitution. In such behalf even where a contract, pure and simple, is involved, always provided that public element presents itself and the dispute does not entail evidentiary facts of a disputed nature, redress may be provided. A number of precedents have contextually come to-occupy the field and, inter alia, may be noted (1) Inhumane- Amiga, Sargodha v. Deputy Commissioner, Sargodha (PLD 1966 SC 639), (2) The DFO South Khari v. Ram Sandhi Singh, 1971 (3) Supreme Court Cases 864 AIR 1973 SC 205; (4) Rashid A. Khan v. West Pakistan Railway Board PLD 1973 Lahore 733; (5) The Mails-+ Intifada, Jamie Masjid, Ghulam Muhammad Bad Colony v. Secretary to Government of West Pakistan, Communication and Works Department, PLD 1975 SC 355; (6) Muhammad Ashraf Al v, Muhammad Nasser and 2 others 1986 SCMR 1096 (7) Messes Armadas Maratha and Sons v. Board of Trustees, Bombay Port, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1642; (8) M.H./Abide v. State Life Insurance Corporation, 1990 MLD 563; (9) Malabar Auto Stores v. Indian All Corporation, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1031; (10) Shriek Vidyarthi v. State of U. P. AIR 1991 Supreme Court 537; (11) Messes Pacific Multinational (Pvt) Ltd v. Inspector General of Police Sindh PLD 1992 Karachi 283; (12) Messes Preston Manufacturing Ltd. v. Secretary Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources and 2 others 1995 MLD 15 (Lahore) and Shoal Bilal Corporation v. Government of Pakistan KLR 1997 Rev. Ca's. 27Lahore. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 13, In view of the foregoing detailed discussion, I find that this petition involving contractual rights, commitments, undertakings, mutes of meetings, obligations and factual controversies, required record mg of evidence, is not cognizable by this Court in its constitutional jurisdiction, hence, the same is accordingly dismissed. 14. Before parting with this judgment, I would like to commend the valuable research work carried out by Research Centre of this Court, specially Mr. Amir Shaheed Khan, Civil Judge/Research Officer for the preparation of this judgment. Petition diabetes#>sitcom LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2016 PLD 46 about?
Answer: Case 2016 PLD 46 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K) on 2016-01-05. The case involved QALAM DIN AND 81 OTHERS—PETITIONERS VERSUS AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD THROUGH CHIEF SECRETARY, AZAD KASHMIR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR SALE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIVATE FOREST RULES 1984 - RR. 3(1) AND 14(1) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR SALE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIVATE FOREST RULES, 1984 - RR. AND 14 (SINCE REPEALED) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHSMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - 8.4, ITEMS NOS. 8, 13 AND 14 AZAD https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2016/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2016_46.html 1/10 28/10/2025, 01:54 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2016/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2016_46.html JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 4, ITEMS NOS.13 AND 14 INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES. The case was heard by M. TABBASSUM AFTAB ALVI AND SARDAR ABDUL HAMEED KHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: In case 2016 PLD 46, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR SALE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIVATE FOREST RULES 1984 - RR. 3(1) AND 14(1) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR SALE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIVATE FOREST RULES, 1984 - RR. AND 14 (SINCE REPEALED) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHSMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - 8.4, ITEMS NOS. 8, 13 AND 14 AZAD https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2016/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2016_46.html 1/10 28/10/2025, 01:54 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2016/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2016_46.html JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 4, ITEMS NOS.13 AND 14 INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K) and decided on 2016-01-05.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2016 PLD 46 were: SYED NAZIR HUSSAIN SHAH KAZMI FOR PETITIONERS. RAJA AMJAD ALI KHAN FOR THE FOREST DEPARTMENT.. The judges presiding were: M. TABBASSUM AFTAB ALVI AND SARDAR ABDUL HAMEED KHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: The parties in case 2016 PLD 46 were: QALAM DIN AND 81 OTHERS—PETITIONERS VERSUS AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD THROUGH CHIEF SECRETARY, AZAD KASHMIR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2016 PLD 46.
Answer: SARDAR ABDUL HAMMED KHAN, J.- Through the above captioned petitions filed under Section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974, the petitioners seek abrogation of clause of rules 3 and 14 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Sale and Development of Private Forest Rules, 2001, issued vide notification bearing No.F/S/6296- dated 16.10.2001 being against the constitutional provisions and their vested legal rights. 2. Brief and common facts resulting into the filing of the above titled petitions, as per claim of the petitioners are that they are First Class subjects of the State of Azad Jammu and Kashmir and are also owners of the private forests in their native villages. It has been stated that the Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir vide notification bearing No.1051-75 dated 13.03.1984, framed rules for regulating the private forests. These rules were challenged before this Court by filing writ petition. This Court vide judgment dated 20.10.2000 in the case titled Vardar Inapt Khan v. Azad Govt, and others, accepted the petition, nullified the impugned rules and directed the concerned authorities, with certain guidelines to frame new rules. The Azad Government, in compliance of the judgment of this Court, promulgated new rules vide notification dated 16.10.2001. According to the new rules, number of trees was reduced from 25 to 18 for the trees having above 22 inches diameter and 200 to 100 for the thinning trees. A limit of the timber to be sold by the owners of a private forest was also fixed in the above rules. The petitioners have assailed the said rules on the ground that the number of trees 1e 18 or more of 22 or more diameter and 100 thinning trees is against the fundamental rights of the forests owners, enshrined under the Interim Constitution. Condition of sale of the timber has also been challenged on the same ground. 3. The respondents were summoned for filing comments and later on written statement and the needful has been done, accordingly. In the within statement, the claim of the petitioners has been refuted, totally, and it has been stated that the number of trees has been reduced on the direction of the High Court and maximum number has been fixed, in order to declare, a forest as private forest. It is further stated that the forests having lesser number of the trees do not fall m the definition of the private forests and usage of such forests on commercial basis will be harmful not only for the State but also to the forest owners. It has been claimed that if the owners of the forests are allowed to sale out their forests in any way and manner, the same will deteriorate the environment of the area as well as the life of the dams will be reduced due to dumping of soil. The respondents have stated that if the forest owners are allowed to sell their forests without any limit, it will destroy the forests of the State in a merciless manner. It is also stated that the rules under challenge have been framed in light of the guidelines laid down by this Court m Vardar Inapt's case decided on 20.10.2000. 4. Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi Advocate, the learned counsel for the petitioners, in his written arguments has contended that the petitioners are lawful owners of the land under the private forest and the revenue department has issued N.O. Cs in their favor. It has been contended that Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government, initially framed rules for regularization of the private forests known as AJ&K Sales and Development of Private Forests Rules, 1984, which were challenged before this court through Constitutional writ petition and the court has directed the government to frame new rules keeping in view the fundamental rights of the subjects of the State enshrined in the Interim Constitution Act, 1974. The learned counsel has contended that Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government framed rules by avoiding the guidelines laid down by this court and enforced the same on 16.10.2001. The learned counsel stated that existing rules have been framed in derogation with the Interim Constitution Act, 1974 and rules 3 and 14 of the said rules are liable to be struck down. It has been stated that under rule 3(1) of the said rules minimum number of the trees above 22" diameter is 18 and the number of thinning trees is 100. Hence, rule 3 of the earlier rules and that of the prevailing rules are same. Similarly, under rule 14 of the existing rules only 2 lac cubic feet timber from conifer trees and 20000 efts from broad leaves trees can be marked, and this restriction is against the fundamental rights of the private forest owners. The learned counsel has ma'am;gained that the owners of the private forests have not been heard before promulgation of the new rules hence the same are liable to be set at naught. Finally the learned counsel has craved for acceptance of the writ petitions, reversal of the impugned rules and a direction to the respondents for framing new rules in consultation, with the private forests owners and referred the following case law: 1. 2005 SCR 236. 2. 1993 PLC (C.S.) 1201. 3. PLD 1998 SC(AJ&K) 17. 4.2003 PLC (C:S.) 1 5. Raja Ahead Ali Khan Advocate, the learned legal Advisor for the forest department has filed written arguments stating therein that the petitioners do not fall within the definition of aggrieved persons, and they have no locus standi to file the above writ petitions. It has been argued that the petitions are hit by latches as the rules under challenge have been enforced in 2001 whereas, the petitions have been filed in 2004. The learned counsel has argued that no constitutional or legal right of the petitioners has been infringed and the rules under challenge have been framed in compliance of the court order as well as keeping in view the guidelines laid down by this court in Vardar Inapt Khan's case. The learned counsel has contended that the number of trees to be marked; either 22" or above diameter or the thinning trees has been reduced from 25 to 18 and 200 to 100 respectively. Referring to rule 14 of the impugned rules the learned counsel has contended that the restriction on sale of the prescribed quantity of the timber has been fixed keeping in view the consequences of the cutting of the trees at a large scale which may cause destruction of the environment as well as the dams. It has been maintained by the learned ‘counsel that the Inter Constitution Act does not contain any restriction regarding promulgation of rules and regulations for regularizing the private businesses hence, the impugned rules are not derogatory to the said Act. Finally, the learned counsel has craved for dismissal of the writ petitions with costs, 6. We have examine4 the written arguments filed by the learned counsel for the parties, perused the record made available with the file and considered the controversy with due care. 7. It may be stated that the rules under challenge have been framed in compliance of the judgment passed by this Court in case titled Vardar Inapt Khan v. Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government and others' Writ Petition No. decided on 20.10.2000. In the earlier rules, the number of trees having 22 inches or more diameter was fixed as 25 and the number of thinning trees, poles was 200. The rules were challenged, and the learned bench seized with the matter, while accepting the petition, directed the respondents, therein, to frame new rules keeping in view the guidelines, laid down therein. 8. Before adverting to the merits of the case we would like to reproduce the relevant excerpts from the repealed rules 1984, rules under challenge, 2001, guidelines and findings returned by this court in the above referred case. "Rules 1984, Rule 3. The sale of the private forest shall be sanctioned by the Government: Provided that 25 trees or more of over 22" diameter at breast height are available under the selection-cum improvement system or 200 poles or more available underthinning, and AKS-LATHA" of the area is available with the Revenue Department. Rule 14. Sale DF wood from private forest Ina year shall not exceed two lac efts. Of conifers and twenty thousand efts; of broad leaved trees in standing volume, through-out Azad Jammu and Kashmir territory. No suit shall he against any Government servant for any loss or any act done by him m good faith; provided it is not done willfully, maliciously, negligently or intentionally to harm the owner or exploitation agency." Rules, 2001 Rule 3. The sale of private forests shall be sanctioned by the Chief Conservator of Forests subject to fulfilling the following conditions but total period consuming and Lodging a request by the applicant till the grant of final sanction to start with marketing the timber shall not exceed one-year period: (i) Eighteen trees or more. Of 22 inches and above diameter at the breast height are available under the selection cum-improvement system or 100 poles (above 8 inches DBH) or more available under thinning, and AKS-LATHA (Field map) of the area is available with the revenue Department. (i) The forest will be worked under selection-cum improvement system with a felling cycle of at least ten years. (i!) For broad leaved trees the concerned DFO will decide its exploitation under silvicultural. (iv) Private Forest trees affected by natural calamities and public projects shall be excluded from the operation of section 3(1) due to unavoidable circumstances. Rule (14). Throughout the territory of Azad Jammu and Kashmir, sale of wood from private forests in a year shall not exceed two lac eft on conifers and twenty thousand efts of broad leaved trees in standing volume. 9. A careful perusal of the files reveals that the rules enforced by the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government have been challenged by the petitioners on the ground that the same have not been framed in light of the guidelines laid down by this Court in Vardar Inapt Khan's case. For convenience, the guidelines, laid down in the above referred case are reproduced, which are as follows:- a) Application may be made to the Chief Conservator Forests; b) The Deputy Commissioner after due inquiry should issue the certificate of undisputed ownership and possession within 3 months; c) The approval by the competent authority may be issued within further 3 months; d) The marking on spot of the trees should not take more than two months. This period may however, extended in the snow fall areas or where there is a war like condition; e) The option should lie with the owner to undertaking the job himself under the supervision of Forests Department; f) Provision should be made for reasonable expenses of the department at the costs of the owner for services of the staff g) Reasonable amount of the royalty should also be paid to the Government; h) Thus, in all cases the total period in starting the marketing of the timber should not extend one year." 10. A perusal of the files also reveals that the moot ports in the controversy are; whether, the rules. Under challenge have been framed according to the guidelines laid down by this Court and whether, the fundamental rights of the petitioners, granted in the Interim Constitution Act, 1974 have been infringed or not? In this regard, we would like to reproduce, the relevant provisions of the Act, which are as follows: Selection Fundamental Rights 8. Freedom of trade, business or profession:- Every State subject possessing such qualifications, if any, as may be prescribed by law in relation to his profession or occupation shall have the right to enter upon any lawful profession or occupation, and to conduct any lawful trade or business. Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall prevent- a) The regulation of any trade or profession by a licensing system; or b) The regulation of trade, commerce or industry in the interest of free competition therein; or (c) The carrying on, by Government or council, or by a corporation controlled by Government or the council, of any trade, business, industry or service, to the exclusion, complete or partial, or other persons. 13. Provision as to property:- Subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the public interest, every State Subject shall have the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property. 14. Protection of Property:- (1) No person shall be deprived of his property save in accordance with law. Explanation: In sub-paragraphs (2) and 'property' shall mean immovable property, or any commercial or industrial undertaking or any interest in any undertaking. 11. This Court is in agreement with the claim of the petitioners that each and every State Subject has an equal right hold, acquire and utilize the property owned by him, but the same is subject to some restrictions, like safeguard of the rights of the other subjects, public interest etc. and nobody can be allowed to carry on his business or utilize his property, according to his wishes Ina free laces manner. An owner of some property or business may run his business or utilize his property keeping in view the rights of the other subjects as well as the public interest; moreover all these rights are subject to reasonable restrictions imposed by law as postulated in supra quoted constitutional provisions. For judging the reasonability of the impugned rules we have scanned the impugned rules as well the pleadings and other record of both the writ petitions. 12. The respondents in their written statement, while referring Rule 14 of the impugned rules, have stated as under:- 13. The controversy relating to violation of fundamental right was resolved by the apex Court of AJ&K in case titled AKLASC and 6 others v. AJ&K Govt, and 8 others [2000 YLR 2911], Relevant observation which reads as under:- "A Notification was issued on 16th May 1997 that the President of Azad Jammu and Kashmir had accorded approval to a decision taken by the Cabinet to impose complete ban on cutting, of trees on commercial basis for a period of three years. It was also notified that no tender will be cited for cutting of trees nor would any contract be awarded. All contracts relating to Forest Department and Azad Jammu Kashmir Logging and Saw Mills Corporation in which work orders had been issued, but actual work had not commenced were cancelled. Seven persons, Gular Ahmed Abbas and others filed a writ petition on 19th June 1997 seeking a declaration that the Notification mentioned above had been issued without lawful authority. Some notices issued to the writ petitioners to stop their respective works were also challenged. They also prayed for a writ of prohibition restraining the respondents, Azad Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Forest Department and AKLAS Corporation from interfering in the execution of their works. The writ petition was accepted on 3rd April 1998 but with certain conditionalities which are unacceptable to the contractors. Two main grounds were urged in the writ petition. The first ground was the impugned Notification was inconsistent with Fundamental Rights No. (FREEDOM OF TRADE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSION}, No. 13 PROVISION AS TO PROPERTY and PROTCTION OF PROPERTY No. 14 The second post was that the Executive did not enjoy the power to issue the Notification because it is only the Legislature which can deprive a person of his property which can be done in accordance with law. The main plank of the arguments was that the impugned Notification had deprived the writ petitioners of the "property" within the meaning of Fundamental Right, No. 14 and was therefore void. "This definition does not say what property is but only lays down that the term property includes, inter alia right or interest in moveable or immovable property and means of production. It is an accepted fact that meaning of property is very wide. It is provided in sub-paragraph (1) of Fundamental Right No. 14 that no person shall be deprived of his property save in accordance with law. The definition of property given at the end of the Fundamental Right is not applicable to sub-paragraph Therefore the extended definition, reproduced above, in section 2 1s applicable. As concluded above, the interests of the contractors were covered by this definition and, therefore, they could not be deprived of it save in accordance with law as authoritatively laid in Kashmir Timber Corporation case." 13(sic). It may be proper to mention that the impugned rules have been framed in the light of earlier judgment of this court recorded in Analyst Khan’s case. It is admitted fact that “the Rules are part of the law as these carry out the purpose of law and regulate the business to be conducted under the law. These have the same force as the law has. The law is not one man business nor is to be made to benefit anyone. The framing and promulgation of the law or rules is a institutional function of a state or Government as the case may be. All the departments which are concerned with the framing of law or rules have to go through the process provided for framing or amending the law and rules as the case may be. While keeping in mind the above principle of law framing process, we have analyzed the impugned provision of rules along with the explanation /reasons furnished by the respondents in their pleadings but have no reason to differ with the view post of respondents, because we are fully cognizant of the environmental requirements of the state in the context of Global Environmental crises which is the most burning issue of whole the world. It may be added that this is the era of environmental protection efforts and law relating thereto. 14. It may further be observed that while examine the reasonability of rules in view of provisions of fundamental right No. 13 of Interim Constitution Act 1974, regarding imposition of "reasonable restrictions" pertaining to right, to acquire hold and dispose of property. We have given our earnest thought to the controversy, and we are of the firmed view that "right to acquire, hold and dispose of property’, can be regulated only through reasonable restrictions imposed by law in public interest. Both validity of law and action taken become justiciable from standpoint of the reasonableness as well as public interest. If restriction to hold properly imposed by law is found reasonable, court would uphold the same. We felt satisfied, that the restrictions imposed are reasonable and not warrant any interference. This view of the Court is also fortified by 2003 CLD 1797, 15. In continuation of the above we have categorically noted that vide clause (1) of the rule 3, the quantity of trees of 22"(twenty-two inches) diameter has been reduced from 25 to 18 as well as the quantity of 200 poles has been reduced to 100 poles. Moreover, omission of clause regarding non-institution of the suit against the Government Servant in Rule 14 are the major changes which is seen collectively, are almost in line with guidelines given in the ibid judgment of this Court. Hence, it may safely be concluded that the restrictions imposed in the impugned’ rules are fully covered under the definition of "reasonable restrictions" which have been imposed in "the public interest" it is further observed that the public interact is the supreme merest. Thus it is concluded that neither violation of any law nor contravention of any constitutional provision or infringement of any fundamental right has been found in the cases in hand. 16. The nub of the above discussion is that both the above captioned writ petitions, having no merits are hereby dismissed, with no order as to costs. Petitions dismissed. WWW

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: From case 2016 PLD 46 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2016-01-05): SARDAR ABDUL HAMMED KHAN, J.- Through the above captioned petitions filed under Section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974, the petitioners seek abrogation of clause of rules 3 and 14 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Sale and Development of Private Forest Rules, 2001, issued vide notification bearing No.F/S/6296- dated 16.10.2001 being against the constitutional provisions and their vested legal rights. 2. Brief and common facts resulting into the filing of the above titled petitions, as per claim of the petitioners are that they are First Class subjects of the State of Azad Jammu and Kashmir and are also owners of the private forests in their native villages. It has been stated that the Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir vide notification bearing No.1051-75 dated 13.03.1984, framed rules for regulating the private forests. These rules were challenged before this Court by filing writ petition. This Court vide judgment dated 20.10.2000 in the case titled Vardar Inapt Khan v. Azad Govt, and others, accepted the petition, nullified the impugned rules and directed the concerned authorities, with certain guidelines to frame new rules. The Azad Government, in compliance of the judgment of this Court, promulgated new rules vide notification dated 16.10.2001. According to the new rules, number of trees was reduced from 25 to 18 for the trees having above 22 inches diameter and 200 to 100 for the thinning trees. A limit of the timber to be sold by the owners of a private forest was also fixed in the above rules. The petitioners have assailed the said rules on the ground that the number of trees 1e 18 or more of 22 or more diameter and 100 thinning trees is against the fundamental rights of the forests owners, enshrined under the Interim Constitution. Condition of sale of the timber has also been challenged on the same ground. 3. The respondents were summoned for filing comments and later on written statement and the needful has been done, accordingly. In the within statement, the claim of the petitioners has been refuted, totally, and it has been stated that the number of trees has been reduced on the direction of the High Court and maximum number has been fixed, in order to declare, a forest as private forest. It is further stated that the forests having lesser number of the trees do not fall m the definition of the private forests and usage of such forests on commercial basis will be harmful not only for the State but also to the forest owners. It has been claimed that if the owners of the forests are allowed to sale out their forests in any way and manner, the same will deteriorate the environment of the area as well as the life of the dams will be reduced due to dumping of soil. The respondents have stated that if the forest owners are allowed to sell their forests without any limit, it will destroy the forests of the State in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: From case 2016 PLD 46 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2016-01-05): will deteriorate the environment of the area as well as the life of the dams will be reduced due to dumping of soil. The respondents have stated that if the forest owners are allowed to sell their forests without any limit, it will destroy the forests of the State in a merciless manner. It is also stated that the rules under challenge have been framed in light of the guidelines laid down by this Court m Vardar Inapt's case decided on 20.10.2000. 4. Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi Advocate, the learned counsel for the petitioners, in his written arguments has contended that the petitioners are lawful owners of the land under the private forest and the revenue department has issued N.O. Cs in their favor. It has been contended that Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government, initially framed rules for regularization of the private forests known as AJ&K Sales and Development of Private Forests Rules, 1984, which were challenged before this court through Constitutional writ petition and the court has directed the government to frame new rules keeping in view the fundamental rights of the subjects of the State enshrined in the Interim Constitution Act, 1974. The learned counsel has contended that Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government framed rules by avoiding the guidelines laid down by this court and enforced the same on 16.10.2001. The learned counsel stated that existing rules have been framed in derogation with the Interim Constitution Act, 1974 and rules 3 and 14 of the said rules are liable to be struck down. It has been stated that under rule 3(1) of the said rules minimum number of the trees above 22" diameter is 18 and the number of thinning trees is 100. Hence, rule 3 of the earlier rules and that of the prevailing rules are same. Similarly, under rule 14 of the existing rules only 2 lac cubic feet timber from conifer trees and 20000 efts from broad leaves trees can be marked, and this restriction is against the fundamental rights of the private forest owners. The learned counsel has ma'am;gained that the owners of the private forests have not been heard before promulgation of the new rules hence the same are liable to be set at naught. Finally the learned counsel has craved for acceptance of the writ petitions, reversal of the impugned rules and a direction to the respondents for framing new rules in consultation, with the private forests owners and referred the following case law: 1. 2005 SCR 236. 2. 1993 PLC (C.S.) 1201. 3. PLD 1998 SC(AJ&K) 17. 4.2003 PLC (C:S.) 1 5. Raja Ahead Ali Khan Advocate, the learned legal Advisor for the forest department has filed written arguments stating therein that the petitioners do not fall within the definition of aggrieved persons, and they have no locus standi to file the above writ petitions. It has been argued that the petitions are hit by latches as the rules under challenge have been enforced in 2001 whereas, the petitions have

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: From case 2016 PLD 46 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2016-01-05): therein that the petitioners do not fall within the definition of aggrieved persons, and they have no locus standi to file the above writ petitions. It has been argued that the petitions are hit by latches as the rules under challenge have been enforced in 2001 whereas, the petitions have been filed in 2004. The learned counsel has argued that no constitutional or legal right of the petitioners has been infringed and the rules under challenge have been framed in compliance of the court order as well as keeping in view the guidelines laid down by this court in Vardar Inapt Khan's case. The learned counsel has contended that the number of trees to be marked; either 22" or above diameter or the thinning trees has been reduced from 25 to 18 and 200 to 100 respectively. Referring to rule 14 of the impugned rules the learned counsel has contended that the restriction on sale of the prescribed quantity of the timber has been fixed keeping in view the consequences of the cutting of the trees at a large scale which may cause destruction of the environment as well as the dams. It has been maintained by the learned ‘counsel that the Inter Constitution Act does not contain any restriction regarding promulgation of rules and regulations for regularizing the private businesses hence, the impugned rules are not derogatory to the said Act. Finally, the learned counsel has craved for dismissal of the writ petitions with costs, 6. We have examine4 the written arguments filed by the learned counsel for the parties, perused the record made available with the file and considered the controversy with due care. 7. It may be stated that the rules under challenge have been framed in compliance of the judgment passed by this Court in case titled Vardar Inapt Khan v. Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government and others' Writ Petition No. decided on 20.10.2000. In the earlier rules, the number of trees having 22 inches or more diameter was fixed as 25 and the number of thinning trees, poles was 200. The rules were challenged, and the learned bench seized with the matter, while accepting the petition, directed the respondents, therein, to frame new rules keeping in view the guidelines, laid down therein. 8. Before adverting to the merits of the case we would like to reproduce the relevant excerpts from the repealed rules 1984, rules under challenge, 2001, guidelines and findings returned by this court in the above referred case. "Rules 1984, Rule 3. The sale of the private forest shall be sanctioned by the Government: Provided that 25 trees or more of over 22" diameter at breast height are available under the selection-cum improvement system or 200 poles or more available underthinning, and AKS-LATHA" of the area is available with the Revenue Department. Rule 14. Sale DF wood from private forest Ina year shall not exceed two lac efts. Of conifers and twenty thousand efts; of broad leaved trees in standing volume, through-out Azad

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: From case 2016 PLD 46 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2016-01-05): system or 200 poles or more available underthinning, and AKS-LATHA" of the area is available with the Revenue Department. Rule 14. Sale DF wood from private forest Ina year shall not exceed two lac efts. Of conifers and twenty thousand efts; of broad leaved trees in standing volume, through-out Azad Jammu and Kashmir territory. No suit shall he against any Government servant for any loss or any act done by him m good faith; provided it is not done willfully, maliciously, negligently or intentionally to harm the owner or exploitation agency." Rules, 2001 Rule 3. The sale of private forests shall be sanctioned by the Chief Conservator of Forests subject to fulfilling the following conditions but total period consuming and Lodging a request by the applicant till the grant of final sanction to start with marketing the timber shall not exceed one-year period: (i) Eighteen trees or more. Of 22 inches and above diameter at the breast height are available under the selection cum-improvement system or 100 poles (above 8 inches DBH) or more available under thinning, and AKS-LATHA (Field map) of the area is available with the revenue Department. (i) The forest will be worked under selection-cum improvement system with a felling cycle of at least ten years. (i!) For broad leaved trees the concerned DFO will decide its exploitation under silvicultural. (iv) Private Forest trees affected by natural calamities and public projects shall be excluded from the operation of section 3(1) due to unavoidable circumstances. Rule (14). Throughout the territory of Azad Jammu and Kashmir, sale of wood from private forests in a year shall not exceed two lac eft on conifers and twenty thousand efts of broad leaved trees in standing volume. 9. A careful perusal of the files reveals that the rules enforced by the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government have been challenged by the petitioners on the ground that the same have not been framed in light of the guidelines laid down by this Court in Vardar Inapt Khan's case. For convenience, the guidelines, laid down in the above referred case are reproduced, which are as follows:- a) Application may be made to the Chief Conservator Forests; b) The Deputy Commissioner after due inquiry should issue the certificate of undisputed ownership and possession within 3 months; c) The approval by the competent authority may be issued within further 3 months; d) The marking on spot of the trees should not take more than two months. This period may however, extended in the snow fall areas or where there is a war like condition; e) The option should lie with the owner to undertaking the job himself under the supervision of Forests Department; f) Provision should be made for reasonable expenses of the department at the costs of the owner for services of the staff g) Reasonable amount of the royalty should also be paid to the Government; h) Thus, in all cases the total period in starting the marketing of the timber should not extend

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: From case 2016 PLD 46 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2016-01-05): be made for reasonable expenses of the department at the costs of the owner for services of the staff g) Reasonable amount of the royalty should also be paid to the Government; h) Thus, in all cases the total period in starting the marketing of the timber should not extend one year." 10. A perusal of the files also reveals that the moot ports in the controversy are; whether, the rules. Under challenge have been framed according to the guidelines laid down by this Court and whether, the fundamental rights of the petitioners, granted in the Interim Constitution Act, 1974 have been infringed or not? In this regard, we would like to reproduce, the relevant provisions of the Act, which are as follows: Selection Fundamental Rights 8. Freedom of trade, business or profession:- Every State subject possessing such qualifications, if any, as may be prescribed by law in relation to his profession or occupation shall have the right to enter upon any lawful profession or occupation, and to conduct any lawful trade or business. Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall prevent- a) The regulation of any trade or profession by a licensing system; or b) The regulation of trade, commerce or industry in the interest of free competition therein; or (c) The carrying on, by Government or council, or by a corporation controlled by Government or the council, of any trade, business, industry or service, to the exclusion, complete or partial, or other persons. 13. Provision as to property:- Subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the public interest, every State Subject shall have the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property. 14. Protection of Property:- (1) No person shall be deprived of his property save in accordance with law. Explanation: In sub-paragraphs (2) and 'property' shall mean immovable property, or any commercial or industrial undertaking or any interest in any undertaking. 11. This Court is in agreement with the claim of the petitioners that each and every State Subject has an equal right hold, acquire and utilize the property owned by him, but the same is subject to some restrictions, like safeguard of the rights of the other subjects, public interest etc. and nobody can be allowed to carry on his business or utilize his property, according to his wishes Ina free laces manner. An owner of some property or business may run his business or utilize his property keeping in view the rights of the other subjects as well as the public interest; moreover all these rights are subject to reasonable restrictions imposed by law as postulated in supra quoted constitutional provisions. For judging the reasonability of the impugned rules we have scanned the impugned rules as well the pleadings and other record of both the writ petitions. 12. The respondents in their written statement, while referring Rule 14 of the impugned rules, have stated as under:- 13. The controversy relating to violation of fundamental right was resolved by the apex Court of AJ&K

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: From case 2016 PLD 46 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2016-01-05): impugned rules as well the pleadings and other record of both the writ petitions. 12. The respondents in their written statement, while referring Rule 14 of the impugned rules, have stated as under:- 13. The controversy relating to violation of fundamental right was resolved by the apex Court of AJ&K in case titled AKLASC and 6 others v. AJ&K Govt, and 8 others [2000 YLR 2911], Relevant observation which reads as under:- "A Notification was issued on 16th May 1997 that the President of Azad Jammu and Kashmir had accorded approval to a decision taken by the Cabinet to impose complete ban on cutting, of trees on commercial basis for a period of three years. It was also notified that no tender will be cited for cutting of trees nor would any contract be awarded. All contracts relating to Forest Department and Azad Jammu Kashmir Logging and Saw Mills Corporation in which work orders had been issued, but actual work had not commenced were cancelled. Seven persons, Gular Ahmed Abbas and others filed a writ petition on 19th June 1997 seeking a declaration that the Notification mentioned above had been issued without lawful authority. Some notices issued to the writ petitioners to stop their respective works were also challenged. They also prayed for a writ of prohibition restraining the respondents, Azad Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Forest Department and AKLAS Corporation from interfering in the execution of their works. The writ petition was accepted on 3rd April 1998 but with certain conditionalities which are unacceptable to the contractors. Two main grounds were urged in the writ petition. The first ground was the impugned Notification was inconsistent with Fundamental Rights No. (FREEDOM OF TRADE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSION}, No. 13 PROVISION AS TO PROPERTY and PROTCTION OF PROPERTY No. 14 The second post was that the Executive did not enjoy the power to issue the Notification because it is only the Legislature which can deprive a person of his property which can be done in accordance with law. The main plank of the arguments was that the impugned Notification had deprived the writ petitioners of the "property" within the meaning of Fundamental Right, No. 14 and was therefore void. "This definition does not say what property is but only lays down that the term property includes, inter alia right or interest in moveable or immovable property and means of production. It is an accepted fact that meaning of property is very wide. It is provided in sub-paragraph (1) of Fundamental Right No. 14 that no person shall be deprived of his property save in accordance with law. The definition of property given at the end of the Fundamental Right is not applicable to sub-paragraph Therefore the extended definition, reproduced above, in section 2 1s applicable. As concluded above, the interests of the contractors were covered by this definition and, therefore, they could not be deprived of it save in accordance with law as authoritatively laid in Kashmir Timber Corporation

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: From case 2016 PLD 46 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2016-01-05): is not applicable to sub-paragraph Therefore the extended definition, reproduced above, in section 2 1s applicable. As concluded above, the interests of the contractors were covered by this definition and, therefore, they could not be deprived of it save in accordance with law as authoritatively laid in Kashmir Timber Corporation case." 13(sic). It may be proper to mention that the impugned rules have been framed in the light of earlier judgment of this court recorded in Analyst Khan’s case. It is admitted fact that “the Rules are part of the law as these carry out the purpose of law and regulate the business to be conducted under the law. These have the same force as the law has. The law is not one man business nor is to be made to benefit anyone. The framing and promulgation of the law or rules is a institutional function of a state or Government as the case may be. All the departments which are concerned with the framing of law or rules have to go through the process provided for framing or amending the law and rules as the case may be. While keeping in mind the above principle of law framing process, we have analyzed the impugned provision of rules along with the explanation /reasons furnished by the respondents in their pleadings but have no reason to differ with the view post of respondents, because we are fully cognizant of the environmental requirements of the state in the context of Global Environmental crises which is the most burning issue of whole the world. It may be added that this is the era of environmental protection efforts and law relating thereto. 14. It may further be observed that while examine the reasonability of rules in view of provisions of fundamental right No. 13 of Interim Constitution Act 1974, regarding imposition of "reasonable restrictions" pertaining to right, to acquire hold and dispose of property. We have given our earnest thought to the controversy, and we are of the firmed view that "right to acquire, hold and dispose of property’, can be regulated only through reasonable restrictions imposed by law in public interest. Both validity of law and action taken become justiciable from standpoint of the reasonableness as well as public interest. If restriction to hold properly imposed by law is found reasonable, court would uphold the same. We felt satisfied, that the restrictions imposed are reasonable and not warrant any interference. This view of the Court is also fortified by 2003 CLD 1797, 15. In continuation of the above we have categorically noted that vide clause (1) of the rule 3, the quantity of trees of 22"(twenty-two inches) diameter has been reduced from 25 to 18 as well as the quantity of 200 poles has been reduced to 100 poles. Moreover, omission of clause regarding non-institution of the suit against the Government Servant in Rule 14 are the major changes which is seen collectively, are almost in line with guidelines given in the ibid

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2016 PLD 46?
Answer: From case 2016 PLD 46 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2016-01-05): to 18 as well as the quantity of 200 poles has been reduced to 100 poles. Moreover, omission of clause regarding non-institution of the suit against the Government Servant in Rule 14 are the major changes which is seen collectively, are almost in line with guidelines given in the ibid judgment of this Court. Hence, it may safely be concluded that the restrictions imposed in the impugned’ rules are fully covered under the definition of "reasonable restrictions" which have been imposed in "the public interest" it is further observed that the public interact is the supreme merest. Thus it is concluded that neither violation of any law nor contravention of any constitutional provision or infringement of any fundamental right has been found in the cases in hand. 16. The nub of the above discussion is that both the above captioned writ petitions, having no merits are hereby dismissed, with no order as to costs. Petitions dismissed. WWW

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 2010-12-06. The case involved EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD THROUGH DEPUTY/ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY, PESHAWAR VERSUS ALI BAHADUR. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (1975) - S. 14 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT, 1975 - SS. 14, 8, 10 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 1877 - S. 42 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PSC/html_txt/PSC_2011_22.html 1/6 28/10/2025, 01:54 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PSC/html_txt/PSC_2011_22.html. The case was heard by MAHMOOD AKHTAR SHAHID SIDDIQUI AND MIAN SAQIB NISAR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (1975) - S. 14 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT, 1975 - SS. 14, 8, 10 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 1877 - S. 42 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PSC/html_txt/PSC_2011_22.html 1/6 28/10/2025, 01:54 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PSC/html_txt/PSC_2011_22.html. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 2010-12-06.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANT: HAFIZ S.A. REHMAN, SR. ASC AND ZAWAR SHAH, PATWARI (ON BEHALF OF DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR, AUQAF, PESHAWAR).FOR THE RESPONDENT: ABDUL SAMAD KHAN ZIADA, ASC/AOR.. The judges presiding were: MAHMOOD AKHTAR SHAHID SIDDIQUI AND MIAN SAQIB NISAR.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD THROUGH DEPUTY/ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY, PESHAWAR VERSUS ALI BAHADUR. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J. - The suit for declaration etc. filed by the respondent-plaintiff against the appellant-defendant, after the contest and trial, was decreed by the learned Civil Judge, Swabia vide judgment and decree dated 3.7.2002 holding that the house in dispute has been validly transferred to the respondent by'the Evacuee Department, and it has not been established by the appellant to be attached to any charitable/religious trust etc. to form part of an evacuee trust property. However, on the crucial objection, raised ‘appellant WIFI had culminated into issue No. it was ostensibly found by the Trial Court having no " jurisdiction in the matter, yet strangely the suit as mentioned earlier was decreed. The appeal of the appellant, which was filed through Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Peshawar, was dismissed by the Additional District Judge on 5.3.2003 while upholding the decision of the Trial Court as a whole, and for an additional reason that the appeal was instituted by an officer, who was not competent to do so: these judgments and decrees have been sustained by the Peshawar High Court through its judgment dated 19.12.2003. Leave to appeal was granted in this case on 26.1.2006 in the following terms:- "Contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the suit filed by the respondent/plaintiff was barred by law as such Civil Court has no jurisdiction to grant the declaration prayed for n view of the bar contained in Section 14 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act XIII of 1975 and such plea was raised before the Trial Court and as such issue was also framed and finding of the suit on Issue No. was to the effect that the Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, yet the suit was decreed and declaration was granted declaring the suit property to be non-evacuee". 2. The brief facts germane for the disposal of the present appeal, are: the house in question measuring about four Marley, situated m village Aida (Swabia) was transferred to the respondent by the Assistant Settlement Commissioner (Lands), Marian through PTO dated 6.10.1967 on the payment of Rs. 1010/-. On the strength of the above, the respondent on 13.6.1996 brought the suit seeking declaration about his exclusive ownership of the house and asserting that the appellant has no right or concern thereto with an additional claim of permanent injunctive relief that the appellant should not meddle, with his ownership and possessory rights qua the suit property. The appellant in its written statement took up the specific objection regarding the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to entertain and try the suit which objection obviously was in terms of Section 14 read with other enabling provisions of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII), 1975 (hereafter referred to as the Act). It may be pertinent to mention here that in the first instance the learned Civil Judge seized of the case vide order dated 3.4.2000, rejected the plaint of the respondent under Order 7, Rule 11, CPC holding that it has no jurisdiction to hear the matter, which (jurisdiction) 1s barred by law. The respondent preferred an appeal which was allowed and by setting aside the order impugned therein, the case was remanded with the direction that such objection should form into an issue and should be decided along with other issues evolved in the matter. Upon trial, the learned Civil Judge on the issue of jurisdiction has come to the conclusion "in the light of above discussion, it is held that this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the mutant suit. [his issue is therefore decided in positive" (emphasis supplied). It may be relevant to mention here that from the reproduced part of the findings of the Trial Court and of the leave granting order, an impression can be gathered that the Civil Judge seized of the matter decided the issue of jurisdiction against the respondent and yet decreed the suit. But upon reading of the specific wordings of issue No. 1e. "whether this Court has no jurisdiction to restrain (sic) the present suit Our view is otherwise, because the discussion on this issue by the Trial Court especially the portion "the objection with respect to bar of jurisdiction under Section 14 TTB, B (sic) Act, 1975 appears to have no force" leads us to form an opinion that the finding is, that the Court has the jurisdiction. Be that as it may, the revisional Court (the High Court) having final say in the matter by relying upon the judgment of this Court reported as Evacuee Trust Property Board through Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board at Mirpur Khas v. Abdul Aziz Khan and 6 others (2000 SCMR 1371) particularly by quoting a portion therefrom Le. Since in Jaw the disputed property had not been treated as evacuee trust property, therefore, the bar of jurisdiction cannot be pressed into service. For the ouster of jurisdiction, the petitioner ought to have proved through cogent evidence that the disputed property was attached to a charitable trust and as such no suit was maintainable in respect thereof” Therefore, on the touchstone of the above and while examining the documentary evidence, produced by the appellant9 the revisional Court came to the conclusion that from none of such documents it is established if either the suit property was declared to be an evacuee trust property by the Chairman or was ever so treated; and/or even e said documents do not relate to the suit property It is therefore, on account of this that the decisions of the two Courts were upheld by dismissing the revision petition of the appellant. Learned counsel for the appellant states that in terms of Section 8 of the Act that it is the exclusive jurisdiction of the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board to adjudge, decide and declare whether any property is an evacuee trust property or not; besides the validation of certain transfers of the properties which are considered to be evacuee trust properties shall also be within the sole and exclusive empowerment of the Chairman and the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts in relation to these powers/questions is expressed barred by the two noted provisions of law. Further by making Reference to Section 14 of the Act, it is submitted that there is an express bar for the exercise of the jurisdiction by the Civil Court in respect of any action which an officer appointed under the Act is empowered determine or to take or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred upon him by or under the Act. In support of submissions, he has also relied upon the cases reported! as Evacuee Trust Property Board and others v. Ahmed and others (2004 SCMR 440), Evacuee Trust Property Board and others v. MST. Sabina Bibi and others (2007 SCMR 262) Sugar Department through Chief Administrator, USAF Punjab, Lahore v. Secretary, Ministry of Religious Zakat, User and Minorities Affairs, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and 3 others (2009 SCMR 210) and Evacuee Trust Property Board v. Sheikh Abdul Attar and another (2009 SCMR 1.223). Whereas, contrary to the above-learned counsel for the respondent, has relied upon 2000 SCMR 1371 (supra) the judgment on which reliance has been placed by the High Court. 4. Heard. From the above-mentioned provisions of the Act and the case-law cited, it is clear that for the actions/orders etc. mentioned in the Section, an express bar has been placed upon the exercise of jurisdiction by the Civil Courts. However, when the facts of the present case are exam med in the light of the evidence brought on the record by the parties particularly the appellant, it has conspicuously emerged that no declaration under Section 8 of the Act assigning the suit property a status of evacuee trust property has been made by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board. Likewise, the validity of the transfer made in favor of the respondent by the evacuee department through the PTO referred to above has not been determined and adjudicated by the Chairman as required under Section 10 of the Act. Obviously, in such a situation the specific bar contemplated by the noted two Sections shall not be attracted. As regards, the general bar of Section 14 is concerned, on the basis of which leave was granted by this Court, it (the Section) reads as under:- Bar of jurisdiction. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Federal Government or an officer apported under this Act is empowered under this Act to determine, and no junction, process or order shall be granted or issued by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Analyzing Section 14 ibid, it is unambiguous that the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts have been barred with respect to any matter... which an officer appointed under the Act is empowered to determine: such jurisdiction is also ousted to grant and issue a junction, process or order MN respect of any action taken or to be taken by such officer in exercise of any power conferred by or under the Act, Briefly the facts to decide the petition are that the pet’t,oner joined F.].A. as Head Constable on 21.9 19*5 Annuity/h Inhale !AME position at Jinnah International 18 ? ?Nor w’ Wh6n h® Was placed under suspension on 30 3 poor,and T S6rVed with chase-sheet dates «nhm2« ° w along,th statement of allegations. The petitioner habited the'S t0 the char9e-sheet in which he denied the allegations levelled against him. The petitioner was new,th show'cause not'ice dated 24.6,2006 along with copy of inquiry. The petitioner did not find favor with the parsed ?Dr f?r his removal from sere passed. His departmental representation did not merit ANV ZZT* /.consequently the petitioner fired Servlet Appeal before the Tribunal within the stipulated time frame. 3. Learned Federal Service Tribunal vide its aroundthaMh 2006 dismissed the APPEAL solely on the ground that though minor penalty was recommended by the Inquiry Officer, the competent authority, after giving show tenant n0,IC? to,he Petitioner indicating the order of major penalty can be passed, rightly passed order of removed from service. for the petition Saeed Khan Thor’r APPAAD"9 5. Learned Advocate for the petitioner vehemently argued that although Moor penalty was propose cl by the Inquiry Officer but the competent authority without providing proper opportunity of harem passed order of removal from service. r her 6. We have gone through the impugned judgment as well as perused the record. From the perusal of the Celled APP-AAISHHAT the petitioner denied all the allegations levelled against him,n the charge-sheet as well as -show- cause notice and the material witnesses were not exam med Butte Fun, conduced also before the Tribunal t the Tribunal passed the impugned order by holding that a competent authority can take different view than townies taken by the Inquiry Officer. There is no cavil to this proposition but since the Tribunal failed to take in consideration other grounds taken by the petitioner, we convert this petition into appeal, allow the same, set aside the impugned judgment and remand the matter to the Tribunal to decide the case of the petitioner afresh after harem the parties. Case remanded

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-06): MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J. - The suit for declaration etc. filed by the respondent-plaintiff against the appellant-defendant, after the contest and trial, was decreed by the learned Civil Judge, Swabia vide judgment and decree dated 3.7.2002 holding that the house in dispute has been validly transferred to the respondent by'the Evacuee Department, and it has not been established by the appellant to be attached to any charitable/religious trust etc. to form part of an evacuee trust property. However, on the crucial objection, raised ‘appellant WIFI had culminated into issue No. it was ostensibly found by the Trial Court having no " jurisdiction in the matter, yet strangely the suit as mentioned earlier was decreed. The appeal of the appellant, which was filed through Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Peshawar, was dismissed by the Additional District Judge on 5.3.2003 while upholding the decision of the Trial Court as a whole, and for an additional reason that the appeal was instituted by an officer, who was not competent to do so: these judgments and decrees have been sustained by the Peshawar High Court through its judgment dated 19.12.2003. Leave to appeal was granted in this case on 26.1.2006 in the following terms:- "Contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the suit filed by the respondent/plaintiff was barred by law as such Civil Court has no jurisdiction to grant the declaration prayed for n view of the bar contained in Section 14 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act XIII of 1975 and such plea was raised before the Trial Court and as such issue was also framed and finding of the suit on Issue No. was to the effect that the Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, yet the suit was decreed and declaration was granted declaring the suit property to be non-evacuee". 2. The brief facts germane for the disposal of the present appeal, are: the house in question measuring about four Marley, situated m village Aida (Swabia) was transferred to the respondent by the Assistant Settlement Commissioner (Lands), Marian through PTO dated 6.10.1967 on the payment of Rs. 1010/-. On the strength of the above, the respondent on 13.6.1996 brought the suit seeking declaration about his exclusive ownership of the house and asserting that the appellant has no right or concern thereto with an additional claim of permanent injunctive relief that the appellant should not meddle, with his ownership and possessory rights qua the suit property. The appellant in its written statement took up the specific objection regarding the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to entertain and try the suit which objection obviously was in terms of Section 14 read with other enabling provisions of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII), 1975 (hereafter referred to as the Act). It may be pertinent to mention here that in the first instance the learned Civil Judge seized of the case vide order dated 3.4.2000, rejected the plaint of the respondent under Order 7,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-06): provisions of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII), 1975 (hereafter referred to as the Act). It may be pertinent to mention here that in the first instance the learned Civil Judge seized of the case vide order dated 3.4.2000, rejected the plaint of the respondent under Order 7, Rule 11, CPC holding that it has no jurisdiction to hear the matter, which (jurisdiction) 1s barred by law. The respondent preferred an appeal which was allowed and by setting aside the order impugned therein, the case was remanded with the direction that such objection should form into an issue and should be decided along with other issues evolved in the matter. Upon trial, the learned Civil Judge on the issue of jurisdiction has come to the conclusion "in the light of above discussion, it is held that this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the mutant suit. [his issue is therefore decided in positive" (emphasis supplied). It may be relevant to mention here that from the reproduced part of the findings of the Trial Court and of the leave granting order, an impression can be gathered that the Civil Judge seized of the matter decided the issue of jurisdiction against the respondent and yet decreed the suit. But upon reading of the specific wordings of issue No. 1e. "whether this Court has no jurisdiction to restrain (sic) the present suit Our view is otherwise, because the discussion on this issue by the Trial Court especially the portion "the objection with respect to bar of jurisdiction under Section 14 TTB, B (sic) Act, 1975 appears to have no force" leads us to form an opinion that the finding is, that the Court has the jurisdiction. Be that as it may, the revisional Court (the High Court) having final say in the matter by relying upon the judgment of this Court reported as Evacuee Trust Property Board through Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board at Mirpur Khas v. Abdul Aziz Khan and 6 others (2000 SCMR 1371) particularly by quoting a portion therefrom Le. Since in Jaw the disputed property had not been treated as evacuee trust property, therefore, the bar of jurisdiction cannot be pressed into service. For the ouster of jurisdiction, the petitioner ought to have proved through cogent evidence that the disputed property was attached to a charitable trust and as such no suit was maintainable in respect thereof” Therefore, on the touchstone of the above and while examining the documentary evidence, produced by the appellant9 the revisional Court came to the conclusion that from none of such documents it is established if either the suit property was declared to be an evacuee trust property by the Chairman or was ever so treated; and/or even e said documents do not relate to the suit property It is therefore, on account of this that the decisions of the two Courts were upheld by dismissing the revision petition of the appellant. Learned counsel for the appellant states that in terms

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-06): or was ever so treated; and/or even e said documents do not relate to the suit property It is therefore, on account of this that the decisions of the two Courts were upheld by dismissing the revision petition of the appellant. Learned counsel for the appellant states that in terms of Section 8 of the Act that it is the exclusive jurisdiction of the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board to adjudge, decide and declare whether any property is an evacuee trust property or not; besides the validation of certain transfers of the properties which are considered to be evacuee trust properties shall also be within the sole and exclusive empowerment of the Chairman and the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts in relation to these powers/questions is expressed barred by the two noted provisions of law. Further by making Reference to Section 14 of the Act, it is submitted that there is an express bar for the exercise of the jurisdiction by the Civil Court in respect of any action which an officer appointed under the Act is empowered determine or to take or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred upon him by or under the Act. In support of submissions, he has also relied upon the cases reported! as Evacuee Trust Property Board and others v. Ahmed and others (2004 SCMR 440), Evacuee Trust Property Board and others v. MST. Sabina Bibi and others (2007 SCMR 262) Sugar Department through Chief Administrator, USAF Punjab, Lahore v. Secretary, Ministry of Religious Zakat, User and Minorities Affairs, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and 3 others (2009 SCMR 210) and Evacuee Trust Property Board v. Sheikh Abdul Attar and another (2009 SCMR 1.223). Whereas, contrary to the above-learned counsel for the respondent, has relied upon 2000 SCMR 1371 (supra) the judgment on which reliance has been placed by the High Court. 4. Heard. From the above-mentioned provisions of the Act and the case-law cited, it is clear that for the actions/orders etc. mentioned in the Section, an express bar has been placed upon the exercise of jurisdiction by the Civil Courts. However, when the facts of the present case are exam med in the light of the evidence brought on the record by the parties particularly the appellant, it has conspicuously emerged that no declaration under Section 8 of the Act assigning the suit property a status of evacuee trust property has been made by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board. Likewise, the validity of the transfer made in favor of the respondent by the evacuee department through the PTO referred to above has not been determined and adjudicated by the Chairman as required under Section 10 of the Act. Obviously, in such a situation the specific bar contemplated by the noted two Sections shall not be attracted. As regards, the general bar of Section 14 is concerned, on the basis of which leave was granted by this Court, it (the Section) reads as under:- Bar of jurisdiction. Save as otherwise

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-06): in such a situation the specific bar contemplated by the noted two Sections shall not be attracted. As regards, the general bar of Section 14 is concerned, on the basis of which leave was granted by this Court, it (the Section) reads as under:- Bar of jurisdiction. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Federal Government or an officer apported under this Act is empowered under this Act to determine, and no junction, process or order shall be granted or issued by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Analyzing Section 14 ibid, it is unambiguous that the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts have been barred with respect to any matter... which an officer appointed under the Act is empowered to determine: such jurisdiction is also ousted to grant and issue a junction, process or order MN respect of any action taken or to be taken by such officer in exercise of any power conferred by or under the Act, Briefly the facts to decide the petition are that the pet’t,oner joined F.].A. as Head Constable on 21.9 19*5 Annuity/h Inhale !AME position at Jinnah International 18 ? ?Nor w’ Wh6n h® Was placed under suspension on 30 3 poor,and T S6rVed with chase-sheet dates «nhm2« ° w along,th statement of allegations. The petitioner habited the'S t0 the char9e-sheet in which he denied the allegations levelled against him. The petitioner was new,th show'cause not'ice dated 24.6,2006 along with copy of inquiry. The petitioner did not find favor with the parsed ?Dr f?r his removal from sere passed. His departmental representation did not merit ANV ZZT* /.consequently the petitioner fired Servlet Appeal before the Tribunal within the stipulated time frame. 3. Learned Federal Service Tribunal vide its aroundthaMh 2006 dismissed the APPEAL solely on the ground that though minor penalty was recommended by the Inquiry Officer, the competent authority, after giving show tenant n0,IC? to,he Petitioner indicating the order of major penalty can be passed, rightly passed order of removed from service. for the petition Saeed Khan Thor’r APPAAD"9 5. Learned Advocate for the petitioner vehemently argued that although Moor penalty was propose cl by the Inquiry Officer but the competent authority without providing proper opportunity of harem passed order of removal from service. r her 6. We have gone through the impugned judgment as well as perused the record. From the perusal of the Celled APP-AAISHHAT the petitioner denied all the allegations levelled against him,n the charge-sheet as well as -show- cause notice and the material witnesses were not exam med Butte Fun, conduced also before the Tribunal t the Tribunal passed the impugned order by holding that a competent authority can take different view than townies taken by the Inquiry Officer. There is no cavil to this proposition but since the Tribunal failed to take in consideration other

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-06): exam med Butte Fun, conduced also before the Tribunal t the Tribunal passed the impugned order by holding that a competent authority can take different view than townies taken by the Inquiry Officer. There is no cavil to this proposition but since the Tribunal failed to take in consideration other grounds taken by the petitioner, we convert this petition into appeal, allow the same, set aside the impugned judgment and remand the matter to the Tribunal to decide the case of the petitioner afresh after harem the parties. Case remanded

Question: What is case 2011 PLD 17 about?
Answer: Case 2011 PLD 17 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ K) on 2011-03-25. The case involved MUHAMMAD ANAYAT KHAN PETITIONER VERSUS ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE, POONCH, RAWALAKOT AJ&K AND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR RENT RESTRICTION ACT (XIII OF 1986) - SS. 4, 14 AND 18 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR RENT RESTRICTION ACT (XIII OF 1986) - SS. AND 14. The case was heard by GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL, CJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2011 PLD 17?
Answer: In case 2011 PLD 17, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR RENT RESTRICTION ACT (XIII OF 1986) - SS. 4, 14 AND 18 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S.44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR RENT RESTRICTION ACT (XIII OF 1986) - SS. AND 14. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ K) and decided on 2011-03-25.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2011 PLD 17?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2011 PLD 17 were: BARRISTER HUMAYUN NAWAZ KHAN FOR PETITIONER. M.HANIF MINHAS FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL, CJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2011 PLD 17?
Answer: The parties in case 2011 PLD 17 were: MUHAMMAD ANAYAT KHAN PETITIONER VERSUS ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE, POONCH, RAWALAKOT AJ&K AND ANOTHER— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ K).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2011 PLD 17.
Answer: GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL, C J. ---Through this petition filed under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974 judgment and order passed by Additional District Judge, Pooch, respondent No.1 harm, on 15-52010 has been challenged for having been passed without lawful authority. Brief facts of the case are that respondent No.2, harm, rented out his shops situated at Supply Bazaar Rawalakot in 1985-86 to the petitioner herein, who filed an application under section of the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 before the Rent Controller, Rawalakot on 29-4-2000 for determination of fair rent of the shops. After 3 weeks respondent No.2 herein, also filed an application in the same Court for ejectment of the petitioner from the said shops on the ground that respondent No. herein, without prior consent of the petitioner has sublet the shops and the same are required to him for his personal use. After receiving objections from the parties, the applications were consolidated and issues were framed. The parties were allowed an opportunity for leading evidence in support of their respective petitions. At the conclusion of the proceedings, the learned Senior Civil Judge/Rent Controller, Ravbialakot vide his judgment and order dated 28-10-2009 accepted the application for ejectment and disposed of the other application. An appeal was filed before the Appellate Authority, which, was dismissed Vide judgment dated 15-5- 2010. The order passed by the Appellate Authority has been challenged on the ground that respondent No. herein, has not been designated as Appellate Authority under the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986, hence, has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the appeals against the judgments of the Rent Controller, thus, the order passed by him in the mutant case is without jurisdictional competence and is a nullity in the eye of law. It was further alleged that respondent No. has earlier expressed himself while deciding an application for interim relief on 25-8-2006, therefore, by deciding this appeal he has acted as Judge in his own cause hence, the judgment is violative of the principle of natural justice. It is further stated that the question of default has not been attended by respondent No.1 in light of the record and the evidence has also not been appreciated properly and the conclusion drawn from the evidence is erroneous, illegal and violative of the settled principle of law. Respondent No.1 has been proceeded ex parte whereas respondent No.2 in his comments/written statement has refuted the stand taken in the petition and pleaded that the petitioner is defaulter since, 2004 and has also sublet the shops without prior consent of the respondent, hence, the Rent Controller as well as the Additional District Judge has rightly disposed of the controversy on the basis of the evidence brought on the record. It is further alleged that both the orders are based on evidence which was properly appreciated, hence, the decision is immune from interference in writ jurisdiction. Barrister Humayun Nawab Khan, the learned Advocate for the petitioner inter alia contended that the application for ejectment filed on behalf of respondent No.2 herein, was male FIDE because the same has been filed after 3 weeks of filing the application by the petitioner harm, for determination of the wait rent under section of the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986. He argued that the order passed by the Rent Controller as well as the Appellate Authority is illegal because neither the Rent Controller nor the Appellate Authority has disposed of the application for determination of the fair rent. He further argued that the judgment passed by the Additional District Judge is coral non juice because he was not designated as appellate Authority under the provisions contained in the AJ&K. Rent Restriction Act, 1986. The learned Advocate submitted that even otherwise, the learned Additional District Judge cannot act as Judge in his own cause because earlier he has disposed of an application regarding the term relief vide his order dated 25-8- 2006, therefore, he cannot hear the appeal. The learned Advocate contended that even the respondent has not proved that the shops were required to him for establishing his own business rather he wants to rent out the same to some other person. In support of his submission the learned Advocate placed reliance on PLD 1965 SC 459, PLD 1983 SC (AJ&K) 204 and 1997. CLC 1830. Mr. Muhammad Han if Min has, the learned Advocate for the respondents contended that the Rent Controller as well as the Appellate. Authority is a Special Tribunal constituted and appointed under the special law and its findings are based on evidence, which cannot be disturbed in writ jurisdiction. He further contended that no misreading or non -reading of evidence has been pointed out by the learned Advocate for the petitioner, therefore, the petition cannot be entertained for appraisal or reappraisal of the question of facts. He argued that the appeal was made over to the Additional District Judge, who is designated Authority by virtue of the provisions contained in the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 and the petitioner has appeared before the said authority without any objection and protest and after its decision against him, he cannot take an inconsistent position. The learned Advocate further contended that the authorities referred to by the learned Advocate for the petitioner have no relevancy so far the facts and legal position of the case m hand is concerned. The learned Advocate submitted that a special remedy is provided by the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 and the petitioner is litigating from 29-4-2006. He argued that in an earlier round of litigation the matter was disposed of on appeal of the petitioner herein, by the same Additional District Judge, hence, after receiving benefit from the Omni he cannot blow both, hot and cold in the same threat. I have heard the learned Advocates for the parties and gone through the record of the case. So far as the contention of Barrister Human Nawab Khan, the learned Advocate for the petitioner that Additional District Judge was not vested with the authority to Harland dispose of the appeal against the order passed by the Rent Controller is concerned the same is devoid of any force and the authority relied upon by him m this regard is also not applicable. Under section 15(1) of the West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction Ordinance, 1959 (Ordinance, VI of 1959) the Government has to confer the power of Appellate Authority by a notification on any District Judge for the purpose of that Ordinance, therefore, without any formal notification or designation of the Appellate Authority the District Judge was rightly held incompetent to hear the appeals as a principal Civil Court of the District. In case in hand, section 18 of the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 is attracted which reads as under: "Appeal--(I) Any party aggrieved by an order of the Controller finally disposing of an application made under this Act may within thirty days of the date of such order, prefer an appeal in writing to the District Judge having jurisdiction over the area where the building or rented land m relation to which the order is passed, is situated: Provided that no appeal shall lie against an order made by a Controller under subsection (6) of S.14 determine approximately the amount of rent due or the rate of rent and directing the tenant to deposit all the rent due: Provided further that no appeal shall be from a interlocutory order passed by the Controller. (2) On such appeal being preferred, the District Judge may hear it himself or refer it for disposal to an Additional District Judge having jurisdiction over the area where the building or rented land in relation to which the order is passed, is situated. (3) The District Judge may recall an appeal made over by him to an Additional District Judge and either hear it himself or refer it for disposal of another Additional District Judge having jurisdiction as provided in subsection Section 18 reproduced hereinabove, provides a complete scheme for hearing and disposal of appeals by conferring powers on the District Judges and Additional District Judges, therefore; no notification in this regard is required. The Act itself has appointed District Judges as Appellate Authority having jurisdiction over the area where building or rented property relation to which the order is passed is situated. Under subsection (2) reproduced hereinabove, the'appeal can be heard toy the District Judge himself, or he can refer it for disposal to an Additional District Judge. The only embargo is that the Additional District Judge to whom appeal is entrusted should have jurisdiction over the subject - matter of dispute 1e. building or rented land should be situated in its respective jurisdiction and the appeal should have been entrusted to such Additional District Judge. This provision is enacted MN IME with section 24 of the C.P.C, which empowers the District Judge to make over any suit and case and recall the same for harem and disposal of the same by himself and again refer the same for disposal to any other Court of competent jurisdiction. In this case, as is evident from the order under challenge, the appeal was filed before the learned District Judge who made over the same to the learned Additional District Judge for disposal. The other authority relied upon by Barrister Humayun Nawab Khan, the learned Advocate for the petitioner is also not attracted in the present case. In that case the revisional jurisdiction was exercised by this Court against an order passed by the Rent Controller. The apex Court observed that as the Rent Controller as well as the Appellate Authority is special forum, created under the Rent Restriction Act and the Civil Procedure Code is not applicable to the proceedings before the Rent Controller, therefore, High Court was not vested with supervisory or revisional jurisdiction to enter tam the revision or revise the judgment/order passed by the Rent Controller or an Appellate Authority. In Khalid RAAF Mr's case [1997 CLC 1830] the apex Court observed that fan order of Special Tribunal or forum is passed on no evidence, or it suffers from a patent mistake or the order has not been passed keeping in view the relevant provisions of law, that is open to review in constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court. It was further observed that a bare statement of the landlord to the effect that he needed shops for running his own business did not prove the requirements of law. In the circumstances of the present case, I am of the view that there is no need to revisit the evidence produced by the parties in support of their respective stands because the Rent Controller who has rejected the application filed on behalf of M. Analyst Khan and granted the application of Vardar M. Altar} respondent No.2 herein, has not been pleaded in IME of the respondents. Though, the order has been merged in the order of Additional District Judge, but the fact remains that an authority or public functionary, who has passed the order against a person, is necessary party and MN absence Whereof no-writ can be issued. In a case titled. Lt. (R) Muhammad Shabbir and 6 other's case [2003 YLR 346] the petition was dismissed on the ground that the SDM, who made the original report regarding the shifting of the School after visiting the spot MN pursuance Of which Government notifications issued, was not imp leaded in line of the respondents. A further reference can be made to Mira Law Hussein v. Custodian and others (1992 SCR 214), Muhammad Ashraf v. Azad Government and others (PLD 1985 SC (AJK) 102) and Muhammad Gresham Khan v. Chairman Inspection Team and others 1990 SC 1355(sic). The contention of the learned Advocate for the petitioner that the application of the petitioner for determination of the fair rent has not been disposed of is also misconceived because a consolidated order has been passed on both the applications and mere Missing some words from a judicial order, which is otherwise liable to be maintained, does not persuade me to remand the case for fresh decision. In view of above, finding no substance, this petition is dismissed. Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 17?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 17 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2011-03-25): GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL, C J. ---Through this petition filed under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974 judgment and order passed by Additional District Judge, Pooch, respondent No.1 harm, on 15-52010 has been challenged for having been passed without lawful authority. Brief facts of the case are that respondent No.2, harm, rented out his shops situated at Supply Bazaar Rawalakot in 1985-86 to the petitioner herein, who filed an application under section of the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 before the Rent Controller, Rawalakot on 29-4-2000 for determination of fair rent of the shops. After 3 weeks respondent No.2 herein, also filed an application in the same Court for ejectment of the petitioner from the said shops on the ground that respondent No. herein, without prior consent of the petitioner has sublet the shops and the same are required to him for his personal use. After receiving objections from the parties, the applications were consolidated and issues were framed. The parties were allowed an opportunity for leading evidence in support of their respective petitions. At the conclusion of the proceedings, the learned Senior Civil Judge/Rent Controller, Ravbialakot vide his judgment and order dated 28-10-2009 accepted the application for ejectment and disposed of the other application. An appeal was filed before the Appellate Authority, which, was dismissed Vide judgment dated 15-5- 2010. The order passed by the Appellate Authority has been challenged on the ground that respondent No. herein, has not been designated as Appellate Authority under the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986, hence, has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the appeals against the judgments of the Rent Controller, thus, the order passed by him in the mutant case is without jurisdictional competence and is a nullity in the eye of law. It was further alleged that respondent No. has earlier expressed himself while deciding an application for interim relief on 25-8-2006, therefore, by deciding this appeal he has acted as Judge in his own cause hence, the judgment is violative of the principle of natural justice. It is further stated that the question of default has not been attended by respondent No.1 in light of the record and the evidence has also not been appreciated properly and the conclusion drawn from the evidence is erroneous, illegal and violative of the settled principle of law. Respondent No.1 has been proceeded ex parte whereas respondent No.2 in his comments/written statement has refuted the stand taken in the petition and pleaded that the petitioner is defaulter since, 2004 and has also sublet the shops without prior consent of the respondent, hence, the Rent Controller as well as the Additional District Judge has rightly disposed of the controversy on the basis of the evidence brought on the record. It is further alleged that both the orders are based on evidence which was properly appreciated, hence, the decision is immune from interference in writ jurisdiction. Barrister Humayun Nawab Khan, the learned Advocate for the petitioner inter alia contended that

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 17?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 17 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2011-03-25): on the basis of the evidence brought on the record. It is further alleged that both the orders are based on evidence which was properly appreciated, hence, the decision is immune from interference in writ jurisdiction. Barrister Humayun Nawab Khan, the learned Advocate for the petitioner inter alia contended that the application for ejectment filed on behalf of respondent No.2 herein, was male FIDE because the same has been filed after 3 weeks of filing the application by the petitioner harm, for determination of the wait rent under section of the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986. He argued that the order passed by the Rent Controller as well as the Appellate Authority is illegal because neither the Rent Controller nor the Appellate Authority has disposed of the application for determination of the fair rent. He further argued that the judgment passed by the Additional District Judge is coral non juice because he was not designated as appellate Authority under the provisions contained in the AJ&K. Rent Restriction Act, 1986. The learned Advocate submitted that even otherwise, the learned Additional District Judge cannot act as Judge in his own cause because earlier he has disposed of an application regarding the term relief vide his order dated 25-8- 2006, therefore, he cannot hear the appeal. The learned Advocate contended that even the respondent has not proved that the shops were required to him for establishing his own business rather he wants to rent out the same to some other person. In support of his submission the learned Advocate placed reliance on PLD 1965 SC 459, PLD 1983 SC (AJ&K) 204 and 1997. CLC 1830. Mr. Muhammad Han if Min has, the learned Advocate for the respondents contended that the Rent Controller as well as the Appellate. Authority is a Special Tribunal constituted and appointed under the special law and its findings are based on evidence, which cannot be disturbed in writ jurisdiction. He further contended that no misreading or non -reading of evidence has been pointed out by the learned Advocate for the petitioner, therefore, the petition cannot be entertained for appraisal or reappraisal of the question of facts. He argued that the appeal was made over to the Additional District Judge, who is designated Authority by virtue of the provisions contained in the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 and the petitioner has appeared before the said authority without any objection and protest and after its decision against him, he cannot take an inconsistent position. The learned Advocate further contended that the authorities referred to by the learned Advocate for the petitioner have no relevancy so far the facts and legal position of the case m hand is concerned. The learned Advocate submitted that a special remedy is provided by the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 and the petitioner is litigating from 29-4-2006. He argued that in an earlier round of litigation the matter was disposed of on appeal of the petitioner herein, by the same Additional District Judge, hence, after receiving

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 17?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 17 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2011-03-25): submitted that a special remedy is provided by the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 and the petitioner is litigating from 29-4-2006. He argued that in an earlier round of litigation the matter was disposed of on appeal of the petitioner herein, by the same Additional District Judge, hence, after receiving benefit from the Omni he cannot blow both, hot and cold in the same threat. I have heard the learned Advocates for the parties and gone through the record of the case. So far as the contention of Barrister Human Nawab Khan, the learned Advocate for the petitioner that Additional District Judge was not vested with the authority to Harland dispose of the appeal against the order passed by the Rent Controller is concerned the same is devoid of any force and the authority relied upon by him m this regard is also not applicable. Under section 15(1) of the West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction Ordinance, 1959 (Ordinance, VI of 1959) the Government has to confer the power of Appellate Authority by a notification on any District Judge for the purpose of that Ordinance, therefore, without any formal notification or designation of the Appellate Authority the District Judge was rightly held incompetent to hear the appeals as a principal Civil Court of the District. In case in hand, section 18 of the AJ&K Rent Restriction Act, 1986 is attracted which reads as under: "Appeal--(I) Any party aggrieved by an order of the Controller finally disposing of an application made under this Act may within thirty days of the date of such order, prefer an appeal in writing to the District Judge having jurisdiction over the area where the building or rented land m relation to which the order is passed, is situated: Provided that no appeal shall lie against an order made by a Controller under subsection (6) of S.14 determine approximately the amount of rent due or the rate of rent and directing the tenant to deposit all the rent due: Provided further that no appeal shall be from a interlocutory order passed by the Controller. (2) On such appeal being preferred, the District Judge may hear it himself or refer it for disposal to an Additional District Judge having jurisdiction over the area where the building or rented land in relation to which the order is passed, is situated. (3) The District Judge may recall an appeal made over by him to an Additional District Judge and either hear it himself or refer it for disposal of another Additional District Judge having jurisdiction as provided in subsection Section 18 reproduced hereinabove, provides a complete scheme for hearing and disposal of appeals by conferring powers on the District Judges and Additional District Judges, therefore; no notification in this regard is required. The Act itself has appointed District Judges as Appellate Authority having jurisdiction over the area where building or rented property relation to which the order is passed is situated. Under subsection (2) reproduced hereinabove, the'appeal can be heard

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 17?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 17 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2011-03-25): and Additional District Judges, therefore; no notification in this regard is required. The Act itself has appointed District Judges as Appellate Authority having jurisdiction over the area where building or rented property relation to which the order is passed is situated. Under subsection (2) reproduced hereinabove, the'appeal can be heard toy the District Judge himself, or he can refer it for disposal to an Additional District Judge. The only embargo is that the Additional District Judge to whom appeal is entrusted should have jurisdiction over the subject - matter of dispute 1e. building or rented land should be situated in its respective jurisdiction and the appeal should have been entrusted to such Additional District Judge. This provision is enacted MN IME with section 24 of the C.P.C, which empowers the District Judge to make over any suit and case and recall the same for harem and disposal of the same by himself and again refer the same for disposal to any other Court of competent jurisdiction. In this case, as is evident from the order under challenge, the appeal was filed before the learned District Judge who made over the same to the learned Additional District Judge for disposal. The other authority relied upon by Barrister Humayun Nawab Khan, the learned Advocate for the petitioner is also not attracted in the present case. In that case the revisional jurisdiction was exercised by this Court against an order passed by the Rent Controller. The apex Court observed that as the Rent Controller as well as the Appellate Authority is special forum, created under the Rent Restriction Act and the Civil Procedure Code is not applicable to the proceedings before the Rent Controller, therefore, High Court was not vested with supervisory or revisional jurisdiction to enter tam the revision or revise the judgment/order passed by the Rent Controller or an Appellate Authority. In Khalid RAAF Mr's case [1997 CLC 1830] the apex Court observed that fan order of Special Tribunal or forum is passed on no evidence, or it suffers from a patent mistake or the order has not been passed keeping in view the relevant provisions of law, that is open to review in constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court. It was further observed that a bare statement of the landlord to the effect that he needed shops for running his own business did not prove the requirements of law. In the circumstances of the present case, I am of the view that there is no need to revisit the evidence produced by the parties in support of their respective stands because the Rent Controller who has rejected the application filed on behalf of M. Analyst Khan and granted the application of Vardar M. Altar} respondent No.2 herein, has not been pleaded in IME of the respondents. Though, the order has been merged in the order of Additional District Judge, but the fact remains that an authority or public functionary, who has passed the order against a person, is necessary party

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 17?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 17 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2011-03-25): of Vardar M. Altar} respondent No.2 herein, has not been pleaded in IME of the respondents. Though, the order has been merged in the order of Additional District Judge, but the fact remains that an authority or public functionary, who has passed the order against a person, is necessary party and MN absence Whereof no-writ can be issued. In a case titled. Lt. (R) Muhammad Shabbir and 6 other's case [2003 YLR 346] the petition was dismissed on the ground that the SDM, who made the original report regarding the shifting of the School after visiting the spot MN pursuance Of which Government notifications issued, was not imp leaded in line of the respondents. A further reference can be made to Mira Law Hussein v. Custodian and others (1992 SCR 214), Muhammad Ashraf v. Azad Government and others (PLD 1985 SC (AJK) 102) and Muhammad Gresham Khan v. Chairman Inspection Team and others 1990 SC 1355(sic). The contention of the learned Advocate for the petitioner that the application of the petitioner for determination of the fair rent has not been disposed of is also misconceived because a consolidated order has been passed on both the applications and mere Missing some words from a judicial order, which is otherwise liable to be maintained, does not persuade me to remand the case for fresh decision. In view of above, finding no substance, this petition is dismissed. Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 2011 PLD 296 about?
Answer: Case 2011 PLD 296 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 2010-12-21. The case involved HAFIZ TASSADUQ HUSSAIN APPELLANT VERSUS LAL KHATOON AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S. 27(B) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN - ARTICLE 285(3) QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) - ARTICLE 117, 118, 119 AND 120 GENERAL CLAUSES ACT (X OF 1897) - S.3(20) QANUN-E- SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) - ARTICLES 132 AND 133 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2011_296.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 01:55 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PLD/htm|_txt/PLD_2011_296.htm!. The case was heard by MAHMOOD AKHTAR SHAHID SIDDIQUI AND MIAN SAQIB NISAR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: In case 2011 PLD 296, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S. 27(B) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN - ARTICLE 285(3) QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) - ARTICLE 117, 118, 119 AND 120 GENERAL CLAUSES ACT (X OF 1897) - S.3(20) QANUN-E- SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) - ARTICLES 132 AND 133 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2011_296.html 1/9 28/10/2025, 01:55 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PLD/htm|_txt/PLD_2011_296.htm!. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 2010-12-21.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2011 PLD 296 were: TALIB H. RIZVI, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND C.M. LATIF, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR APPELLANT. MIAN MUDDASAR BODLA, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND CH. M. ANWAR KHAN, ADVOCATE- ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. 1-6, AND 9. RESPONDENTS 7, 10: EX PARTE.. The judges presiding were: MAHMOOD AKHTAR SHAHID SIDDIQUI AND MIAN SAQIB NISAR.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: The parties in case 2011 PLD 296 were: HAFIZ TASSADUQ HUSSAIN APPELLANT VERSUS LAL KHATOON AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2011 PLD 296.
Answer: MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J.--The present appeal has its genesis in a suit for the specific performance filed by the appellant/plaintiff originally against Muhammad Din seeking enforcement of an agreement to sell dated 17-2-1986, whereby the latter statedly agreed to sell the suit property to him. During the pendency of the suit the plaintiff got imp leaded respondents Nos.2 to 9 as the defendants, being the subsequent vendees of the suit land vide nutation dated 24-8-1987. The defendants, so arrayed in their written statement, set out the defense under section 27(b) of Specific Relief Act 1877, BMG the bona fide purchasers of the land; however the original defendant as had denied the execution of the agreement to sell and parties were also discordant about the description of the property; therefore, inter alia three important issues 1.e. (1) about the execution of the agreement, (iv) qua the description of the property and (vi) and about the bona fide purchase of the said defendants were framed. The learned trial Court after recording of the evidence, by returning its finding in favor of the plaintiff on Issue No.(1) and deciding the other two issues against the defendants, passed the decree for specific performance dated 12-10- 2000. The said judgment and decree was challenged by the subsequent vendees, in appeal which was accepted by reversing the findings only to their extent being the bona fide purchasers, while the finding of the trial Court on other two issues were affirmed, with the result that the suit was dismissed through the judgment and decree dated 12-10-2000. The appellant challenged this verdict in a civil revision before the Lahore High Court, but without any success. It has been held: - "the learned appellate court Lias rightly held that after the testimony of die respondents witnesses asserting that they were unaware of the existence of the aforesaid agreement, the onus shifted on to the petitioner/plaintiff to prove through affirmative evidence that the respondents/defendants had knowledge of the said agreement and as such, they were not bona fide purchaser. There can be no cavil with this well-established Legal principle. (4) I have myself gone through, the evidence of the witnesses produced by the petitioner/plaintiff and find that there is no evidence to establish that the respondent/defendants had notice of the agreement Ex.P.1. in the circumstances, the impugned appellate decree is not open to exception. Leave in this case was granted on 1-1-2009 to consider if the view set out by the appellate and revisional Courts is in consonance with the law laid down by this Court regarding the above proposition. 3. Learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon the following judgments: Raoul Baths Nacli v. Syed Raoul Baths Shah (2010 SCMR 988), M. Din v. MST. Sabina Bibi (2003 SCMR 956), MST. Surra ya Begum and others v. MST. Rubati Begum (1992 SCMR 652), M. Ashraf v. Ali Haman (1992 SCMR 1942), MST. There-ul-Nisa v: Malik M. Ishfaque (PLD 1972 SC 25), Heidi Abdul Regina and others v. Noa Ahmed and others (PLD 1974- Baghdad-UL-Jadid 25), M. Shall v. M. Salwar (1997 CLC 1231), Kathiawar v. Shah Muhammad (1984 CLC 22), M. Yousaf Issue v. Abdul Majid Khan and others (1984 CLC 243) and Malik M. Issue and others v. Mira Adam Ali Beige and others (PLD 1969 L,ah 762) to argue that the subsequent Vendée asserting to be a bona fide purchaser having no knowledge/notice of the prior agreement to sell, is required to lead affirmative evidence to that effect; such essential evidence according to learned counsel however is conspicuously missing in this case, therefore the view of the two Courts holding that the respondents are protected by the said equitable rule is against the settled law. 4. Heard. The principles regarding the burden (onus) of proof, particularly in the civil litigation are elucidated by the provisions of Articles 117 to 120 of the QAnon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, which for the facility of reference are reproduced as below:- "117. Burden of proof-(1) Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or ability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist. (2) When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person. 118. On whom burden of proof lies.--The burden of proofing a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail info evidence at all were given on either side. 119. Burden of proof as to particular fact.--The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person. 120. Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible.--The burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on the person who wishes to give such evidence. From the analysis and collective reading of the above provisions, it is manifest and unambiguously clear that in a dispute between the parties in a civil litigation, the resolution whereof is dependant upon the existence of certain facts which are not self-evident, and a party to the is wants the Court to believe about the existence of those and seek verdict in his favor, the onus to prove shall be on the shoulder of such litigant who asserts the existence of the fact. In the cases pertain and relating to the protection under section 27(b) of the Specific Reef Act, 1877, undoubtedly, it is the subsequent Vendée who asserts and avows in the defense that his case falls within the purview and parameter of the noted section Le. he is a transferee for value; the money (consideration) has been paid in good faith; and that he had no notice of the original (earlier) contract between the plaintiff and the vendor. In other words that lie is a Bona tide purchaser without notice. Obviously the existence of the facts aforementioned and the ascertainment thereof is an issue between the parties which requires resolution from the Court. It is therefore in such like cases by applying the rules regarding burden of proof as emerging from the noted Articles, especially 117 and 118, the initial onus to prove the same is on the shoulder of the subsequent Vendée. It may be pertinent to post out that in civil disputes the onus to prove a fact however does not remain constant or stagnant, thus once the initial onus on a proposition of fact has been discharged by the side upon whom TT was originally placed, it would shift over to the other party for the rebuttal thereof or for the proof otherwise. 5. Be that as it may, the subsequent Vendée thus has to discharge the initial onus as follows: (1) that he acquired the property for due consideration and thus is a transferee for value, meaning thereby that his purchase is for the price paid to the vendor and not otherwise. (2) there was no dishonesty of purpose or tainted intention to enter MTO the transaction which shall settle that he acted in good faith or with bona fide; (3) he had no knowledge or the notice of the original sale agreement between the plaintiff and the vendor at the time of his transaction with the latter. From the above it is depicted that the section merely enacts the English equitable rule which allows later legal title to prevail over an equitable interest in case of bona fide purchaser for value without notice (emphases supplied). And this principle has to be kept in view by the Courts while analyzing and appreciating the evidence on the record for the discharge of the requisite burden. 6. In the afore-noted context, it is thus required that a subsequent Vendée should adduce in evidence his sale instrument or the mutation of his transaction, if not otherwise on the record having been brought by the plaintiff himself or any other proof in this connection such as the receipt of payment made to the vendor or the bank record etc. or should lead credible, oral evidence in this behalf} these are some conceivable modes of proving the transfer for value and shall be a sufficient discharge of onus in this respect in ordinary cases. If however, a specific attack has been made in the plant or the replication by the plaintiff that the subsequent transaction is without consideration, or the value given is colorable, understated, underpaid and illusionary, it becomes the ( bounden duty of the subsequent transferee to establish through positive evidence that adequate price was paid, because this fac tum shall also have a close nexus to the good faith and the bona fides of the said transferee as well; when it is so done, the onus shall switch over to the plaintiff to prove otherwise. 7. The second ingredient "good faith" is the term which reflects the state of mind and according to section 3(20) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 "a thing shall be deemed to. be done in 'good faith' where it is in fact done honestly, whether it is done negligently or not". While interpreting this, it was held in Nanny Mai v. Rani Chandler (AIR 1931 All 277 (FB)) that good faith as defined above is equivalent to honesty of dealing arid does not entail upon the purchaser the necessity of searching the registry, even assuming that there were facts indicative of negligence in investigating title, that by itself was not predicative of alack of Bona tides. Therefore, the second condition shall stand settled if the subsequent Vendée has acted as a man of ordinary prudence m retaking inquiries expected from a purchaser who wants to acquire a good title for the price/value he is pay mg. This may include the checking of the Revenue Record or obtain the copies thereof to verify about the title of the vendor OT any third party in right, east or charge over the property or any endorsement in such record about any pending litigation or an injunctive order etc.; this may be a good and adequate exercise of investigative process, in case of rural/agriculture property. And for the same purpose, regarding urban property, the Excise and Taxation record may be examined coupled with the verification and obtaining the original documents of title from the vendor, if those are available. However, the subsequent Vendée is not obliged to run from the pillar to post in conducting rowing and fish mg inquiries, to ascertain if a third party has any merest etc. In the property which otherwise is visibly lacking. But if there exist some overt, prominent and conspicuous indicators about the third party interest, which are so patently noticeable and manifest that those could not and should not be missed aid ignored by a purchaser, such as the possession not with the vendor but someone else, who is approached or its nature investigated would lead to discover such interest, the purchaser is obliged to probe about it, otherwise he may not be able to take resort of the noted equitable rule. If therefore a subsequent Vendée has taken due care in the above manner and there are no indicators to put him to a notice of third party merest, he shall be said to have acted in good faith, thus satisfying the second condition of the rule. 8. The last and the utmost important ingredient of section 27(b) is the lack of knowledge or the notice of the subsequent Vendée about the original contract between the plaintiff of the case and the vendor. This undoubtedly is the negative fact which cannot be conclusively proved in positive terms as it is conceivable that such fact could be established by affirmative means. To illustrate the point; if the marriage between the parties is an admitted fact but due to the subsequent assertion of the husband that it has been terminated on account of divorce pronounced by him; the wife who refutes it and in order to safeguard her marital status and the nights flowing therefrom is constrained to institute a suit for activation, in which the man sets out (obviously) the defense of divorce; the factual proposition with reference to the noted facts which would emerge for the resolution and determination of the Court would be whether the plaintiffs is still the wife of the defendant? and/or whether the defendant has divorced the plaintiff? Viewing it from any angle the fact'that the marriage on account of divorce by the husband stands dissolved is a negative fact, for the wife to prove. Another example may further elucidate the post, in an ejectment petition, the landlord seeks the eviction of his tenant on the ground of default in the payment of rent, which fact is denied by the tenant, now it shall not be possible for the landlord to prove in the positive term that the rent has not been paid, which again is a negative proof of fact, thus the landlord shall be said to have discharged the initial burden of proof by making statement on oath about the lack of payment of rent, which shall be subject to cross-examination by the other side, thereafter, the onus shall be on the tenant to prove in positive terms that the rent Lias been paid. The above example shall also be true with reference to the first illustration, because if a wife makes a statement on oath about the subsistence of marriage between the parties and deny the divorce, she shall be considered in law to have discharged the initial onus, which shall switch over to the husband for the proof otherwise, by positive evidence. Because such a negative fact the law of evidence universally recognizes is not capable of proof positively. 9. Considering the above rule in context with the proposition in hand in Leslie Singh v. Dark Path and others (AIR 1929 Lahore 249) it has been held: - "The onus of proving that the subsequent purchaser had no notice of a prior claim lies on such purchaser; and the onus of such a negative issue is ordinarily discharged by a denial and by a negative evidence." In MST. There-ul-Nisa and 6 others v. Malik Muhammad Issue and 2 others (PLD 1972 SC 25) this Court ordained: "Under section 27(b) of the Specific Relief Act negative is to be proved by the subsequent transferee. If he appears in Court and states on oath that lie had no knowledge of the transfer that ( would be quite sufficient to discharge the burden and the onus will, then shift to the plaintiff to prove that the subsequent transferee had the notice of the original contract". In MST. Surra ya Begum and others v. MST. Cuban Begum and others (1992 SCMR 652) while dilating on the proposition this Court laid down the law:- "Since in civil suits an issue is to be decided by preponderance of evidence, the mutual burden would be on the plaintiff to prove his prior contract, which is discharged, the burden of proving the subsequent bona fide transfer for value without notice would be on the party alleging TT. Very little evidence and MN certain circumstances a mere denial regarding want of knowledge of the earlier contract would discharge this burden and shift the onus on the plaintiff to prove that the subsequent transferee had the notice of the earlier contract." In the light of the noted authoritative pronouncements, it can be safely concluded that though the initial onus is on the subsequent Vendée, however, it is light one, and once it is discharged by abiding by the criteria set out hereinabove, it shall be the burden and duty of the plaintiff to prove positively that the subsequent Vendée had the notice of his sale agreement; besides, the subsequent transaction is without the passing of the due consideration; it is a colorable or a fraudulent transaction entered into with dishonesty of purpose by the vendor and the subsequent Vendée in order to cause prejudice, his rights under the sale agreement. This in our view to an extent should settle the law regarding the rule providing protection to bona fide purchaser for value without notice and the standards of proof thereof. 10. Now, it-is expedient to evaluate if the subsequent vendees in the present case have discharged their mitral burden of the issue on the criteria as has been set out above, suffice it to say that the mutation of subsequent sale has been produced by them in evidence; Ghulam Hussain, one of the vendees, appeared and deposed about the quantum and payment of the price, but he was not cross-examined; the appellant while appearing as P.W.8 in his cross- examination has also admitted that the suit property was purchased by the said respondents for a price of Rs.3,50,000 which was prior to the institution of the suit; moreover, a suggestion was given to Ghulam Hussain MN the cross-examination that the subsequent vendees were informed by the relatives of the plaintiff about the agreement to sell, which he denied, but in rebuttal'in such evidence was led to prove the passing of such an information. D.W:1, one of the vendees, appeared acid testified about the lack of knowledge of the prior agreement, no cross-examination was again conducted on his, this deposition; the said witness stated that the copies of the Revenue Record were procured by subsequent transferee, there is no cross-examination to refute the above; it is specifically mentioned by the witnesses that the plaintiff or any other third person was not in possession of the suit land and the subsequent vendees pursuant to their sale got the possession of the property from the vendor, this too was not subject to cross-examination. This all brings the case within the realm of the principle that if a material fact Lias been deposed in the examination in-chief, and it is not subjected to the cross-examination, it shall be deemed to have been admitted. The elements of overt indicators are also conspicuously missing in the case; there is no corporation of the appellant's agreement in the Revenue Record. Besides, the most vital and striking aspect of the case is that the plaintiff in rebuttal to the relevant issue after the evidence was led by the respondents who had discharged their mitral onus has led no evidence (emphasis supplied) at all to prove that the respondents lacked in the payment, their transfer is male FIDE and is meant to effect the (plaintiffs) equitable interest under the agreement. And above all that they (subsequent vendees) had the notice of their sale agreement. This omission is a very fatal lapse on their part. Thus, the views set out by the appellate Court and the High Court that the nights of the respondents are protected under section 27(b) of the Act (ibid) are unexceptionable. This appeal, therefore, has, no merits and is hereby dismissed. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 296 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-21): MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J.--The present appeal has its genesis in a suit for the specific performance filed by the appellant/plaintiff originally against Muhammad Din seeking enforcement of an agreement to sell dated 17-2-1986, whereby the latter statedly agreed to sell the suit property to him. During the pendency of the suit the plaintiff got imp leaded respondents Nos.2 to 9 as the defendants, being the subsequent vendees of the suit land vide nutation dated 24-8-1987. The defendants, so arrayed in their written statement, set out the defense under section 27(b) of Specific Relief Act 1877, BMG the bona fide purchasers of the land; however the original defendant as had denied the execution of the agreement to sell and parties were also discordant about the description of the property; therefore, inter alia three important issues 1.e. (1) about the execution of the agreement, (iv) qua the description of the property and (vi) and about the bona fide purchase of the said defendants were framed. The learned trial Court after recording of the evidence, by returning its finding in favor of the plaintiff on Issue No.(1) and deciding the other two issues against the defendants, passed the decree for specific performance dated 12-10- 2000. The said judgment and decree was challenged by the subsequent vendees, in appeal which was accepted by reversing the findings only to their extent being the bona fide purchasers, while the finding of the trial Court on other two issues were affirmed, with the result that the suit was dismissed through the judgment and decree dated 12-10-2000. The appellant challenged this verdict in a civil revision before the Lahore High Court, but without any success. It has been held: - "the learned appellate court Lias rightly held that after the testimony of die respondents witnesses asserting that they were unaware of the existence of the aforesaid agreement, the onus shifted on to the petitioner/plaintiff to prove through affirmative evidence that the respondents/defendants had knowledge of the said agreement and as such, they were not bona fide purchaser. There can be no cavil with this well-established Legal principle. (4) I have myself gone through, the evidence of the witnesses produced by the petitioner/plaintiff and find that there is no evidence to establish that the respondent/defendants had notice of the agreement Ex.P.1. in the circumstances, the impugned appellate decree is not open to exception. Leave in this case was granted on 1-1-2009 to consider if the view set out by the appellate and revisional Courts is in consonance with the law laid down by this Court regarding the above proposition. 3. Learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon the following judgments: Raoul Baths Nacli v. Syed Raoul Baths Shah (2010 SCMR 988), M. Din v. MST. Sabina Bibi (2003 SCMR 956), MST. Surra ya Begum and others v. MST. Rubati Begum (1992 SCMR 652), M. Ashraf v. Ali Haman (1992 SCMR 1942), MST. There-ul-Nisa v: Malik M. Ishfaque (PLD 1972 SC 25), Heidi Abdul Regina and others v. Noa

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 296 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-21): (2010 SCMR 988), M. Din v. MST. Sabina Bibi (2003 SCMR 956), MST. Surra ya Begum and others v. MST. Rubati Begum (1992 SCMR 652), M. Ashraf v. Ali Haman (1992 SCMR 1942), MST. There-ul-Nisa v: Malik M. Ishfaque (PLD 1972 SC 25), Heidi Abdul Regina and others v. Noa Ahmed and others (PLD 1974- Baghdad-UL-Jadid 25), M. Shall v. M. Salwar (1997 CLC 1231), Kathiawar v. Shah Muhammad (1984 CLC 22), M. Yousaf Issue v. Abdul Majid Khan and others (1984 CLC 243) and Malik M. Issue and others v. Mira Adam Ali Beige and others (PLD 1969 L,ah 762) to argue that the subsequent Vendée asserting to be a bona fide purchaser having no knowledge/notice of the prior agreement to sell, is required to lead affirmative evidence to that effect; such essential evidence according to learned counsel however is conspicuously missing in this case, therefore the view of the two Courts holding that the respondents are protected by the said equitable rule is against the settled law. 4. Heard. The principles regarding the burden (onus) of proof, particularly in the civil litigation are elucidated by the provisions of Articles 117 to 120 of the QAnon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, which for the facility of reference are reproduced as below:- "117. Burden of proof-(1) Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or ability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist. (2) When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person. 118. On whom burden of proof lies.--The burden of proofing a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail info evidence at all were given on either side. 119. Burden of proof as to particular fact.--The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person. 120. Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible.--The burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on the person who wishes to give such evidence. From the analysis and collective reading of the above provisions, it is manifest and unambiguously clear that in a dispute between the parties in a civil litigation, the resolution whereof is dependant upon the existence of certain facts which are not self-evident, and a party to the is wants the Court to believe about the existence of those and seek verdict in his favor, the onus to prove shall be on the shoulder of such litigant who asserts the existence of the fact. In the cases pertain and relating to the protection under section 27(b) of the Specific Reef Act, 1877, undoubtedly, it is the subsequent Vendée who asserts and avows

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 296 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-21): in his favor, the onus to prove shall be on the shoulder of such litigant who asserts the existence of the fact. In the cases pertain and relating to the protection under section 27(b) of the Specific Reef Act, 1877, undoubtedly, it is the subsequent Vendée who asserts and avows in the defense that his case falls within the purview and parameter of the noted section Le. he is a transferee for value; the money (consideration) has been paid in good faith; and that he had no notice of the original (earlier) contract between the plaintiff and the vendor. In other words that lie is a Bona tide purchaser without notice. Obviously the existence of the facts aforementioned and the ascertainment thereof is an issue between the parties which requires resolution from the Court. It is therefore in such like cases by applying the rules regarding burden of proof as emerging from the noted Articles, especially 117 and 118, the initial onus to prove the same is on the shoulder of the subsequent Vendée. It may be pertinent to post out that in civil disputes the onus to prove a fact however does not remain constant or stagnant, thus once the initial onus on a proposition of fact has been discharged by the side upon whom TT was originally placed, it would shift over to the other party for the rebuttal thereof or for the proof otherwise. 5. Be that as it may, the subsequent Vendée thus has to discharge the initial onus as follows: (1) that he acquired the property for due consideration and thus is a transferee for value, meaning thereby that his purchase is for the price paid to the vendor and not otherwise. (2) there was no dishonesty of purpose or tainted intention to enter MTO the transaction which shall settle that he acted in good faith or with bona fide; (3) he had no knowledge or the notice of the original sale agreement between the plaintiff and the vendor at the time of his transaction with the latter. From the above it is depicted that the section merely enacts the English equitable rule which allows later legal title to prevail over an equitable interest in case of bona fide purchaser for value without notice (emphases supplied). And this principle has to be kept in view by the Courts while analyzing and appreciating the evidence on the record for the discharge of the requisite burden. 6. In the afore-noted context, it is thus required that a subsequent Vendée should adduce in evidence his sale instrument or the mutation of his transaction, if not otherwise on the record having been brought by the plaintiff himself or any other proof in this connection such as the receipt of payment made to the vendor or the bank record etc. or should lead credible, oral evidence in this behalf} these are some conceivable modes of proving the transfer for value and shall be a sufficient discharge of onus in this

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 296 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-21): other proof in this connection such as the receipt of payment made to the vendor or the bank record etc. or should lead credible, oral evidence in this behalf} these are some conceivable modes of proving the transfer for value and shall be a sufficient discharge of onus in this respect in ordinary cases. If however, a specific attack has been made in the plant or the replication by the plaintiff that the subsequent transaction is without consideration, or the value given is colorable, understated, underpaid and illusionary, it becomes the ( bounden duty of the subsequent transferee to establish through positive evidence that adequate price was paid, because this fac tum shall also have a close nexus to the good faith and the bona fides of the said transferee as well; when it is so done, the onus shall switch over to the plaintiff to prove otherwise. 7. The second ingredient "good faith" is the term which reflects the state of mind and according to section 3(20) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 "a thing shall be deemed to. be done in 'good faith' where it is in fact done honestly, whether it is done negligently or not". While interpreting this, it was held in Nanny Mai v. Rani Chandler (AIR 1931 All 277 (FB)) that good faith as defined above is equivalent to honesty of dealing arid does not entail upon the purchaser the necessity of searching the registry, even assuming that there were facts indicative of negligence in investigating title, that by itself was not predicative of alack of Bona tides. Therefore, the second condition shall stand settled if the subsequent Vendée has acted as a man of ordinary prudence m retaking inquiries expected from a purchaser who wants to acquire a good title for the price/value he is pay mg. This may include the checking of the Revenue Record or obtain the copies thereof to verify about the title of the vendor OT any third party in right, east or charge over the property or any endorsement in such record about any pending litigation or an injunctive order etc.; this may be a good and adequate exercise of investigative process, in case of rural/agriculture property. And for the same purpose, regarding urban property, the Excise and Taxation record may be examined coupled with the verification and obtaining the original documents of title from the vendor, if those are available. However, the subsequent Vendée is not obliged to run from the pillar to post in conducting rowing and fish mg inquiries, to ascertain if a third party has any merest etc. In the property which otherwise is visibly lacking. But if there exist some overt, prominent and conspicuous indicators about the third party interest, which are so patently noticeable and manifest that those could not and should not be missed aid ignored by a purchaser, such as the possession not with the vendor but someone else, who is approached or its nature investigated would lead to discover

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 296 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-21): conspicuous indicators about the third party interest, which are so patently noticeable and manifest that those could not and should not be missed aid ignored by a purchaser, such as the possession not with the vendor but someone else, who is approached or its nature investigated would lead to discover such interest, the purchaser is obliged to probe about it, otherwise he may not be able to take resort of the noted equitable rule. If therefore a subsequent Vendée has taken due care in the above manner and there are no indicators to put him to a notice of third party merest, he shall be said to have acted in good faith, thus satisfying the second condition of the rule. 8. The last and the utmost important ingredient of section 27(b) is the lack of knowledge or the notice of the subsequent Vendée about the original contract between the plaintiff of the case and the vendor. This undoubtedly is the negative fact which cannot be conclusively proved in positive terms as it is conceivable that such fact could be established by affirmative means. To illustrate the point; if the marriage between the parties is an admitted fact but due to the subsequent assertion of the husband that it has been terminated on account of divorce pronounced by him; the wife who refutes it and in order to safeguard her marital status and the nights flowing therefrom is constrained to institute a suit for activation, in which the man sets out (obviously) the defense of divorce; the factual proposition with reference to the noted facts which would emerge for the resolution and determination of the Court would be whether the plaintiffs is still the wife of the defendant? and/or whether the defendant has divorced the plaintiff? Viewing it from any angle the fact'that the marriage on account of divorce by the husband stands dissolved is a negative fact, for the wife to prove. Another example may further elucidate the post, in an ejectment petition, the landlord seeks the eviction of his tenant on the ground of default in the payment of rent, which fact is denied by the tenant, now it shall not be possible for the landlord to prove in the positive term that the rent has not been paid, which again is a negative proof of fact, thus the landlord shall be said to have discharged the initial burden of proof by making statement on oath about the lack of payment of rent, which shall be subject to cross-examination by the other side, thereafter, the onus shall be on the tenant to prove in positive terms that the rent Lias been paid. The above example shall also be true with reference to the first illustration, because if a wife makes a statement on oath about the subsistence of marriage between the parties and deny the divorce, she shall be considered in law to have discharged the initial onus, which shall switch over to the husband for the proof otherwise,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 296 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-21): with reference to the first illustration, because if a wife makes a statement on oath about the subsistence of marriage between the parties and deny the divorce, she shall be considered in law to have discharged the initial onus, which shall switch over to the husband for the proof otherwise, by positive evidence. Because such a negative fact the law of evidence universally recognizes is not capable of proof positively. 9. Considering the above rule in context with the proposition in hand in Leslie Singh v. Dark Path and others (AIR 1929 Lahore 249) it has been held: - "The onus of proving that the subsequent purchaser had no notice of a prior claim lies on such purchaser; and the onus of such a negative issue is ordinarily discharged by a denial and by a negative evidence." In MST. There-ul-Nisa and 6 others v. Malik Muhammad Issue and 2 others (PLD 1972 SC 25) this Court ordained: "Under section 27(b) of the Specific Relief Act negative is to be proved by the subsequent transferee. If he appears in Court and states on oath that lie had no knowledge of the transfer that ( would be quite sufficient to discharge the burden and the onus will, then shift to the plaintiff to prove that the subsequent transferee had the notice of the original contract". In MST. Surra ya Begum and others v. MST. Cuban Begum and others (1992 SCMR 652) while dilating on the proposition this Court laid down the law:- "Since in civil suits an issue is to be decided by preponderance of evidence, the mutual burden would be on the plaintiff to prove his prior contract, which is discharged, the burden of proving the subsequent bona fide transfer for value without notice would be on the party alleging TT. Very little evidence and MN certain circumstances a mere denial regarding want of knowledge of the earlier contract would discharge this burden and shift the onus on the plaintiff to prove that the subsequent transferee had the notice of the earlier contract." In the light of the noted authoritative pronouncements, it can be safely concluded that though the initial onus is on the subsequent Vendée, however, it is light one, and once it is discharged by abiding by the criteria set out hereinabove, it shall be the burden and duty of the plaintiff to prove positively that the subsequent Vendée had the notice of his sale agreement; besides, the subsequent transaction is without the passing of the due consideration; it is a colorable or a fraudulent transaction entered into with dishonesty of purpose by the vendor and the subsequent Vendée in order to cause prejudice, his rights under the sale agreement. This in our view to an extent should settle the law regarding the rule providing protection to bona fide purchaser for value without notice and the standards of proof thereof. 10. Now, it-is expedient to evaluate if the subsequent vendees in the present case have discharged their mitral burden

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 296?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 296 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-12-21): agreement. This in our view to an extent should settle the law regarding the rule providing protection to bona fide purchaser for value without notice and the standards of proof thereof. 10. Now, it-is expedient to evaluate if the subsequent vendees in the present case have discharged their mitral burden of the issue on the criteria as has been set out above, suffice it to say that the mutation of subsequent sale has been produced by them in evidence; Ghulam Hussain, one of the vendees, appeared and deposed about the quantum and payment of the price, but he was not cross-examined; the appellant while appearing as P.W.8 in his cross- examination has also admitted that the suit property was purchased by the said respondents for a price of Rs.3,50,000 which was prior to the institution of the suit; moreover, a suggestion was given to Ghulam Hussain MN the cross-examination that the subsequent vendees were informed by the relatives of the plaintiff about the agreement to sell, which he denied, but in rebuttal'in such evidence was led to prove the passing of such an information. D.W:1, one of the vendees, appeared acid testified about the lack of knowledge of the prior agreement, no cross-examination was again conducted on his, this deposition; the said witness stated that the copies of the Revenue Record were procured by subsequent transferee, there is no cross-examination to refute the above; it is specifically mentioned by the witnesses that the plaintiff or any other third person was not in possession of the suit land and the subsequent vendees pursuant to their sale got the possession of the property from the vendor, this too was not subject to cross-examination. This all brings the case within the realm of the principle that if a material fact Lias been deposed in the examination in-chief, and it is not subjected to the cross-examination, it shall be deemed to have been admitted. The elements of overt indicators are also conspicuously missing in the case; there is no corporation of the appellant's agreement in the Revenue Record. Besides, the most vital and striking aspect of the case is that the plaintiff in rebuttal to the relevant issue after the evidence was led by the respondents who had discharged their mitral onus has led no evidence (emphasis supplied) at all to prove that the respondents lacked in the payment, their transfer is male FIDE and is meant to effect the (plaintiffs) equitable interest under the agreement. And above all that they (subsequent vendees) had the notice of their sale agreement. This omission is a very fatal lapse on their part. Thus, the views set out by the appellate Court and the High Court that the nights of the respondents are protected under section 27(b) of the Act (ibid) are unexceptionable. This appeal, therefore, has, no merits and is hereby dismissed. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 2011 PLD 126 about?
Answer: Case 2011 PLD 126 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 2010-05-06. The case involved EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD THROUGH DEPUTY/ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY, PESHAWAR APPELLANT VERSUS ALI BAHADUR (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XII OF 1975) - S. 14 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN - ARTICLE 185 (3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XII OF 1975) - SS. AND 14 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S. 42 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2011_126.html 1/6 28/10/2025, 01:55 paklegaldatabase.comw p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2011_126.htm!. The case was heard by MAHMOOD AKHTAR SHAHID SIDDIQUI AND MIAN SAQIB NISAR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2011 PLD 126?
Answer: In case 2011 PLD 126, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XII OF 1975) - S. 14 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN - ARTICLE 185 (3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XII OF 1975) - SS. AND 14 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S. 42 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2011_126.html 1/6 28/10/2025, 01:55 paklegaldatabase.comw p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2011/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2011_126.htm!. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 2010-05-06.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2011 PLD 126?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2011 PLD 126 were: HAFIZS. A. REHMAN, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND ZAWAR SHAH, PATWARI FOR APPELLANTS. ABDUL SAMAD KHAN ZAADA, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT/ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: MAHMOOD AKHTAR SHAHID SIDDIQUI AND MIAN SAQIB NISAR.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2011 PLD 126?
Answer: The parties in case 2011 PLD 126 were: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD THROUGH DEPUTY/ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY, PESHAWAR APPELLANT VERSUS ALI BAHADUR (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2011 PLD 126.
Answer: MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J.--The suit for declaration etc. filed by the respondent-plaintiff against the appellant-defendant, after the contest and trial was decreed by the learned Civil Judge, Swabia vide judgment and decree dated 3-7-2002 holding that the house in dispute has been validly transferred to the respondent by the Evacuee Department, and it has not been established by the appellant to be attached to any charitable/religious trust etc. to form part of an evacuee trust property. However, on the crucial objection, raised by the appellant which had culminated into Issue No.2 it was ostensibly found by the trial Court having no jurisdiction in the matter, yet strangely the suit as mentioned earlier was decreed. The appeal of the appellant, which was filed through Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Peshawar, was dismissed by the Additional District Judge on 5-3-2003 while upholding the decision of the trial Court as a whole, and for an additional reason that the appeal was instituted by an officer, who was not competent to do so: these judgments and decrees have been sustained by the Peshawar High Court through its judgment dated 19- 12-2003. Leave to appeal was granted in this case on 26-1-2006 in the following terms:- "Contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the suit filed by the respondent/plaintiff was barred by law as such civil Court has no jurisdiction to grant the declaration prayed for in view of the bar contained in section 14 of PTFE Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975) and such plea was raised before the trial Court and as such issue was also framed and finding of the suit on Issue No. was to the effect that the Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, yet the suit was decreed and declaration was granted declaring the suit property to be non-evacuee." 2. The brief facts germane for the disposal of the present appeal, are: the house in question measuring about four Marley, situated in village Aida (Swabia) was transferred to the respondent by the Assistant Settlement Commissioner (Lands), Marian through PTO dated 6-10-1967 on the payment of Rs.1010. On the strength of the above, the respondent on 13-6-1996 brought the suit seeking declaration about his exclusive ownership of the house and asserting that the appellant has no right or concern thereto, with an additional claim of permanent injunctive relief that the appellant should not meddle with his ownership and possessory rights qua the suit property. The appellant in its written WW. statement took up the specific objection regarding the jurisdiction of the civil Court to entertain and try the suit, which objection obviously was in terms of section 14 read with other enable provisions of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII), 1975 (hereafter referred to as the Act). It may be percent to mention here that in the first stance the learned Civil Judge seized of the case vide order dated 3-4-2000, rejected the plaint of the respondent under Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. holding that it has no jurisdiction to hear the matter, which (jurisdiction) is barred by law. The respondent preferred an appeal which was allowed and by setting aside the order impugned their, the case was remanded with the direction that such objection should form MTO an issue and should be decided along with other issues involved in the matter. Upon trial, the learned Civil Judge on the issue of jurisdiction has come to the conclusion "In the light of above discussion, it is held that this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the instant suit. This issue is therefore decided in positive" emphasis supplied). It may be relevant to mention here that from the reproduced part of the findings of the trial Court and of the leave granting order, an impression can be gathered that the Civil Judge seized of the matter decided the issue of jurisdiction against the respondent and yet decreed the suit. But upon reading of the specific wordings of Issue No.2 1e. "whether this Court has no jurisdiction to restrain (sic) the present suit?" Our view is otherwise, because the discussion on this issue by the trial Court especially the portion "the objection with respect to Bar of jurisdiction under section 14 of TTB, B(sic) Act, 1975 appears to have no force" leads us to form an option that the finding is that the Court has the jurisdiction. Be that as it may, the revisional Court (the High Court) having final say in the matter by relying upon the judgment of this Court reported as Evacuee Trust Property Board through Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board at Mirpur Khas v. Abdul Aziz Khan and 6 others (2000 SCMR 1371) particularly by quoting a portion therefrom i.e. "Since in law the disputed property had not been treated as evacuee trust property, therefore, the bar of jurisdiction cannot be pressed into service. For the ouster of Jurisdiction, the petitioner ought to have proved through cogent evidence that the disputed property was attached to a charitable trust and as such no suit was maintainable in respect thereof" Therefore, on the touchstone of the above and while examining the documentary evidence, produced by the appellant, the revisional Court came to the conclusion that from none of WW. such documents it is established if either the suit property was declared to be an evacuee trust property by the Chairman or was ever so treated; and/or even the said documents do not relate to the suit property. It is, therefore, on account of this that the decisions of the two Courts were upheld by dismissing the revision petition of the appellant. 3. Learned counsel for the appellant states that in terms of section 8 of the Act that it is the exclusive jurisdiction of the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board to adjudge, decide and declare whether any property is an evacuee trust property or not; besides the validation of CERTAM transfers of the properties which are considered to be evacuee trust properties shall also be within the sole and exclusive empowerment of the Chairman and the jurisdiction of the civil Courts in relation to these powers/questions is expressly barred by the two noted provisions of law. Further by making reference to section 14 of the Act, it is submitted that there is an express bar for the exercise of the jurisdiction by the civil Court in respect of any action which an officer appointed under the Act is empowered to determine or to take or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred upon him by or under the Act. In support of his submissions, he has also relied upon the cases reported as Evacuee Trust Property Board and others v. Ahmed and others (2004 SCMR 440), Evacuee Trust Property Board and others v. MST. Sabina Bibi and others (2007 SCMR 262), Sugar Department through Chief Administrator Sugar, Punjab, Lahore v. Secretary, Ministry of Religious Zakat, Usher and Minorities Affairs, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and 3 others (2009 SCMR 210) and Evacuee Trust Property Board v. Sheikh Abdul Attar and another (2009 SCMR 1223). Whereas, contrary to the above, learned counsel for the respondent, has relied upon 2000 SCMR 1371 (supra) the judgment on which reliance has been placed by the High Court. 4. Heard. From the above-mentioned provisions of the Act and the case-law cited, it is clear that for the actions/orders etc. mentioned in the section, an express bar has been placed upon the exercise of jurisdiction by the civil Courts. However, when the facts of the present case are examined in the light of the evidence brought on the record by the parties particularly the appellant, it has conspicuously emerged that no declaration under section 8 of the Act assigning the suit property a status of evacuee trust property has been made by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board. Likewise, the validity of the transfer made in favor of the respondent by the evacuee department through the PTO referred to above WW. has not been determined and adjudicated by the Chairman as required under section 10 of the Act. Obviously, in such a situation the specific bar contemplated by the noted two sections shall not be attracted. As regards, the general bar of section 14 is concerned, on the basis of which leave was granted by this Court, it (the section) reads as under: Bar of jurisdiction.-- Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Federal Government or an officer appointed under this Act is empowered under this Act to determine, and no injunction, process or order shall be granted or issued by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act." Analyzing section 14 ibid, it is unambiguous that the jurisdiction of the civil Courts have been barred with respect to any matter. which an officer apported under the Act is empowered to determine: such jurisdiction is also ousted to grant and issue an injunction, process or order in respect of any action taken or to be taken by such officer in exercise of any power conferred by or under the Act. Undoubtedly, the Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Property Board is an officer within the contemplation of the section. Therefore, in order to settle the question about the ouster of jurisdiction it seems expedient to examine, what was the proposition evolved in the suit and whether such a question was determinable by the Chairman or not: In this respect, it is foundational to evaluate the clam of the respondent in his suit/plaint; on the perusal thereof it is vivid that the respondent is seeking a declaration that the suit property is his exclusive ownership and is not an evacuee trust property, consequently the appellant should be precluded from interfere MTO his ownership nights and apprentices thereto; the appellant in defense joined issue with the respondent on these factual aspects and claimed the suit property being an evacuee trust property, and it is on this account that the jurisdiction of the Court was challenged. Therefore, the key issue before the Court would be whether the property is an evacuee trust property or otherwise? Now when the provisions of section 8 of the Act are adverted to, it specially mentions "if a question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust, or not it shall be decided by the Chairman" meaning thereby that notwithstanding whether a declaration in terms of section 8 has been made or not by the Chairman, yet even if a question has arisen at any point of time about the status of the property it shall be the Chairman alone who under the Act shall be competent and empowered to determine and decide the question and the Court in view of the bar contained in Section 14 shall have no jurisdiction in the matter. 5. Whether the question of the above nature was/is involved in the matter is clear from the pleadings of the parties and from the findings of all the Courts below on Issue No.5 Le. whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree as prayed for? As the Courts while considering and appreciating the evidence of the parties on the record have come to the conclusion ( that the property is not established by the appellant to be attached to any charitable, religious trust etc. thus is not an evacuee trust property. This determination, in our considered view, was within the exclusive domain of the Chairman and the adjudication thereof by the Courts is an encroachment and circumvention on his empowerment. Therefore, the bar of section 14 ibid was duly attracted. 5A. In the light of the above, while allowing this appeal the judgments and decrees of all the Courts below are hereby set aside and the suit of the respondent its dismissed due to the lack of jurisdiction of the civil Court. Appeal allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 126?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 126 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-05-06): MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J.--The suit for declaration etc. filed by the respondent-plaintiff against the appellant-defendant, after the contest and trial was decreed by the learned Civil Judge, Swabia vide judgment and decree dated 3-7-2002 holding that the house in dispute has been validly transferred to the respondent by the Evacuee Department, and it has not been established by the appellant to be attached to any charitable/religious trust etc. to form part of an evacuee trust property. However, on the crucial objection, raised by the appellant which had culminated into Issue No.2 it was ostensibly found by the trial Court having no jurisdiction in the matter, yet strangely the suit as mentioned earlier was decreed. The appeal of the appellant, which was filed through Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Peshawar, was dismissed by the Additional District Judge on 5-3-2003 while upholding the decision of the trial Court as a whole, and for an additional reason that the appeal was instituted by an officer, who was not competent to do so: these judgments and decrees have been sustained by the Peshawar High Court through its judgment dated 19- 12-2003. Leave to appeal was granted in this case on 26-1-2006 in the following terms:- "Contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the suit filed by the respondent/plaintiff was barred by law as such civil Court has no jurisdiction to grant the declaration prayed for in view of the bar contained in section 14 of PTFE Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975) and such plea was raised before the trial Court and as such issue was also framed and finding of the suit on Issue No. was to the effect that the Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, yet the suit was decreed and declaration was granted declaring the suit property to be non-evacuee." 2. The brief facts germane for the disposal of the present appeal, are: the house in question measuring about four Marley, situated in village Aida (Swabia) was transferred to the respondent by the Assistant Settlement Commissioner (Lands), Marian through PTO dated 6-10-1967 on the payment of Rs.1010. On the strength of the above, the respondent on 13-6-1996 brought the suit seeking declaration about his exclusive ownership of the house and asserting that the appellant has no right or concern thereto, with an additional claim of permanent injunctive relief that the appellant should not meddle with his ownership and possessory rights qua the suit property. The appellant in its written WW. statement took up the specific objection regarding the jurisdiction of the civil Court to entertain and try the suit, which objection obviously was in terms of section 14 read with other enable provisions of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII), 1975 (hereafter referred to as the Act). It may be percent to mention here that in the first stance the learned Civil Judge seized of the case vide order dated 3-4-2000, rejected the plaint of the respondent under Order

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 126?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 126 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-05-06): enable provisions of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII), 1975 (hereafter referred to as the Act). It may be percent to mention here that in the first stance the learned Civil Judge seized of the case vide order dated 3-4-2000, rejected the plaint of the respondent under Order VII, Rule 11, C.P.C. holding that it has no jurisdiction to hear the matter, which (jurisdiction) is barred by law. The respondent preferred an appeal which was allowed and by setting aside the order impugned their, the case was remanded with the direction that such objection should form MTO an issue and should be decided along with other issues involved in the matter. Upon trial, the learned Civil Judge on the issue of jurisdiction has come to the conclusion "In the light of above discussion, it is held that this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the instant suit. This issue is therefore decided in positive" emphasis supplied). It may be relevant to mention here that from the reproduced part of the findings of the trial Court and of the leave granting order, an impression can be gathered that the Civil Judge seized of the matter decided the issue of jurisdiction against the respondent and yet decreed the suit. But upon reading of the specific wordings of Issue No.2 1e. "whether this Court has no jurisdiction to restrain (sic) the present suit?" Our view is otherwise, because the discussion on this issue by the trial Court especially the portion "the objection with respect to Bar of jurisdiction under section 14 of TTB, B(sic) Act, 1975 appears to have no force" leads us to form an option that the finding is that the Court has the jurisdiction. Be that as it may, the revisional Court (the High Court) having final say in the matter by relying upon the judgment of this Court reported as Evacuee Trust Property Board through Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board at Mirpur Khas v. Abdul Aziz Khan and 6 others (2000 SCMR 1371) particularly by quoting a portion therefrom i.e. "Since in law the disputed property had not been treated as evacuee trust property, therefore, the bar of jurisdiction cannot be pressed into service. For the ouster of Jurisdiction, the petitioner ought to have proved through cogent evidence that the disputed property was attached to a charitable trust and as such no suit was maintainable in respect thereof" Therefore, on the touchstone of the above and while examining the documentary evidence, produced by the appellant, the revisional Court came to the conclusion that from none of WW. such documents it is established if either the suit property was declared to be an evacuee trust property by the Chairman or was ever so treated; and/or even the said documents do not relate to the suit property. It is, therefore, on account of this that the decisions of the two Courts were upheld by dismissing the revision petition of the appellant. 3. Learned counsel for the appellant states

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 126?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 126 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-05-06): the Chairman or was ever so treated; and/or even the said documents do not relate to the suit property. It is, therefore, on account of this that the decisions of the two Courts were upheld by dismissing the revision petition of the appellant. 3. Learned counsel for the appellant states that in terms of section 8 of the Act that it is the exclusive jurisdiction of the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board to adjudge, decide and declare whether any property is an evacuee trust property or not; besides the validation of CERTAM transfers of the properties which are considered to be evacuee trust properties shall also be within the sole and exclusive empowerment of the Chairman and the jurisdiction of the civil Courts in relation to these powers/questions is expressly barred by the two noted provisions of law. Further by making reference to section 14 of the Act, it is submitted that there is an express bar for the exercise of the jurisdiction by the civil Court in respect of any action which an officer appointed under the Act is empowered to determine or to take or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred upon him by or under the Act. In support of his submissions, he has also relied upon the cases reported as Evacuee Trust Property Board and others v. Ahmed and others (2004 SCMR 440), Evacuee Trust Property Board and others v. MST. Sabina Bibi and others (2007 SCMR 262), Sugar Department through Chief Administrator Sugar, Punjab, Lahore v. Secretary, Ministry of Religious Zakat, Usher and Minorities Affairs, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and 3 others (2009 SCMR 210) and Evacuee Trust Property Board v. Sheikh Abdul Attar and another (2009 SCMR 1223). Whereas, contrary to the above, learned counsel for the respondent, has relied upon 2000 SCMR 1371 (supra) the judgment on which reliance has been placed by the High Court. 4. Heard. From the above-mentioned provisions of the Act and the case-law cited, it is clear that for the actions/orders etc. mentioned in the section, an express bar has been placed upon the exercise of jurisdiction by the civil Courts. However, when the facts of the present case are examined in the light of the evidence brought on the record by the parties particularly the appellant, it has conspicuously emerged that no declaration under section 8 of the Act assigning the suit property a status of evacuee trust property has been made by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board. Likewise, the validity of the transfer made in favor of the respondent by the evacuee department through the PTO referred to above WW. has not been determined and adjudicated by the Chairman as required under section 10 of the Act. Obviously, in such a situation the specific bar contemplated by the noted two sections shall not be attracted. As regards, the general bar of section 14 is concerned, on the basis of which leave was granted by this Court, it (the section) reads as under:

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 126?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 126 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-05-06): section 10 of the Act. Obviously, in such a situation the specific bar contemplated by the noted two sections shall not be attracted. As regards, the general bar of section 14 is concerned, on the basis of which leave was granted by this Court, it (the section) reads as under: Bar of jurisdiction.-- Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Federal Government or an officer appointed under this Act is empowered under this Act to determine, and no injunction, process or order shall be granted or issued by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act." Analyzing section 14 ibid, it is unambiguous that the jurisdiction of the civil Courts have been barred with respect to any matter. which an officer apported under the Act is empowered to determine: such jurisdiction is also ousted to grant and issue an injunction, process or order in respect of any action taken or to be taken by such officer in exercise of any power conferred by or under the Act. Undoubtedly, the Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Property Board is an officer within the contemplation of the section. Therefore, in order to settle the question about the ouster of jurisdiction it seems expedient to examine, what was the proposition evolved in the suit and whether such a question was determinable by the Chairman or not: In this respect, it is foundational to evaluate the clam of the respondent in his suit/plaint; on the perusal thereof it is vivid that the respondent is seeking a declaration that the suit property is his exclusive ownership and is not an evacuee trust property, consequently the appellant should be precluded from interfere MTO his ownership nights and apprentices thereto; the appellant in defense joined issue with the respondent on these factual aspects and claimed the suit property being an evacuee trust property, and it is on this account that the jurisdiction of the Court was challenged. Therefore, the key issue before the Court would be whether the property is an evacuee trust property or otherwise? Now when the provisions of section 8 of the Act are adverted to, it specially mentions "if a question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust, or not it shall be decided by the Chairman" meaning thereby that notwithstanding whether a declaration in terms of section 8 has been made or not by the Chairman, yet even if a question has arisen at any point of time about the status of the property it shall be the Chairman alone who under the Act shall be competent and empowered to determine and decide the question and the Court in view of the bar contained in Section 14 shall have no jurisdiction in the matter. 5. Whether the question of the above nature was/is involved in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2011 PLD 126?
Answer: From case 2011 PLD 126 (SUPREME COURT, 2010-05-06): shall be the Chairman alone who under the Act shall be competent and empowered to determine and decide the question and the Court in view of the bar contained in Section 14 shall have no jurisdiction in the matter. 5. Whether the question of the above nature was/is involved in the matter is clear from the pleadings of the parties and from the findings of all the Courts below on Issue No.5 Le. whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree as prayed for? As the Courts while considering and appreciating the evidence of the parties on the record have come to the conclusion ( that the property is not established by the appellant to be attached to any charitable, religious trust etc. thus is not an evacuee trust property. This determination, in our considered view, was within the exclusive domain of the Chairman and the adjudication thereof by the Courts is an encroachment and circumvention on his empowerment. Therefore, the bar of section 14 ibid was duly attracted. 5A. In the light of the above, while allowing this appeal the judgments and decrees of all the Courts below are hereby set aside and the suit of the respondent its dismissed due to the lack of jurisdiction of the civil Court. Appeal allowed.

Question: What is case 2017 SCMR 98 about?
Answer: Case 2017 SCMR 98 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 2016-11-11. The case involved MUHAMMAD SATTAR AND OTHERS—APPELLANTS VERSUS TARIQ JAVAID AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include CONTRACT ACT (IX OF 1872)-SS. AND SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877)-S. 22 TRANSFER OF PROPERTYACT (IV OF 1882)-S. 54 CONTRACT ACT (LX OF 1872) SS. AND SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) S. 12 QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) ARTS. 17 AND 79. The case was heard by PRESENT: ANWAR ZAHEER JAMALT, C.J. AMIR HANI MUSLIM, SH. AZM AT SAEED, MANZOOR AHMAD MALIK AND FAISAL.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: In case 2017 SCMR 98, the court applied the following statutes: CONTRACT ACT (IX OF 1872)-SS. AND SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877)-S. 22 TRANSFER OF PROPERTYACT (IV OF 1882)-S. 54 CONTRACT ACT (LX OF 1872) SS. AND SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) S. 12 QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) ARTS. 17 AND 79. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 2016-11-11.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2017 SCMR 98 were: CH. MUSHTAQ AHMED KHAN, SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND SYED RIFAQAT HUSSAIN SHAH, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD (ABSENT) FOR APPELLANTS (IN C.A. 56 OF 2011). MOULVI ANWAR-UL-HAQ, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR APPELLANTS (IN C.A. 462-L OF 2009). MIAN ALLAH NAWAZ SENIOR ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR APPELLANTS (IN C.A. 11-L OF 2013). MALIK MUHAMMAD KABIR, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND AHMED NAWAZ CH. ADVOCATE-ON- RECORD (ABSENT) FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. 1-4 AND 6-8 (IN C.A. 56 OF 2011). SARDAR MUHAMMAD ASLAM, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR RESPONDENTS (IN C.A. 462-L OF 2009). CH. AAMIR REHMAN, ADVOCATE ISUPREME COURT FOR RESPONDENTS (IN C.A. 11-L OF https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2017/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_2017_98.html 1/15 28/10/2025, 01:55 paklegaldatabase.comw p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2017/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_2017_98.htm| 2013). JUDGMENT JUDGMENT C.M.A. NO. 6863 OF 2014 IN CIVILAPPEAL NO. 56 OF 2011, CIVIL APPEAL NO. 462-L OF 2009 AND CIVILAPPEAL NO.11-L OF 2013.. The judges presiding were: PRESENT: ANWAR ZAHEER JAMALT, C.J. AMIR HANI MUSLIM, SH. AZM AT SAEED, MANZOOR AHMAD MALIK AND FAISAL.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: The parties in case 2017 SCMR 98 were: MUHAMMAD SATTAR AND OTHERS—APPELLANTS VERSUS TARIQ JAVAID AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2017 SCMR 98.
Answer: JUDGMENT C.M.A. NO. 6863 OF 2014 IN CIVILAPPEAL NO. 56 OF 2011, CIVIL APPEAL NO. 462-L OF 2009 AND CIVILAPPEAL NO.11-L OF 2013. Statutes CONTRACT ACT (IX OF 1872)-SS. AND 9 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877)-S. 22 TRANSFER OF PROPERTYACT (IV OF 1882)-S. 54 CONTRACT ACT (LX OF 1872) SS. AND 9 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) S. 12 QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) ARTS. 17 AND 79 Judgment SH. AZMAT SAEED, J.—Civil Appeal No.56 of 2011, Civil Misc. Application No.6863 of 2014 in Civil Appeal No.56 of 2011 and Civil Appeals No.462-L of 2009 and No.1 1- L of 2013 have arisen out of Civil Suits, wherein the Plaintiffs therein variously claimed relief of Specific Performance of Agreements to Sell pertaining to immovable property. In each of the aforesaid cases, the Agreement to Sell in question was purportedly signed and executed by the Vendors but did not bear the signatures of the Vendees, who were the Plaintiffs in their respective Civil Suits. A common question which has arisen mm all the aforesaid Civil Appeals is whether such Agreements to Sell not signed by the Vendees were valid and enforceable in law. The learned High Court in its judgment dated 30.11.2010 impugned in the Civil Appeal No.56 of 2011 and in the judgment dated 19.12.2012 by relying upon the judgment of this Court, reported as MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) held that such an Agreement to Sell not signed by the Vendee/Plaintiff was not enforceable in law. A similar argument was also canvassed at the bar in Civil Appeal No.452-L of 2009. Reference was also made to another judgment of this Court, reported as Farmland Ali and another v. Kinda Baths and others (PLD 2015 SC 187) to assert that the Agreement to Sell not signed by one of the parties was invalid. 2. The learned counsel appearing for both sides of aisle were brisking with arguments based upon the entire factual and legal spectrum of their respective cases but were asked to restrict themselves to the legal - proposition noted above, as we initially propose only to decide the aforesaid question of law leaving the merits of the individual case, including all other issues of fact and law to be adjudicated upon separately on a case to case basis. WW. 2115 3. Main Allah Nawab, learned Sr. ASC leading the charge on behalf of the Appellant in Civil Appeal No.11-Lof2013 contended that the learned High Court has failed to take into consideration the provisions of sections 8 and 9 of the Contract Act, 1872, and a bare reading thereof leaves no manner of doubt that a concluded enforceable agreement can come about, even in the absence of formal signatures by one of the parties. It was added that there is nothing in the Contract Act, 1872, which prohibits an oral agreement, which is obviously not signed by either party. It was further added that the learned High Court has failed to take MTO consideration the law laid down by this Court in the judgment, reported as Messes Jamal Jute Bang and Co. Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies and Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784), wherein it has been held that an Agreement reduced into writing and accepted by both the parties is enforceable in law, even if} one of the parties has not appended its signatures thereupon. The learned counsel further relied upon the judgment of this Court, reported as Karachi Gas Co, Ltd. v. Heywood Cotton Mills Ltd. (PLD 1975 SC 193) to assert that a valid agreement can be based upon an implied proposal and acceptance and, in this behalf writing is not necessary. The learned counsel also placed reliance upon the judgments, reported as RTS Flexible Systems Limited v. Moliere Alois Muller GmbH and Co. KG (2012 SCMR 1027), Messes Habit Bank Limited v. Abdul Zahid Khan (1996 CLC 698), Jugal Kishore Rameshwardas v. Mrs. Toolbar Horus (AIR 1955 SC 812) and Banaras Was v. Cane Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh and another (AIR 1963 SC 1417). With regard to the judgments of this Court, reported as MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) and Farmland Ali and another v. Kinda Baths and others (PLD 2015 SC 187), it was contended that the same are not only distinguishable on facts but also do not lay down the entire law on the subject and cannot be construed to run contrary to the express provisions of sections 8 and 9 of the Contract Act, 1872 and the settled law on the subject, as laid down by this Court, including in the judgments referred to above. 4. The other learned counsel adopted and supported the contentions raised on behalf of the learned counsel for the Appellants referred to above. 5. The learned counsel for the opposite side controverted the contentions raised by Main Allah Nawab, learned Sr. ASC by contending that mutuality is a SME qua non for an enforceable agreement and the absence of the signatures of one of the parties thereto for all intends and purposes conclusively determine the absence of such mutuality. It was further WW. contended that the same is even more vital in an executory agreement contaming reciprocal promises. The learned counsel placed reliance upon the judgments of this Court in the case, reported as Timbaland v. Allah Like and others (1996 SCMR 575), Messes M.A. Khan and Co. through Sole Proprietor Muhammad Ali Khan v. Messes Pakistan Railway Employees Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. through Principal Officer/Secretary, Karachi (2006 SCMR 721), MST. Russian Hamid (supra). Alleged Corruption in Rental Power Plants etc.: In the matter of (Eftekhari Muhammad Haughty, CJ) (2012 SCMR 773) and Farmland Ali and another (supra). 6. Heard and perused the available record. 7. The primary and basic law relating to the contracts is obviously the Contract Act, 1872. The essentials of a valid contract are an offer communicated, the unconditional acceptance of such offer and consideration. There is nothing in the Contract Act, 1872 which requires that such offer and acceptance must necessarily be m writing or form a single document. The law i.e. the Contract Act, 1872 envisages a valid enforceable contract, which may even be oral. A perusal of the provisions of the said enactment also reveals that both the proposal and its acceptance may be expressed or implied, as is apparent from section 9 thereof, which reads as under: Promises, express and implied.—In so far as the proposal or acceptance of any promise is made in words, the promise is said to be express. In so far as such proposal or acceptance is made otherwise than in words, the promise is said to be implied." 8. Similarly/once an offer is communicated, the performance of the conditions of the proposal or the acceptance of any consideration or part thereof offered with the proposal also constitutes an acceptance so as to bring about a valid biding contract between the parties, as is obvious from the bare reading of section 8 of the Contract Act, 1872, which is reproduced hereunder for ease of reference: 8. Acceptance by performing conditions or receiving consideration.—Performance of the conditions of a proposal, or the acceptance of any consideration for a reciprocal-promise which may be offered with a proposal, is an acceptance of the proposal." 9. No doubt, the Contract Act, 1872 may not be the only law applicable to the transactions enumerating the requisite formalities. Various special laws pertaining to certain specified species of contracts also hold the field and the provisions thereof may envisage certain additional requirements to bring about a valid contract. An obvious example is section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, which requires that a contract of sale of immovable property of value of more than one hundred WW. 4115 rupees must necessarily be reduced in writing. This condition only applies where the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 is applicable through a Notification in terms of section 1 thereof: The said provision of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 is not applicable to the entire length and breadth of Pakistan and oral sales are recognized and enforced in various parts of Pakistan. Be that as it may, there is nothing in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 or any other law, which requires that an Agreement to Sell of immovable property must necessarily be reduced into writing Or be signed by the parties thereto. 10. The Courts m Pakistan, while interpreting the various provisions applicable, more particularly, sections 8 and 9 of the Contract Act, 1872, have repeatedly and consistently held that the contracts in general do not require to be reduced MTO writing (except where otherwise specifically provided by law) and the offer and acceptance can also:be implied from the conduct of the parties in terms of sections 8 and 9 ibid and the absence of formal signatures does not affect the validity or enforceability of the Contract Act, 1872. 11. This Court in the judgment, reported as Lesser's Jamal Jute Balm and Co, Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784) held as follows: "Even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the contract was not properly signed even otherwise in my opinion, the contract between the parties was quite valid and binding on them. It has been rightly posted out by the Civil Judge that the appellant-sellers have accepted the contract. There is also evidence that after the conclusion of the contract the appellant-firm had partially acted upon it for supplying 125 bales of jute. Mr. Bhattacharjee, learned counsel for the respondent has referred to two Indian decisions, Jugal Kishore Rameshwardas v. Mrs. Toolbar Horus (1) and Banaras Was v. Cane Commissioner, Uttar Pardesh and another It was held in these cases that even if signature is not there and acceptance is established it is a proper agreement between the parties. In the case of Jugal Kishore Rameshawardas, it was held as under: "But it is settled law that to constitute an arbitration agreement in writing it is not necessary that it should be signed by the parties, and that it is sufficient if the terms are reduced to writing and the agreement of the parties thereto is established." The same view was expressed in the case of Banaras Was. If the fact of the present case is considered in the light of these principles, it is proved'that the agreement between the parties was reduced to writing. Both the parties accepted its terms and have partially carried them out. WW. In view of this the contract in dispute is established between them and the respondents are entitled to enforce it. Having regards to these facts, I am satisfied that there was a valid reference to arbitration and the Arbitrators were competent to enter on the reference in order to decide the dispute between the parties. I would, therefore, repel the contention of the appellant m this behalf" (emphasis supplied) In the case of Karachi Gas Co. Ltd. v. Heywood Cotton Mills Ltd. (PLD 1975 SC 193), it has been observed as follows: “The customer did not raise any objection to this principle of charging interest. On the basis of these facts, the Privy Council following the principle laid down in (1813) 3 Camp 487 observed at p. 23 as follows:- the fact that the defendant had not objected to a change of compound interest in accounts which for several years, he had annually received from the plaintiff bank offered sufficient evidence of a promise by him to pay interest in that manner.” In the case of Messes M. A. Khan Co. through Sole Proprietor Muhammad Ali Khan v. Messes Pakistan Railways Employees Cooperative' Housing Society Ltd. through Principal Officer/Secretary, Karachi (2006 SCMR 721), it was held as under: The acceptance of the offer may be express or implied, or it can be gathered from the conduct of parties and the circumstance of the case. The acceptance of an offer would give rise to an agreement which is is enforceable in law is a valid contract and the contract is complete as soon as the offer is accepted and the terms of contract required to be reduced in writing would be only incidental to the completion of contract. In a contract by correspondence if the acceptance of offer is established through the letters, the non-execution of the formal agreement would not be essential to constitute a valid contract. The letters of offer and acceptance indicating the term agreed upon by the parties would constitute a valid contract which would not be affected by subsequent negotiation and the terms of the contract would necessarily be judged from the letter of acceptance." 12. The controversy with regard to the validity of the contract, which does not bear the signatures of one of the parties thereof also cropped up in the Indian Jurisdiction and was settled by the Supreme Court of India in the judgment, reported as Asoka Bose v. Sarmatia Devi and others (AIR 2009 SC 1527); it was held as follows: “All agreements of sale are bilateral contracts as promises are made by both — the vendor agreeing to sell and the purchaser agreeing to purchase. On the other hand, the observation in S.M. Goal Chatty (supra) that unless agreement is signed both by the vendor and purchaser, it is hot a valid contract is also not sound. An agreement of sale comes into existence when the WW. vendor agrees to sell and the purchaser agrees purchase, for an agreed consideration on agreed terms. It can be oral. It can be by exchange of communications which may or may not be signed. It may'be by a single document signed by both parties. It can also be by a document in two parts, each party signing one copy and then exchanging the signed copy as a consequence of which the purchaser has the copy signed by the vendor and a vendor has a copy signed by the purchaser. Therefore, even an oral agreement to sell is valid. If so, a written agreement signed by one of the parties, if it evidences such an oral agreement will also be valid. In any agreement of sale, the terms are always negotiated and thereafter reduced in the form of an agreement Of sale and signed by both parties or the vendor alone unless it is by a series of offers and counter-offers by letters or other modes of recognized communication. In India, an agreement of sale signed by the vendor alone and delivered to the purchaser, and accepted by the purchaser, has always been considered to be a valid contract. In the event of breach by the vendor, it can be specifically enforced by the purchaser. There is, however, no practice of purchaser alone signing an agreement of sale.” 13. The aforesaid would make it clear that it is now a well settled proposition of law that for a valid contract, the same can be oral, or it may be through exchange of communication between the parties. Once an offer is communicated, the acceptance thereof can be expressed or implied. Such acceptance of the offer would include accepting the consideration accompany mg the offer or act mg upon the said barge. There is no requirement of a formal signature of both or either of the parties. All that is required is an offer and acceptance and consideration between the parties. 14. At this juncture it may be pertinent to mention that all valid contracts are not specifically enforceable but nevertheless may give rise to rights and liabilities, and the breach thereof may entitle the offended party to seek compensation/damages in terms of sections 73 and 74 of the Contract Act, 1872. 15. The question of Specific Performance of a contract is dealt with in the Specific Relief Act, 1877. The reference to this aspect of the matter has been necessitated in view of the fact that in the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel ie’. MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) and Farmland Ali and another v. Kinda Baths and others (PLD 2015 SC 87), a reference has been made to section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877. The aforesaid provision is reproduced hereunder for ease of reference: "22. Discretion as to decreeing specific performance: The jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discretionary, and the Court is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful to do so; but the discretion of the Court is not arbitrary but sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a Court of appeal. The following are cases in which the Court may properly exercise a discretion not to decree specific performance: I. Where the circumstances under which the contract is made are such as to give the plaintiff fan unfair advantage over the defendant, though there be no fraud or misrepresentation on the plaintiff's part. Illustrations (a) A, tenant for life of certain property, assigns his interest therein to B. C contracts to buy, and B contracts to sell that interest. Before the contract is completed. A receives a mortal injury from the effects of which he dies the day after the contract is executed. If B and C were equally ignorant or equally aware of the fact. B is entitled to specific performance of the contract, if B knew the fact, and C did not, specific performance of the contract should be refused to B. (b) A contracts to sell to B the interest of C in certain Stockton- trade. It is stipulated that the sale shall stand good, even though it should turn out that C's interest is worth nothing. In fact, the value of C's east depends on the result of certain partnership- accounts, on which he is heavily in debt to his partners. This indebtedness is known to A, but not to B. Specific performance of the contract should be refused to A. (c) A contracts to sell and B contracts to buy certain land. To protect the land frown floods, it is necessary for its owner to maintain and expensive embankment. B does not know of this circumstance, and A conceals it from him. Specific performance of the contract should be refused to A. (d) A's property is put up to auction. B requests C, A's attorney, to bid for him. C does this inadvertently and in good faith. The persons present, seems the vendor's attorney bidding, think that he is a mere puffer and cease to compete. The lot is knocked down to B at a low price. Specific performance of the contract should be refused to B." 16. A perusal of the aforesaid provision leaves no manner of doubt that it does not pertain to validity of the contract but to its Specific Performance. In fact, it presupposes a lawful contract as mentioned therein. It also presupposes that the agreement/contract m question contams all the necessary attributes mentioned in section 12 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 enticing a party to its Specific Performance. It also presupposes that the said agreement does not suffer from any of the disabilities mentioned in the preceding section 21 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, which prohibit its Specific Performance. Section 22 only comes into play as a residuary provision authorizing the Court to decline Specific Performance on equitable grounds. The aforesaid provision has come up for interpretation regularly before this Court variously, included in the following bases. In the case of Ghulam Nazi and others v. Seth Muhammad Aqua and others (PLD 1983 SC 344), it was held as under: 19. And lastly it was urged that the jurisdiction of the Court to decree specific performance being discretionary under section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, the Court ought not to have, considering the plaintiffs conduct, granted such relief: The jurisdiction Under section 22 is discretionary only m the sense that it cannot be claimed as a matter of right. As enjoined by the section itself, the exercise of the discretion is not to be arbitrary but sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a Court of appeal. The exercise of the discretion to grant or refuse to grant relief will, therefore, depend upon the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the parties. The Courts below have not found the circumstances of the case or the conduct of the plaintiff to justify a denial of the relief to him, and we see no reason to hold otherwise." In the case of Syed Arif Shah v. Abdul Hakeem Qureshi (PLD 1991 SC 905), it was observed as under: “14. It may be noticed that according to the above-quoted section the jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discretionary, and the Court is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful. However, the discretion of the Court is not arbitrary but sound and reasonable and is to be guided by judicial principles which are amenable to correction by a Court of appeal. It may further be noticed that the above section gives two illustrations which are not exhaustive to demonstrate in which cases the Court may decline’ to exercise discretion of granting specific performance of a contract, namely, (1) where the circumstances under which the contract is made are such as to give the plaintiff fan unfair "advantage over the defendant though there may not be fraud or misrepresentation on the plaintiffs part; and (1) where the performance of the contract would involve some hardship on the defendant which he did not foresee whereas its non-performance would not involve such hardship on the plaintiff It may also be pointed out that the above section provides that the Court may properly exercise discretion to decree specific performance where the plaintiff has done substantial acts or suffered losses in Consequence of a contract capable of specific performance." (emphasis supplied) In the case of Mrs. Muskrat Shankar Ali v. WW. Mrs. Safia Platoon and others (144 SCMR 2189) (at page 2209), it was observed as follows:- “ It is true that grant of relief of specific performance is discretionary with the’ Court, but this discretion cannot be exercised arbitrarily. The relief of specific performance being an equitable relief} it can be refused by the Court only if the equities, in the* case are against the plaintiff. The Court while refusing to grant a decree for specific performance to a plaintiff. must find something in the conduct of plaintiff which disentitled him to the grant of equitable relief of specific performance, or the Court reaches the conclusion that on account of delay in seeking the relief, the circumstances have so materially changed that it would be unjust to enforce the agreement specifically. The specific performance of a contract cannot be refused merely because it is lawful for the Court to refuse it. Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, though not exhaustive provides some instances in which the specific relief of a contract may be refused by the Court in its discretion ” In the case of Rab Nawab and 13 others v. Mustache Khan and 14 others (1999 SCMR 1362), it was stated as under: 9. Undoubtedly there are many instances in which, though there is nothing that actually amounts to fraud there is nevertheless a want of equity and fairness in the contract which are essential in order that the Court may exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction in specific performance. In judging of the fairness of a contract the Court will look not merely at the terms of the contract itself but at all the surrounding circumstances. " In the case of Bashir Ahmed through L. Rs. and another v. Muhammad Ali through L. Rs and another (2007 SCMR 1047), it was held as under: "5. It is a settled law that grant of specific relief is always discretionary in character and the Court is not always bound to decree the suit of specific performance in cases where the agreement is proved. It is a settled law that Court has to exercise discretion judicially and not arbitrarily. Reference can be made to the following judgments:- Arif Shah's case PLD 1991 SC 90, Muskrat Shankar Al’s case PLD 1994 SCMR 2189, Arena Bibi's case PLD 2003 SC 430 and Jet halal Nan shah Mode v. Bach and another AIR 194S BOM. 481. The ratio of the aforesaid precedents is as follows:- Where the circumstances under which a contract is made are ‘ such as to give the plaintiff fan unfair advantage over the defendant, though there may be no fraud or misrepresentation on the plaintiff s part or relief may be denied where the plaintiff has been negligent or as acquiesced in the injury." In the case of WW. MST. Mahmood Begum v. Syed Hassan Salad Anil 2 others (PLD 2010 SC 952), it was observed as follows: '7. Now here at this juncture the question would arise whether the amount of consideration can be enhanced or otherwise? Before dilating upon the said question, it may be kept in view that section 22 provides that the jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discretionary, and die Court is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful to do so, but the discretion of the Court is not arbitrary but sound and reasonable guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a Court of ajipeal." (Abdul Karim v.* Muhammad Shaft 1973 SCMR 225). 'It hardly needs any elaboration that "grant of decree for specific performance of a contract is a discretionary relief and the Court is not bound to decree such a suit merely because it is lawful. The Court has also to see the conduct of the person asking for such relief as also his readiness and willingness and capacity to make payment. "(Emphasis provided). Ali Muhammad v. Shah Mohammad PLD 1987 LAH. 607; Bank of Bahawalpur, Ltd. v. Punjab Tanneries, Faizabad Ltd. PLD 1971 LAH. 19 and Free Lai v. Hiram AIR 1926 Cal. 181). 17. A perusal of section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 as interpreted by this Court in the judgments reproduced hereinabove makes it clear and obvious that the said provision has no bearing on the validity of the contract. It only recognizes the discretion vested with the Court to decline the Specific Performance Of an Agreement even in the absence of any impediment, in this behalf as enumerated in section 21 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 and in spite of the fact that such Agreement may possess the necessary attributes entitling the Specific Performance of section 12 of the said Ac of 1877. It declares that the Specific Performance is essentially an equitable relief which can be declined if it is unjust or inequitable to do so. For determining whether the Relief or Specific Performance is to be granted the circumstances under which the contract is executed and the contract of the parties at that time and thereafter may be taken into account. The illustrated examples pertain to unforeseen circumstances and hardships which may be inflicted upon a party through Specific Performance in contradistinction to the lack of such hardships as a consequence of the failure to specifically perform the contract. The illustrations appended to the provision are not exhaustive but indicate the discretion available with the Court. Such discretion must necessarily be exercised on the basis of sound judicial principles: At the end of the day, the discretion must necessarily be relatable to the circumstances in which agreement came about or to the Specific Performance of the contract and the,consequences of grant or refusal of the relief of specific performance It does not appear WW. possible to invoke section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 to determine the validity of the agreement. 18. Furthermore, there is nothing in section 22 nor TTS illustrations or the interpretation thereof as handed down by this Court in the various, judgments referred to and reproduced hereinabove to indicate that the relief of Specific Performance is relatable to or has any connection with quantity or quality of the evidence required to be produced by either of the parties seeking or resisting such Specific Performance. Obviously a valid enforceable agreement along with factors entitling a person to Specific Performance, would be required to be proved through relevant and admissible evidence in terms of the QAnon- e-Shahadat Order, 1984. ' In this behalf reference was made to Article 17 of the Anne- Sahara Order, 1984, which is reproduced hereunder for ease of reference: "17. Competence and number of witness.—(1) The competence of a person to testify, and the number of witnesses required m any ease shall be determined in accordance with the injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah." (2) Unless otherwise provided in any law relating to the enforcement of Hudson or any other special law. (a) in matters pertaining to financial or future obligations, if reduced to writing, the instrument shall be attested by swollen, or one man and two women, so that one may remind the other, if necessary and evidence shall be led accordingly; and (b) I'm all other matters, the Court may accept, or act on, the testimony of one man or one woman or such other evidence as the circumstances of the case may warrant." This Court in the judgment, reported as MST. Rasheed Begum and others v. Muhammad Yousuf and others (2002 SCMR 1089), has been held as follows: "12. It is true that before promulgation of QAnon- e-Shahadat Order, 1984 an agreement to sell was not required by any law to be attested by witnesses. It is, however, a matter of common knowledge that during that period also the agreements to sell were by and large reduced to writing and attested by witnesses in spite of absence of legislative provision and the mode attained the status of an established practice by efflux of time. This, mode, in all probability, was adopted by way of abundant caution and to procure documentary evidence inasmuch as in a suit for specific performance of contract based on-an agreement to sell the onus is on the plaintiff to prove the contract unless its existence is admitted by the defendant. The merest of justice therefore, demands that the form of proof should be in line with the format of the document executed by the parties to the contract. It would thus follow that where an agreement to sell executed prior to promulgation of Anne- Sahara Order, 1984 has been reduced into writing and attested by witnesses its execution must be proved in accordance with the provisions of section 68 (Article 79) of the erstwhile Evidence Act notwithstanding the fact that the same apply only to that document which is required by law to be attested. Prop of the aforementioned legal vacuum cannot be taken to offset the effect of failure to prove the execution of an agreement to sell in accordance with the said mode. However, where an agreement to sell has been reduced to writing but not attested by witnesses its execution and the contract embodied therein can be proved by other strong evidence and attending circumstances which may vary from case to case. Needless to mention that such evidence can also be produced in the first category of cases as supporting evidence. A perusal of the aforesaid provision as interpreted by this Court makes it clear and obvious that the rigors of Articles 17 and 79 of the QAnon- e- Sahara Order, 1984, would be attracted even if an Agreement to Sell is purportedly signed by both the parties, but its execution is denied. Furthermore, the said provision pertains to the mode of proof of the document not its validity in terms of the Contract Act, 1872 nor its Specific Performance in terms of the Specific Relief Act, 1877. A failure to prove the existence of the Agreement would obviously deprive the Plaintiff of such relief but any difficulty, in this behalf, would not attract the provisions of section 22 of the Specific Reef Act, 1877, as such difficulty may have no nexus with the circumstances under which the agreement came about or the conduct of the parties or the hardship flowing from the grant of such relief: The observations in the case of MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) do not appear to be in consonance with the letter and spirit of section 227 ibid and runs contrary to the judicial pronouncements of this Court. 19, A great emphasis was laid upon the judgment of this Court, reported as Farmland Ali and another (supra), in an attempt to persuade us to hold that an Agreement to Sell not signed by the Vendee was not enforceable in law. A scrutiny of the aforesaid judgment reveals that no doubt a reference has been made to section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 to reiterate the settled proposition of law that relief of Specific Performance of an Agreement to Sell is equitable in nature and the Court has the discretion to decline such WW. relief: However, the judgment turns upon a finding of fact on the basis of the evidence disclosed in extensor. In the said case there was an absence of "consensus ad idem’. The heart of the judgment is embodied in para 9 thereof, the relevant portion whereof for ease of reference is reproduced hereunder: In the above context, the first and the foremost aspect of the case 1s, if the agreement to sell of the appellants was valid, because if it is not valid the question of its enforcement through the process of law and the exercise of discretion does not arise, It is an undisputed fact that appellants' agreement has not been signed by them the first, and the foremost requisite of a contract (agreement) is that the parties should have reached agreement, which unmistakably means, that an agreement is founded upon offer and acceptance, but its proof is also dependent upon the execution of the contract by both the contracting parties Le. by signing or affixing their thumb impression. But in this case this is conspicuously lacking by virtue of nonexecution (non-signing) of the agreement by the appellants, therefore m law and fact it is no contract (agreement).” From the aforesaid, it is clear and obvious that the conclusion drawn was that in fact and in law no agreement had been arrived at between the parties. It has not been laid down that in each and every eventuality where an Agreement, not signed by one of the parties, irrespective of the provisions of the Contract Act, 1872 referred to above would be invalid in law. It has also been noticed that the settled proposition of law as laid down MN the judgment of this Court, reported as Lesser's Jamal Jute Baling and Co. Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies and Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784) has not been overruled-The relevant portion thereof in the same paragraph has been reproduced hereunder for ease of reference. "9, learned counsel for the appellants has relied upon the judgment reported as Messes Jamie Jute Baling and Co. Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies and Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784) to argue to the contrary, wherein it has been held that “terms of agreement reduced into writing and proved to have been accepted and acted upon by both parties—Agreement, proper and valid even if one party had not signed such agreement". However the conditions are that the agreement should be accepted by the parties who are actually in dispute qua the validity thereof, and the agreement should have been acted upon. In this case as explained earlier in the light of the facts of the case the real dispute is between the appellants and the respondent, who (respondent) has never admitted the agreement, and it has also not been acted upon ” 20. Thus, it appears that the proposition of law that an Agreement to Sell not signed by one of the parties if proved to have been accepted and acted upon would be a valid Agreement to Sell, is a valid contract enforceable in law has MN fact been reiterated. 21. In view of the above, it is evident that the proposition that where an Agreement to Sell pertain to immovable property is not signed by one of the parties thereto, in each and every eventuality, is invalid and not specifically enforceable is fallacious and contrary to the law. The existence and validity of the Agreement and it being specifically enforceable or otherwise would depend upon the proof of its existence validity and enforceability in accordance with the QAnon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, the relevant provisions of the Contract Act, 1872, the Specific Relief Act, 1877 and any other law applicable thereto. Having settled the preliminary legal issues involved, let the above-mentioned Civil Appeals be set down for hearing to be decided separately on the basis of the evidence available on the record in terms of the observations made hereinabove.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): JUDGMENT C.M.A. NO. 6863 OF 2014 IN CIVILAPPEAL NO. 56 OF 2011, CIVIL APPEAL NO. 462-L OF 2009 AND CIVILAPPEAL NO.11-L OF 2013. Statutes CONTRACT ACT (IX OF 1872)-SS. AND 9 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877)-S. 22 TRANSFER OF PROPERTYACT (IV OF 1882)-S. 54 CONTRACT ACT (LX OF 1872) SS. AND 9 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) S. 12 QANUN-E-SHAHADAT (10 OF 1984) ARTS. 17 AND 79 Judgment SH. AZMAT SAEED, J.—Civil Appeal No.56 of 2011, Civil Misc. Application No.6863 of 2014 in Civil Appeal No.56 of 2011 and Civil Appeals No.462-L of 2009 and No.1 1- L of 2013 have arisen out of Civil Suits, wherein the Plaintiffs therein variously claimed relief of Specific Performance of Agreements to Sell pertaining to immovable property. In each of the aforesaid cases, the Agreement to Sell in question was purportedly signed and executed by the Vendors but did not bear the signatures of the Vendees, who were the Plaintiffs in their respective Civil Suits. A common question which has arisen mm all the aforesaid Civil Appeals is whether such Agreements to Sell not signed by the Vendees were valid and enforceable in law. The learned High Court in its judgment dated 30.11.2010 impugned in the Civil Appeal No.56 of 2011 and in the judgment dated 19.12.2012 by relying upon the judgment of this Court, reported as MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) held that such an Agreement to Sell not signed by the Vendee/Plaintiff was not enforceable in law. A similar argument was also canvassed at the bar in Civil Appeal No.452-L of 2009. Reference was also made to another judgment of this Court, reported as Farmland Ali and another v. Kinda Baths and others (PLD 2015 SC 187) to assert that the Agreement to Sell not signed by one of the parties was invalid. 2. The learned counsel appearing for both sides of aisle were brisking with arguments based upon the entire factual and legal spectrum of their respective cases but were asked to restrict themselves to the legal - proposition noted above, as we initially propose only to decide the aforesaid question of law leaving the merits of the individual case, including all other issues of fact and law to be adjudicated upon separately on a case to case basis. WW. 2115 3. Main Allah Nawab, learned Sr. ASC leading the charge on behalf of the Appellant in Civil Appeal No.11-Lof2013 contended that the learned High Court has failed to take into consideration the provisions of sections 8 and 9 of the Contract Act, 1872, and a bare reading thereof leaves no manner of doubt that a concluded enforceable agreement can come about, even in the absence of formal signatures by one of the parties. It was added that there is nothing in the Contract Act, 1872, which prohibits an oral agreement, which is obviously not signed by either party. It was further added that the learned High Court has failed to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): about, even in the absence of formal signatures by one of the parties. It was added that there is nothing in the Contract Act, 1872, which prohibits an oral agreement, which is obviously not signed by either party. It was further added that the learned High Court has failed to take MTO consideration the law laid down by this Court in the judgment, reported as Messes Jamal Jute Bang and Co. Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies and Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784), wherein it has been held that an Agreement reduced into writing and accepted by both the parties is enforceable in law, even if} one of the parties has not appended its signatures thereupon. The learned counsel further relied upon the judgment of this Court, reported as Karachi Gas Co, Ltd. v. Heywood Cotton Mills Ltd. (PLD 1975 SC 193) to assert that a valid agreement can be based upon an implied proposal and acceptance and, in this behalf writing is not necessary. The learned counsel also placed reliance upon the judgments, reported as RTS Flexible Systems Limited v. Moliere Alois Muller GmbH and Co. KG (2012 SCMR 1027), Messes Habit Bank Limited v. Abdul Zahid Khan (1996 CLC 698), Jugal Kishore Rameshwardas v. Mrs. Toolbar Horus (AIR 1955 SC 812) and Banaras Was v. Cane Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh and another (AIR 1963 SC 1417). With regard to the judgments of this Court, reported as MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) and Farmland Ali and another v. Kinda Baths and others (PLD 2015 SC 187), it was contended that the same are not only distinguishable on facts but also do not lay down the entire law on the subject and cannot be construed to run contrary to the express provisions of sections 8 and 9 of the Contract Act, 1872 and the settled law on the subject, as laid down by this Court, including in the judgments referred to above. 4. The other learned counsel adopted and supported the contentions raised on behalf of the learned counsel for the Appellants referred to above. 5. The learned counsel for the opposite side controverted the contentions raised by Main Allah Nawab, learned Sr. ASC by contending that mutuality is a SME qua non for an enforceable agreement and the absence of the signatures of one of the parties thereto for all intends and purposes conclusively determine the absence of such mutuality. It was further WW. contended that the same is even more vital in an executory agreement contaming reciprocal promises. The learned counsel placed reliance upon the judgments of this Court in the case, reported as Timbaland v. Allah Like and others (1996 SCMR 575), Messes M.A. Khan and Co. through Sole Proprietor Muhammad Ali Khan v. Messes Pakistan Railway Employees Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. through Principal Officer/Secretary, Karachi (2006 SCMR 721), MST. Russian Hamid (supra). Alleged Corruption in Rental Power Plants etc.: In the matter of (Eftekhari Muhammad Haughty, CJ) (2012 SCMR

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): SCMR 575), Messes M.A. Khan and Co. through Sole Proprietor Muhammad Ali Khan v. Messes Pakistan Railway Employees Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. through Principal Officer/Secretary, Karachi (2006 SCMR 721), MST. Russian Hamid (supra). Alleged Corruption in Rental Power Plants etc.: In the matter of (Eftekhari Muhammad Haughty, CJ) (2012 SCMR 773) and Farmland Ali and another (supra). 6. Heard and perused the available record. 7. The primary and basic law relating to the contracts is obviously the Contract Act, 1872. The essentials of a valid contract are an offer communicated, the unconditional acceptance of such offer and consideration. There is nothing in the Contract Act, 1872 which requires that such offer and acceptance must necessarily be m writing or form a single document. The law i.e. the Contract Act, 1872 envisages a valid enforceable contract, which may even be oral. A perusal of the provisions of the said enactment also reveals that both the proposal and its acceptance may be expressed or implied, as is apparent from section 9 thereof, which reads as under: Promises, express and implied.—In so far as the proposal or acceptance of any promise is made in words, the promise is said to be express. In so far as such proposal or acceptance is made otherwise than in words, the promise is said to be implied." 8. Similarly/once an offer is communicated, the performance of the conditions of the proposal or the acceptance of any consideration or part thereof offered with the proposal also constitutes an acceptance so as to bring about a valid biding contract between the parties, as is obvious from the bare reading of section 8 of the Contract Act, 1872, which is reproduced hereunder for ease of reference: 8. Acceptance by performing conditions or receiving consideration.—Performance of the conditions of a proposal, or the acceptance of any consideration for a reciprocal-promise which may be offered with a proposal, is an acceptance of the proposal." 9. No doubt, the Contract Act, 1872 may not be the only law applicable to the transactions enumerating the requisite formalities. Various special laws pertaining to certain specified species of contracts also hold the field and the provisions thereof may envisage certain additional requirements to bring about a valid contract. An obvious example is section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, which requires that a contract of sale of immovable property of value of more than one hundred WW. 4115 rupees must necessarily be reduced in writing. This condition only applies where the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 is applicable through a Notification in terms of section 1 thereof: The said provision of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 is not applicable to the entire length and breadth of Pakistan and oral sales are recognized and enforced in various parts of Pakistan. Be that as it may, there is nothing in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 or any other law, which requires that an Agreement to Sell of immovable property must necessarily be reduced into

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): and breadth of Pakistan and oral sales are recognized and enforced in various parts of Pakistan. Be that as it may, there is nothing in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 or any other law, which requires that an Agreement to Sell of immovable property must necessarily be reduced into writing Or be signed by the parties thereto. 10. The Courts m Pakistan, while interpreting the various provisions applicable, more particularly, sections 8 and 9 of the Contract Act, 1872, have repeatedly and consistently held that the contracts in general do not require to be reduced MTO writing (except where otherwise specifically provided by law) and the offer and acceptance can also:be implied from the conduct of the parties in terms of sections 8 and 9 ibid and the absence of formal signatures does not affect the validity or enforceability of the Contract Act, 1872. 11. This Court in the judgment, reported as Lesser's Jamal Jute Balm and Co, Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784) held as follows: "Even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the contract was not properly signed even otherwise in my opinion, the contract between the parties was quite valid and binding on them. It has been rightly posted out by the Civil Judge that the appellant-sellers have accepted the contract. There is also evidence that after the conclusion of the contract the appellant-firm had partially acted upon it for supplying 125 bales of jute. Mr. Bhattacharjee, learned counsel for the respondent has referred to two Indian decisions, Jugal Kishore Rameshwardas v. Mrs. Toolbar Horus (1) and Banaras Was v. Cane Commissioner, Uttar Pardesh and another It was held in these cases that even if signature is not there and acceptance is established it is a proper agreement between the parties. In the case of Jugal Kishore Rameshawardas, it was held as under: "But it is settled law that to constitute an arbitration agreement in writing it is not necessary that it should be signed by the parties, and that it is sufficient if the terms are reduced to writing and the agreement of the parties thereto is established." The same view was expressed in the case of Banaras Was. If the fact of the present case is considered in the light of these principles, it is proved'that the agreement between the parties was reduced to writing. Both the parties accepted its terms and have partially carried them out. WW. In view of this the contract in dispute is established between them and the respondents are entitled to enforce it. Having regards to these facts, I am satisfied that there was a valid reference to arbitration and the Arbitrators were competent to enter on the reference in order to decide the dispute between the parties. I would, therefore, repel the contention of the appellant m this behalf" (emphasis supplied) In the case of Karachi Gas Co. Ltd. v. Heywood Cotton Mills Ltd. (PLD 1975 SC 193),

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): and the Arbitrators were competent to enter on the reference in order to decide the dispute between the parties. I would, therefore, repel the contention of the appellant m this behalf" (emphasis supplied) In the case of Karachi Gas Co. Ltd. v. Heywood Cotton Mills Ltd. (PLD 1975 SC 193), it has been observed as follows: “The customer did not raise any objection to this principle of charging interest. On the basis of these facts, the Privy Council following the principle laid down in (1813) 3 Camp 487 observed at p. 23 as follows:- the fact that the defendant had not objected to a change of compound interest in accounts which for several years, he had annually received from the plaintiff bank offered sufficient evidence of a promise by him to pay interest in that manner.” In the case of Messes M. A. Khan Co. through Sole Proprietor Muhammad Ali Khan v. Messes Pakistan Railways Employees Cooperative' Housing Society Ltd. through Principal Officer/Secretary, Karachi (2006 SCMR 721), it was held as under: The acceptance of the offer may be express or implied, or it can be gathered from the conduct of parties and the circumstance of the case. The acceptance of an offer would give rise to an agreement which is is enforceable in law is a valid contract and the contract is complete as soon as the offer is accepted and the terms of contract required to be reduced in writing would be only incidental to the completion of contract. In a contract by correspondence if the acceptance of offer is established through the letters, the non-execution of the formal agreement would not be essential to constitute a valid contract. The letters of offer and acceptance indicating the term agreed upon by the parties would constitute a valid contract which would not be affected by subsequent negotiation and the terms of the contract would necessarily be judged from the letter of acceptance." 12. The controversy with regard to the validity of the contract, which does not bear the signatures of one of the parties thereof also cropped up in the Indian Jurisdiction and was settled by the Supreme Court of India in the judgment, reported as Asoka Bose v. Sarmatia Devi and others (AIR 2009 SC 1527); it was held as follows: “All agreements of sale are bilateral contracts as promises are made by both — the vendor agreeing to sell and the purchaser agreeing to purchase. On the other hand, the observation in S.M. Goal Chatty (supra) that unless agreement is signed both by the vendor and purchaser, it is hot a valid contract is also not sound. An agreement of sale comes into existence when the WW. vendor agrees to sell and the purchaser agrees purchase, for an agreed consideration on agreed terms. It can be oral. It can be by exchange of communications which may or may not be signed. It may'be by a single document signed by both parties. It can also be by a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): vendor agrees to sell and the purchaser agrees purchase, for an agreed consideration on agreed terms. It can be oral. It can be by exchange of communications which may or may not be signed. It may'be by a single document signed by both parties. It can also be by a document in two parts, each party signing one copy and then exchanging the signed copy as a consequence of which the purchaser has the copy signed by the vendor and a vendor has a copy signed by the purchaser. Therefore, even an oral agreement to sell is valid. If so, a written agreement signed by one of the parties, if it evidences such an oral agreement will also be valid. In any agreement of sale, the terms are always negotiated and thereafter reduced in the form of an agreement Of sale and signed by both parties or the vendor alone unless it is by a series of offers and counter-offers by letters or other modes of recognized communication. In India, an agreement of sale signed by the vendor alone and delivered to the purchaser, and accepted by the purchaser, has always been considered to be a valid contract. In the event of breach by the vendor, it can be specifically enforced by the purchaser. There is, however, no practice of purchaser alone signing an agreement of sale.” 13. The aforesaid would make it clear that it is now a well settled proposition of law that for a valid contract, the same can be oral, or it may be through exchange of communication between the parties. Once an offer is communicated, the acceptance thereof can be expressed or implied. Such acceptance of the offer would include accepting the consideration accompany mg the offer or act mg upon the said barge. There is no requirement of a formal signature of both or either of the parties. All that is required is an offer and acceptance and consideration between the parties. 14. At this juncture it may be pertinent to mention that all valid contracts are not specifically enforceable but nevertheless may give rise to rights and liabilities, and the breach thereof may entitle the offended party to seek compensation/damages in terms of sections 73 and 74 of the Contract Act, 1872. 15. The question of Specific Performance of a contract is dealt with in the Specific Relief Act, 1877. The reference to this aspect of the matter has been necessitated in view of the fact that in the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel ie’. MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) and Farmland Ali and another v. Kinda Baths and others (PLD 2015 SC 87), a reference has been made to section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877. The aforesaid provision is reproduced hereunder for ease of reference: "22. Discretion as to decreeing specific performance: The jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discretionary, and the Court is not bound to grant such relief merely

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): a reference has been made to section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877. The aforesaid provision is reproduced hereunder for ease of reference: "22. Discretion as to decreeing specific performance: The jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discretionary, and the Court is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful to do so; but the discretion of the Court is not arbitrary but sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a Court of appeal. The following are cases in which the Court may properly exercise a discretion not to decree specific performance: I. Where the circumstances under which the contract is made are such as to give the plaintiff fan unfair advantage over the defendant, though there be no fraud or misrepresentation on the plaintiff's part. Illustrations (a) A, tenant for life of certain property, assigns his interest therein to B. C contracts to buy, and B contracts to sell that interest. Before the contract is completed. A receives a mortal injury from the effects of which he dies the day after the contract is executed. If B and C were equally ignorant or equally aware of the fact. B is entitled to specific performance of the contract, if B knew the fact, and C did not, specific performance of the contract should be refused to B. (b) A contracts to sell to B the interest of C in certain Stockton- trade. It is stipulated that the sale shall stand good, even though it should turn out that C's interest is worth nothing. In fact, the value of C's east depends on the result of certain partnership- accounts, on which he is heavily in debt to his partners. This indebtedness is known to A, but not to B. Specific performance of the contract should be refused to A. (c) A contracts to sell and B contracts to buy certain land. To protect the land frown floods, it is necessary for its owner to maintain and expensive embankment. B does not know of this circumstance, and A conceals it from him. Specific performance of the contract should be refused to A. (d) A's property is put up to auction. B requests C, A's attorney, to bid for him. C does this inadvertently and in good faith. The persons present, seems the vendor's attorney bidding, think that he is a mere puffer and cease to compete. The lot is knocked down to B at a low price. Specific performance of the contract should be refused to B." 16. A perusal of the aforesaid provision leaves no manner of doubt that it does not pertain to validity of the contract but to its Specific Performance. In fact, it presupposes a lawful contract as mentioned therein. It also presupposes that the agreement/contract m question contams all the necessary attributes mentioned in section 12 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 enticing a party to its Specific Performance. It also presupposes that the said agreement does not

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): Performance. In fact, it presupposes a lawful contract as mentioned therein. It also presupposes that the agreement/contract m question contams all the necessary attributes mentioned in section 12 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 enticing a party to its Specific Performance. It also presupposes that the said agreement does not suffer from any of the disabilities mentioned in the preceding section 21 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, which prohibit its Specific Performance. Section 22 only comes into play as a residuary provision authorizing the Court to decline Specific Performance on equitable grounds. The aforesaid provision has come up for interpretation regularly before this Court variously, included in the following bases. In the case of Ghulam Nazi and others v. Seth Muhammad Aqua and others (PLD 1983 SC 344), it was held as under: 19. And lastly it was urged that the jurisdiction of the Court to decree specific performance being discretionary under section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, the Court ought not to have, considering the plaintiffs conduct, granted such relief: The jurisdiction Under section 22 is discretionary only m the sense that it cannot be claimed as a matter of right. As enjoined by the section itself, the exercise of the discretion is not to be arbitrary but sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a Court of appeal. The exercise of the discretion to grant or refuse to grant relief will, therefore, depend upon the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the parties. The Courts below have not found the circumstances of the case or the conduct of the plaintiff to justify a denial of the relief to him, and we see no reason to hold otherwise." In the case of Syed Arif Shah v. Abdul Hakeem Qureshi (PLD 1991 SC 905), it was observed as under: “14. It may be noticed that according to the above-quoted section the jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discretionary, and the Court is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful. However, the discretion of the Court is not arbitrary but sound and reasonable and is to be guided by judicial principles which are amenable to correction by a Court of appeal. It may further be noticed that the above section gives two illustrations which are not exhaustive to demonstrate in which cases the Court may decline’ to exercise discretion of granting specific performance of a contract, namely, (1) where the circumstances under which the contract is made are such as to give the plaintiff fan unfair "advantage over the defendant though there may not be fraud or misrepresentation on the plaintiffs part; and (1) where the performance of the contract would involve some hardship on the defendant which he did not foresee whereas its non-performance would not involve such hardship on the plaintiff It may also be pointed out that the above section provides that the Court may properly exercise discretion to decree specific performance where the plaintiff

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): the contract would involve some hardship on the defendant which he did not foresee whereas its non-performance would not involve such hardship on the plaintiff It may also be pointed out that the above section provides that the Court may properly exercise discretion to decree specific performance where the plaintiff has done substantial acts or suffered losses in Consequence of a contract capable of specific performance." (emphasis supplied) In the case of Mrs. Muskrat Shankar Ali v. WW. Mrs. Safia Platoon and others (144 SCMR 2189) (at page 2209), it was observed as follows:- “ It is true that grant of relief of specific performance is discretionary with the’ Court, but this discretion cannot be exercised arbitrarily. The relief of specific performance being an equitable relief} it can be refused by the Court only if the equities, in the* case are against the plaintiff. The Court while refusing to grant a decree for specific performance to a plaintiff. must find something in the conduct of plaintiff which disentitled him to the grant of equitable relief of specific performance, or the Court reaches the conclusion that on account of delay in seeking the relief, the circumstances have so materially changed that it would be unjust to enforce the agreement specifically. The specific performance of a contract cannot be refused merely because it is lawful for the Court to refuse it. Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, though not exhaustive provides some instances in which the specific relief of a contract may be refused by the Court in its discretion ” In the case of Rab Nawab and 13 others v. Mustache Khan and 14 others (1999 SCMR 1362), it was stated as under: 9. Undoubtedly there are many instances in which, though there is nothing that actually amounts to fraud there is nevertheless a want of equity and fairness in the contract which are essential in order that the Court may exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction in specific performance. In judging of the fairness of a contract the Court will look not merely at the terms of the contract itself but at all the surrounding circumstances. " In the case of Bashir Ahmed through L. Rs. and another v. Muhammad Ali through L. Rs and another (2007 SCMR 1047), it was held as under: "5. It is a settled law that grant of specific relief is always discretionary in character and the Court is not always bound to decree the suit of specific performance in cases where the agreement is proved. It is a settled law that Court has to exercise discretion judicially and not arbitrarily. Reference can be made to the following judgments:- Arif Shah's case PLD 1991 SC 90, Muskrat Shankar Al’s case PLD 1994 SCMR 2189, Arena Bibi's case PLD 2003 SC 430 and Jet halal Nan shah Mode v. Bach and another AIR 194S BOM. 481. The ratio of the aforesaid precedents is as follows:- Where the circumstances under which a contract is made are ‘ such

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): Muskrat Shankar Al’s case PLD 1994 SCMR 2189, Arena Bibi's case PLD 2003 SC 430 and Jet halal Nan shah Mode v. Bach and another AIR 194S BOM. 481. The ratio of the aforesaid precedents is as follows:- Where the circumstances under which a contract is made are ‘ such as to give the plaintiff fan unfair advantage over the defendant, though there may be no fraud or misrepresentation on the plaintiff s part or relief may be denied where the plaintiff has been negligent or as acquiesced in the injury." In the case of WW. MST. Mahmood Begum v. Syed Hassan Salad Anil 2 others (PLD 2010 SC 952), it was observed as follows: '7. Now here at this juncture the question would arise whether the amount of consideration can be enhanced or otherwise? Before dilating upon the said question, it may be kept in view that section 22 provides that the jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discretionary, and die Court is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful to do so, but the discretion of the Court is not arbitrary but sound and reasonable guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a Court of ajipeal." (Abdul Karim v.* Muhammad Shaft 1973 SCMR 225). 'It hardly needs any elaboration that "grant of decree for specific performance of a contract is a discretionary relief and the Court is not bound to decree such a suit merely because it is lawful. The Court has also to see the conduct of the person asking for such relief as also his readiness and willingness and capacity to make payment. "(Emphasis provided). Ali Muhammad v. Shah Mohammad PLD 1987 LAH. 607; Bank of Bahawalpur, Ltd. v. Punjab Tanneries, Faizabad Ltd. PLD 1971 LAH. 19 and Free Lai v. Hiram AIR 1926 Cal. 181). 17. A perusal of section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 as interpreted by this Court in the judgments reproduced hereinabove makes it clear and obvious that the said provision has no bearing on the validity of the contract. It only recognizes the discretion vested with the Court to decline the Specific Performance Of an Agreement even in the absence of any impediment, in this behalf as enumerated in section 21 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 and in spite of the fact that such Agreement may possess the necessary attributes entitling the Specific Performance of section 12 of the said Ac of 1877. It declares that the Specific Performance is essentially an equitable relief which can be declined if it is unjust or inequitable to do so. For determining whether the Relief or Specific Performance is to be granted the circumstances under which the contract is executed and the contract of the parties at that time and thereafter may be taken into account. The illustrated examples pertain to unforeseen circumstances and hardships which may be inflicted upon a party through Specific Performance in contradistinction to the lack of such hardships as a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): which the contract is executed and the contract of the parties at that time and thereafter may be taken into account. The illustrated examples pertain to unforeseen circumstances and hardships which may be inflicted upon a party through Specific Performance in contradistinction to the lack of such hardships as a consequence of the failure to specifically perform the contract. The illustrations appended to the provision are not exhaustive but indicate the discretion available with the Court. Such discretion must necessarily be exercised on the basis of sound judicial principles: At the end of the day, the discretion must necessarily be relatable to the circumstances in which agreement came about or to the Specific Performance of the contract and the,consequences of grant or refusal of the relief of specific performance It does not appear WW. possible to invoke section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 to determine the validity of the agreement. 18. Furthermore, there is nothing in section 22 nor TTS illustrations or the interpretation thereof as handed down by this Court in the various, judgments referred to and reproduced hereinabove to indicate that the relief of Specific Performance is relatable to or has any connection with quantity or quality of the evidence required to be produced by either of the parties seeking or resisting such Specific Performance. Obviously a valid enforceable agreement along with factors entitling a person to Specific Performance, would be required to be proved through relevant and admissible evidence in terms of the QAnon- e-Shahadat Order, 1984. ' In this behalf reference was made to Article 17 of the Anne- Sahara Order, 1984, which is reproduced hereunder for ease of reference: "17. Competence and number of witness.—(1) The competence of a person to testify, and the number of witnesses required m any ease shall be determined in accordance with the injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah." (2) Unless otherwise provided in any law relating to the enforcement of Hudson or any other special law. (a) in matters pertaining to financial or future obligations, if reduced to writing, the instrument shall be attested by swollen, or one man and two women, so that one may remind the other, if necessary and evidence shall be led accordingly; and (b) I'm all other matters, the Court may accept, or act on, the testimony of one man or one woman or such other evidence as the circumstances of the case may warrant." This Court in the judgment, reported as MST. Rasheed Begum and others v. Muhammad Yousuf and others (2002 SCMR 1089), has been held as follows: "12. It is true that before promulgation of QAnon- e-Shahadat Order, 1984 an agreement to sell was not required by any law to be attested by witnesses. It is, however, a matter of common knowledge that during that period also the agreements to sell were by and large reduced to writing and attested by witnesses in spite of absence of legislative provision and the mode attained

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): was not required by any law to be attested by witnesses. It is, however, a matter of common knowledge that during that period also the agreements to sell were by and large reduced to writing and attested by witnesses in spite of absence of legislative provision and the mode attained the status of an established practice by efflux of time. This, mode, in all probability, was adopted by way of abundant caution and to procure documentary evidence inasmuch as in a suit for specific performance of contract based on-an agreement to sell the onus is on the plaintiff to prove the contract unless its existence is admitted by the defendant. The merest of justice therefore, demands that the form of proof should be in line with the format of the document executed by the parties to the contract. It would thus follow that where an agreement to sell executed prior to promulgation of Anne- Sahara Order, 1984 has been reduced into writing and attested by witnesses its execution must be proved in accordance with the provisions of section 68 (Article 79) of the erstwhile Evidence Act notwithstanding the fact that the same apply only to that document which is required by law to be attested. Prop of the aforementioned legal vacuum cannot be taken to offset the effect of failure to prove the execution of an agreement to sell in accordance with the said mode. However, where an agreement to sell has been reduced to writing but not attested by witnesses its execution and the contract embodied therein can be proved by other strong evidence and attending circumstances which may vary from case to case. Needless to mention that such evidence can also be produced in the first category of cases as supporting evidence. A perusal of the aforesaid provision as interpreted by this Court makes it clear and obvious that the rigors of Articles 17 and 79 of the QAnon- e- Sahara Order, 1984, would be attracted even if an Agreement to Sell is purportedly signed by both the parties, but its execution is denied. Furthermore, the said provision pertains to the mode of proof of the document not its validity in terms of the Contract Act, 1872 nor its Specific Performance in terms of the Specific Relief Act, 1877. A failure to prove the existence of the Agreement would obviously deprive the Plaintiff of such relief but any difficulty, in this behalf, would not attract the provisions of section 22 of the Specific Reef Act, 1877, as such difficulty may have no nexus with the circumstances under which the agreement came about or the conduct of the parties or the hardship flowing from the grant of such relief: The observations in the case of MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) do not appear to be in consonance with the letter and spirit of section 227 ibid and runs contrary to the judicial pronouncements of this Court. 19, A great emphasis was laid

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): The observations in the case of MST. Russian Hamid v. Km. Abdul Rehman and others (2010 SCMR 334) do not appear to be in consonance with the letter and spirit of section 227 ibid and runs contrary to the judicial pronouncements of this Court. 19, A great emphasis was laid upon the judgment of this Court, reported as Farmland Ali and another (supra), in an attempt to persuade us to hold that an Agreement to Sell not signed by the Vendee was not enforceable in law. A scrutiny of the aforesaid judgment reveals that no doubt a reference has been made to section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 to reiterate the settled proposition of law that relief of Specific Performance of an Agreement to Sell is equitable in nature and the Court has the discretion to decline such WW. relief: However, the judgment turns upon a finding of fact on the basis of the evidence disclosed in extensor. In the said case there was an absence of "consensus ad idem’. The heart of the judgment is embodied in para 9 thereof, the relevant portion whereof for ease of reference is reproduced hereunder: In the above context, the first and the foremost aspect of the case 1s, if the agreement to sell of the appellants was valid, because if it is not valid the question of its enforcement through the process of law and the exercise of discretion does not arise, It is an undisputed fact that appellants' agreement has not been signed by them the first, and the foremost requisite of a contract (agreement) is that the parties should have reached agreement, which unmistakably means, that an agreement is founded upon offer and acceptance, but its proof is also dependent upon the execution of the contract by both the contracting parties Le. by signing or affixing their thumb impression. But in this case this is conspicuously lacking by virtue of nonexecution (non-signing) of the agreement by the appellants, therefore m law and fact it is no contract (agreement).” From the aforesaid, it is clear and obvious that the conclusion drawn was that in fact and in law no agreement had been arrived at between the parties. It has not been laid down that in each and every eventuality where an Agreement, not signed by one of the parties, irrespective of the provisions of the Contract Act, 1872 referred to above would be invalid in law. It has also been noticed that the settled proposition of law as laid down MN the judgment of this Court, reported as Lesser's Jamal Jute Baling and Co. Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies and Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784) has not been overruled-The relevant portion thereof in the same paragraph has been reproduced hereunder for ease of reference. "9, learned counsel for the appellants has relied upon the judgment reported as Messes Jamie Jute Baling and Co. Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies and Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784) to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2017 SCMR 98?
Answer: From case 2017 SCMR 98 (SUPREME COURT, 2016-11-11): been overruled-The relevant portion thereof in the same paragraph has been reproduced hereunder for ease of reference. "9, learned counsel for the appellants has relied upon the judgment reported as Messes Jamie Jute Baling and Co. Dacca v. Messes M. Darkies and Sorts (Sons), Dacca (PLD 1971 SC 784) to argue to the contrary, wherein it has been held that “terms of agreement reduced into writing and proved to have been accepted and acted upon by both parties—Agreement, proper and valid even if one party had not signed such agreement". However the conditions are that the agreement should be accepted by the parties who are actually in dispute qua the validity thereof, and the agreement should have been acted upon. In this case as explained earlier in the light of the facts of the case the real dispute is between the appellants and the respondent, who (respondent) has never admitted the agreement, and it has also not been acted upon ” 20. Thus, it appears that the proposition of law that an Agreement to Sell not signed by one of the parties if proved to have been accepted and acted upon would be a valid Agreement to Sell, is a valid contract enforceable in law has MN fact been reiterated. 21. In view of the above, it is evident that the proposition that where an Agreement to Sell pertain to immovable property is not signed by one of the parties thereto, in each and every eventuality, is invalid and not specifically enforceable is fallacious and contrary to the law. The existence and validity of the Agreement and it being specifically enforceable or otherwise would depend upon the proof of its existence validity and enforceability in accordance with the QAnon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, the relevant provisions of the Contract Act, 1872, the Specific Relief Act, 1877 and any other law applicable thereto. Having settled the preliminary legal issues involved, let the above-mentioned Civil Appeals be set down for hearing to be decided separately on the basis of the evidence available on the record in terms of the observations made hereinabove.

Question: What is case 2009 CLC 785 about?
Answer: Case 2009 CLC 785 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ K) on 2009-03-13. The case involved RAJA MUHAMMAD BASHIR APPELLANTWVERSUS.SHAUKAT HABIB AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT A OF 1877) - SS. 42 AND 39 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - SS.L2(2) AND O.XXIII AND R.3 ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, CJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2009 CLC 785?
Answer: In case 2009 CLC 785, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT A OF 1877) - SS. 42 AND 39 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - SS.L2(2) AND O.XXIII AND R.3 ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ K) and decided on 2009-03-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2009 CLC 785?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2009 CLC 785 were: MUHAMMAD YAQOOB KHAN MUGHAL FOR APPELLANT. -FSARDAR KARAM DAD KHAN FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, CJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2009 CLC 785?
Answer: The parties in case 2009 CLC 785 were: RAJA MUHAMMAD BASHIR APPELLANTWVERSUS.SHAUKAT HABIB AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ K).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2009 CLC 785.
Answer: 4 SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.- The’ background of the present litigation is that a declaratory suit seeking cancellation of a sale-deed dated 26-3-1995 regarding the property in dispute was filed by the respondents harm, in the Court of Sub- Judge, Muzaffarabad. During the pendency of the suit the parties entered into compromise consequently, they recorded their statements on 15-6-1996. However, before decree could be passed, on the basis of compromise deed, an application by the appellant harm was submitted m the trial Court on 22-6-1996 alleging that fraud had been committed on him and thus, he sought that compromise deed be annulled, and no decree should be passed on the basis of the same. The appellant while submitting his application for annulling the compromise deed alleged that in fact property in dispute was purchased by him for a consideration of Rs. 10,00,000 but in the sale-deed the consideration was mentioned only to the tune of Rs.5,00,000. The remaining amount was to be paid by him at the time of transfer of the possession of the house to him. It was further alleged that subsequently, he went abroad and sent Rs.5,00,000 which was received by the respondents herein, as outstanding consideration of sale. At the time of compromise, according to the appellant, it was agreed that the aforesaid amount, Rs.5,00,000, would be returned to the respondents after filing of said compromise but subsequently, they refused to pay back the said part of consideration to him. The learned Sub-Judge, after taking objections from the respondents herein, instead of passing a decree on the basis of compromise framed issued on the basis of said application. The respondents feeling aggrieved by the order of the learned Sub- Judge went in appeal before the learned District Judge with no success. A revision petition was filed in the High. Court, which also failed consequently, the respondents filed an appeal before the Supreme Court. The apex Court accepted their appeal with the observation that the trial Court after recording a compromise was bound ‘to pass a decree in view of compromise as envisaged under Order XXIII, “* rule 3 of C.P.C. While the controversy was pending in the superior t Court, the appellant herein filed a declaratory suit with prayer for possession of the suit-land in the trial Court. The suit was pending when verdict of the apex Court, dated 30-11-1998 came against. Him consequently, he amended the plaint. His earlier suit is found to have been instituted before the verdict of the Supreme Court, dated 30-111999. The learned trial Court after taking written statement by the u- respondents herein framed the relevant issues and heard the arguments on Issues Nos;2 and 5. After hearing the arguments on the aforesaid issues the learned trial Judge rejected the plant in View of section 12 subsection (2) of C.P.C. hence this appeal. I I- The learned counsel for. the appellant while assailing the impugned judgment and decree contended that’ the amendment in section 12 of C.P.C. was adapted in Azad Kashmir on 5-3-2003, 1J therefore, it could not be allowed to hit the case of the appellant because m the said amendment operated prospectively and the learned District Judge (trial Court) wrongly rejected the suit by the appellant, and it was on account of misconception about the provision of law resorted to by the learned Judge. * Conversely, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the suit. By the appellant was rightly rejected because under the. amended law the suit was not competent, and it was hit by the operation of amended law MN the shape of subsection (2) of section 12 of C.P.C. His case was that the. amendment in section 12, C.P.C. was effective retrospectively, and the learned Judge committed no illegality while rejecting the plant. He further submitted that even otherwise the suit by the plaintifffappellant was hit by mischief of Order II, rule 2, C.P.C. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record carefully. While dealing with the objection with regard to operation of Order II, rule 2, C.P.C. in the instant case it may be observed that it is nothing but a fallacy. The learned counsel perhaps h failed to look into the record. The record would show that the previous suit was filed by the respondents herein and no previous suit is found to have been instituted by the appellant here. He filed present suit, though it was amended after verdict of the Supreme Court. Therefore, whether the plaintiff/appellant intentionally abandoned or relinquished a part of claim does not arise here. The said provision could come into play only if the plaintiff/appellant is found to have filed a previous suit in which he intentionally relinquished or abandoned any part of the claim pleaded in the present suit. The next question is that whether the learned trial Judge while rejecting the plaint acted in accordance with law. To resolve this controversy it may be observed that the present suit 1s found to have been instituted before the adaption of amended law like section 12(2), C.P.C. in Azad Kashmir. The original suit was instituted in the year 1999, and it was amended in the year 2000 whereas the amended law has been adopted in Azad Kashmir in the year 2003. Therefore, the question arises whether the amendment in section 12, Cr.P.C. which was adopted in Azad Kashmir after institution of the suit by the plaintiff’ appellant, can be given retrospective effect. This proposition came before Lahore High Court in Fate Muhammad’s case 1981 CLC 1130, and it was held that the said amendment could not be given retrospective effect when it causes convenience to the parties and is detrimental to the plaintiff The learned counsel for the respondents contended that the amendment in shape of section 12(2), C.P.C. being a procedural matter shall operate retrospectively. Before reaching any conclusion, it would be appropriate to attend the question that what are matters of procedure. This question is found to have been attended by Supreme Court of Pakistan m Adnan Axial’s case PLD 1969 SC 187 in which the following observation has been made:- “The next question, therefore, that arises for consideration is as to what are matters of procedure. It is obvious that matters relating to the remedy, the mode of trial, the manner of taking evidence and forms of action are all matters relating to procedure- e. Crawford too takes the view that questions relating to jurisdiction over a cause of action, venue, parties pleadings and rules of evidence also pertain to procedure, provided the burden of proof is not shifted. Thus, a statute purporting to transfer jurisdiction over certain causes of action may operate retroactively. This is what is meant by saying that a change of-forum by a law is retrospective being a matter of procedure only. Nevertheless, it must be pointed out that IFN this process any existing rights are affected or the giving of retroactive I operation causes inconvenience or injustice, then the Courts will not even in the case of procedural statute, favor an interpretation giving retrospective effect to the State. On the other hand, if the new procedural statute TS of such a character that its retroactive application will promote justice without any consequential embarrassment or detriment to any of the parties concerned, the Courts would favorably incline towards giving effect to such procedural statute retroactively.” \ On the basis of aforesaid observation of the Supreme Court the learned Judge of Lahore High Court in Fate Muhammad’s case 1981 CLC 1130 held as under:- -for- r MIT will be noted that if the suit brought by the respondent is dismissed, and he is obliged to file an application under subsection (2) of section 12 the parties would be put to additional bother and expense inasmuch as the exercise which has. already been done by them by now, in connection with the suit, will again have to be undertaken by them MN relation to the application. I have been informed by the learned counsel that the suit brought by the respondent is now at the stage of evidence. This means that much headway has been made in the suit. According to the above quoted observations of the Supreme, Court if the giving of retroactive operation to procedural provisions causes inconvenience then the Courts will not even in the case of a procedural statute, favor an interpretation giving retrospective effect to the statute. On the other hand, if the new procedural statute is of such a character that its retroactive t application will tend to promote Justice without any consequential embarrassment or detriment to any of the parties concerned, the Courts would favorably incline towards giving effect to such procedural statutes retroactively. As explained above, if retroactive effect is given, so the amendment made in section 12 of the Code of Civil Procedure by meeting subsection (2) their it will cause convenience to the parties and would also be detrimental, to the respondent. Therefore, in view of the principle enunciated by the learned Judges of the Supreme Court. I am not inclined to give retrospective effect to the amendment made in section 12.” The above cited law would show that the amendment in section 12, C.P.C. providing a remedy to challenge a decree or order passed on the basis of fraud and misrepresentation, has no retrospective effect, and it applies from the date of its coming into force. The suits filed before the date of amendment or date of adaption in Azad Kashmir are not hit by. This amendment. Reference may also be hard to 1981 CLC 1248. P I There is yet another aspect of the case. As stated earlier, the present suit has been filed before the adaption of the said amendment in Azad Kashmur; therefore, apart from the fact that this amendment cannot be allowed to act retrospectively, it cannot be allowed to hit the present suit. The reason being that firstly this amendment is substantive piece of law and secondly, all laws, rules and regulations are meant for the advancement of justice and not to suppress the remedy. The Courts always lean MN favor of adjudication on merit rather than resorting to technicalities. Before the said amendment a suit, for cancellation of a decree, order or proceedings based on fraud or misrepresentation was permissible under law, and it was a right of the appellant to file a civil suit m Civil Court to redress his grievance, and it could continue as such. However, later on, the remedy in shape of section 12(2), C.P.C. has been provided through amendment. So, when the suit was pending before the learned trial Judge prior to the amendment, it could even be treated as application under section 12(2), C.P.C. in order to meet the ends of justice. It was unjustified under law to throw the plaintiff/appellant’s case out of the Court merely on the basis of a technicality. The procedure while entertaining an application under section 12(2) is the same as provided for trial of a suit, therefore, the rejection of the suit merely on the basis that the word “plaint” has been mentioned in place of application is in no way justified under law, nor it was in the interest of justice to reject the plaint by the plaintiff/appellant. The trial Court. Could convert/treat the plaint into application and decide the same on merit in order to fulfil the requirement of law and justice but unfortunately the learned trial Judge due to a wrong conception about the legal position rejected the plaint which has resulted into this appeal. Reference may also be hard to 1992 SCMR 1744, -P The conclusion therefore, is that the plaintiff/appellant's suit is ‘ competent to be decided on its merits. The appeal is allowed resultantly, the impugned judgment and decree is set aside. The case is remanded to the trial Court to decide it on merits. I] H.B.T./9/HC(AJK) Case remanded.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 785?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 785 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-03-13): 4 SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.- The’ background of the present litigation is that a declaratory suit seeking cancellation of a sale-deed dated 26-3-1995 regarding the property in dispute was filed by the respondents harm, in the Court of Sub- Judge, Muzaffarabad. During the pendency of the suit the parties entered into compromise consequently, they recorded their statements on 15-6-1996. However, before decree could be passed, on the basis of compromise deed, an application by the appellant harm was submitted m the trial Court on 22-6-1996 alleging that fraud had been committed on him and thus, he sought that compromise deed be annulled, and no decree should be passed on the basis of the same. The appellant while submitting his application for annulling the compromise deed alleged that in fact property in dispute was purchased by him for a consideration of Rs. 10,00,000 but in the sale-deed the consideration was mentioned only to the tune of Rs.5,00,000. The remaining amount was to be paid by him at the time of transfer of the possession of the house to him. It was further alleged that subsequently, he went abroad and sent Rs.5,00,000 which was received by the respondents herein, as outstanding consideration of sale. At the time of compromise, according to the appellant, it was agreed that the aforesaid amount, Rs.5,00,000, would be returned to the respondents after filing of said compromise but subsequently, they refused to pay back the said part of consideration to him. The learned Sub-Judge, after taking objections from the respondents herein, instead of passing a decree on the basis of compromise framed issued on the basis of said application. The respondents feeling aggrieved by the order of the learned Sub- Judge went in appeal before the learned District Judge with no success. A revision petition was filed in the High. Court, which also failed consequently, the respondents filed an appeal before the Supreme Court. The apex Court accepted their appeal with the observation that the trial Court after recording a compromise was bound ‘to pass a decree in view of compromise as envisaged under Order XXIII, “* rule 3 of C.P.C. While the controversy was pending in the superior t Court, the appellant herein filed a declaratory suit with prayer for possession of the suit-land in the trial Court. The suit was pending when verdict of the apex Court, dated 30-11-1998 came against. Him consequently, he amended the plaint. His earlier suit is found to have been instituted before the verdict of the Supreme Court, dated 30-111999. The learned trial Court after taking written statement by the u- respondents herein framed the relevant issues and heard the arguments on Issues Nos;2 and 5. After hearing the arguments on the aforesaid issues the learned trial Judge rejected the plant in View of section 12 subsection (2) of C.P.C. hence this appeal. I I- The learned counsel for. the appellant while assailing the impugned judgment and decree contended that’ the amendment in section 12 of C.P.C. was adapted

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 785?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 785 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-03-13): arguments on the aforesaid issues the learned trial Judge rejected the plant in View of section 12 subsection (2) of C.P.C. hence this appeal. I I- The learned counsel for. the appellant while assailing the impugned judgment and decree contended that’ the amendment in section 12 of C.P.C. was adapted in Azad Kashmir on 5-3-2003, 1J therefore, it could not be allowed to hit the case of the appellant because m the said amendment operated prospectively and the learned District Judge (trial Court) wrongly rejected the suit by the appellant, and it was on account of misconception about the provision of law resorted to by the learned Judge. * Conversely, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the suit. By the appellant was rightly rejected because under the. amended law the suit was not competent, and it was hit by the operation of amended law MN the shape of subsection (2) of section 12 of C.P.C. His case was that the. amendment in section 12, C.P.C. was effective retrospectively, and the learned Judge committed no illegality while rejecting the plant. He further submitted that even otherwise the suit by the plaintifffappellant was hit by mischief of Order II, rule 2, C.P.C. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record carefully. While dealing with the objection with regard to operation of Order II, rule 2, C.P.C. in the instant case it may be observed that it is nothing but a fallacy. The learned counsel perhaps h failed to look into the record. The record would show that the previous suit was filed by the respondents herein and no previous suit is found to have been instituted by the appellant here. He filed present suit, though it was amended after verdict of the Supreme Court. Therefore, whether the plaintiff/appellant intentionally abandoned or relinquished a part of claim does not arise here. The said provision could come into play only if the plaintiff/appellant is found to have filed a previous suit in which he intentionally relinquished or abandoned any part of the claim pleaded in the present suit. The next question is that whether the learned trial Judge while rejecting the plaint acted in accordance with law. To resolve this controversy it may be observed that the present suit 1s found to have been instituted before the adaption of amended law like section 12(2), C.P.C. in Azad Kashmir. The original suit was instituted in the year 1999, and it was amended in the year 2000 whereas the amended law has been adopted in Azad Kashmir in the year 2003. Therefore, the question arises whether the amendment in section 12, Cr.P.C. which was adopted in Azad Kashmir after institution of the suit by the plaintiff’ appellant, can be given retrospective effect. This proposition came before Lahore High Court in Fate Muhammad’s case 1981 CLC 1130, and it was held that the said amendment could not be given retrospective effect when it causes convenience to the parties and is

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 785?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 785 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-03-13): institution of the suit by the plaintiff’ appellant, can be given retrospective effect. This proposition came before Lahore High Court in Fate Muhammad’s case 1981 CLC 1130, and it was held that the said amendment could not be given retrospective effect when it causes convenience to the parties and is detrimental to the plaintiff The learned counsel for the respondents contended that the amendment in shape of section 12(2), C.P.C. being a procedural matter shall operate retrospectively. Before reaching any conclusion, it would be appropriate to attend the question that what are matters of procedure. This question is found to have been attended by Supreme Court of Pakistan m Adnan Axial’s case PLD 1969 SC 187 in which the following observation has been made:- “The next question, therefore, that arises for consideration is as to what are matters of procedure. It is obvious that matters relating to the remedy, the mode of trial, the manner of taking evidence and forms of action are all matters relating to procedure- e. Crawford too takes the view that questions relating to jurisdiction over a cause of action, venue, parties pleadings and rules of evidence also pertain to procedure, provided the burden of proof is not shifted. Thus, a statute purporting to transfer jurisdiction over certain causes of action may operate retroactively. This is what is meant by saying that a change of-forum by a law is retrospective being a matter of procedure only. Nevertheless, it must be pointed out that IFN this process any existing rights are affected or the giving of retroactive I operation causes inconvenience or injustice, then the Courts will not even in the case of procedural statute, favor an interpretation giving retrospective effect to the State. On the other hand, if the new procedural statute TS of such a character that its retroactive application will promote justice without any consequential embarrassment or detriment to any of the parties concerned, the Courts would favorably incline towards giving effect to such procedural statute retroactively.” \ On the basis of aforesaid observation of the Supreme Court the learned Judge of Lahore High Court in Fate Muhammad’s case 1981 CLC 1130 held as under:- -for- r MIT will be noted that if the suit brought by the respondent is dismissed, and he is obliged to file an application under subsection (2) of section 12 the parties would be put to additional bother and expense inasmuch as the exercise which has. already been done by them by now, in connection with the suit, will again have to be undertaken by them MN relation to the application. I have been informed by the learned counsel that the suit brought by the respondent is now at the stage of evidence. This means that much headway has been made in the suit. According to the above quoted observations of the Supreme, Court if the giving of retroactive operation to procedural provisions causes inconvenience then the Courts will not even in the case of a procedural statute, favor

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 785?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 785 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-03-13): the stage of evidence. This means that much headway has been made in the suit. According to the above quoted observations of the Supreme, Court if the giving of retroactive operation to procedural provisions causes inconvenience then the Courts will not even in the case of a procedural statute, favor an interpretation giving retrospective effect to the statute. On the other hand, if the new procedural statute is of such a character that its retroactive t application will tend to promote Justice without any consequential embarrassment or detriment to any of the parties concerned, the Courts would favorably incline towards giving effect to such procedural statutes retroactively. As explained above, if retroactive effect is given, so the amendment made in section 12 of the Code of Civil Procedure by meeting subsection (2) their it will cause convenience to the parties and would also be detrimental, to the respondent. Therefore, in view of the principle enunciated by the learned Judges of the Supreme Court. I am not inclined to give retrospective effect to the amendment made in section 12.” The above cited law would show that the amendment in section 12, C.P.C. providing a remedy to challenge a decree or order passed on the basis of fraud and misrepresentation, has no retrospective effect, and it applies from the date of its coming into force. The suits filed before the date of amendment or date of adaption in Azad Kashmir are not hit by. This amendment. Reference may also be hard to 1981 CLC 1248. P I There is yet another aspect of the case. As stated earlier, the present suit has been filed before the adaption of the said amendment in Azad Kashmur; therefore, apart from the fact that this amendment cannot be allowed to act retrospectively, it cannot be allowed to hit the present suit. The reason being that firstly this amendment is substantive piece of law and secondly, all laws, rules and regulations are meant for the advancement of justice and not to suppress the remedy. The Courts always lean MN favor of adjudication on merit rather than resorting to technicalities. Before the said amendment a suit, for cancellation of a decree, order or proceedings based on fraud or misrepresentation was permissible under law, and it was a right of the appellant to file a civil suit m Civil Court to redress his grievance, and it could continue as such. However, later on, the remedy in shape of section 12(2), C.P.C. has been provided through amendment. So, when the suit was pending before the learned trial Judge prior to the amendment, it could even be treated as application under section 12(2), C.P.C. in order to meet the ends of justice. It was unjustified under law to throw the plaintiff/appellant’s case out of the Court merely on the basis of a technicality. The procedure while entertaining an application under section 12(2) is the same as provided for trial of a suit, therefore, the rejection of the suit merely on the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 785?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 785 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-03-13): justice. It was unjustified under law to throw the plaintiff/appellant’s case out of the Court merely on the basis of a technicality. The procedure while entertaining an application under section 12(2) is the same as provided for trial of a suit, therefore, the rejection of the suit merely on the basis that the word “plaint” has been mentioned in place of application is in no way justified under law, nor it was in the interest of justice to reject the plaint by the plaintiff/appellant. The trial Court. Could convert/treat the plaint into application and decide the same on merit in order to fulfil the requirement of law and justice but unfortunately the learned trial Judge due to a wrong conception about the legal position rejected the plaint which has resulted into this appeal. Reference may also be hard to 1992 SCMR 1744, -P The conclusion therefore, is that the plaintiff/appellant's suit is ‘ competent to be decided on its merits. The appeal is allowed resultantly, the impugned judgment and decree is set aside. The case is remanded to the trial Court to decide it on merits. I] H.B.T./9/HC(AJK) Case remanded.

Question: What is case 2009 CLC 803 about?
Answer: Case 2009 CLC 803 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ K) on 2009-01-29. The case involved TARIQ MIR (PETITIONER) VERSUS FAZAD GOVERNMENT THROUGH CHIEF SECRETARYM UZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTSP. The relevant statutes include B AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 44. The case was heard by RAFIULLAH SULTANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2009 CLC 803?
Answer: In case 2009 CLC 803, the court applied the following statutes: B AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 44. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ K) and decided on 2009-01-29.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2009 CLC 803?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2009 CLC 803 were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD JAMIL SADIQ FOR PETITIONER. R *JCH. MUHAMMAD RIAZ TABASSUM FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: RAFIULLAH SULTANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2009 CLC 803?
Answer: The parties in case 2009 CLC 803 were: TARIQ MIR (PETITIONER) VERSUS FAZAD GOVERNMENT THROUGH CHIEF SECRETARYM UZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTSP. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ K).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2009 CLC 803.
Answer: RAFIULLAH SULTANI, J.- This writ petition TS directed under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974. Brief facts giving rise to the instant writ petition, as alleged, are that an agreement executed between respondent No.5 and respondent No.6 on 7-12-2005 and the agreement, dated 25-1-2007, letter of respondent No.4 and approval of respondent No.2 accorded on 25-1-2007 are illegal and liable to be cancelled. It is alleged that respondent No.6 with collusion of respondent No.5,* as Medical Superintendent District Headquarter Hospital, Mirror executed an agreement on 7-12-2005, whereby permission was granted for construction of medical store in the premises of District Hospital, Mirror. Respondent No.5 has constructed a medical store and is utilizing the same for business. It is alleged that the petitioners were also eligible for that and intended to obtain the said contract but without inviting tenders and calling applications from the aspirants, the contract has been p awarded which is violation of the fundamental rights as well as without jurisdictional competence. It is further alleged that on 25-1-2007, respondent No.4 addressed/wrote a letter to respondent No.2 for approval of a new agreement, in shape of Iqrarnama “786 Medical Store Mirror’ on the basis of said letter. Respondent No.2 accorded approval i of the same on the same day on 25-1-2007. It is further alleged that action of the official respondents is illegal and violative of the constitutional provisions as well as the fundamental rights granted by the Constitution. It is prayed in the writ petition that the agreements dated w 7-12-2005 and 25-1-2007, respectively, may be cancelled. Respondents’ submitted written statement in which they negated the allegations levelled in the wait petition. Dur mg pendency of the writ petition, petitioner No.] has withdrawn his name from the writ petition and now the petition is continued to the extent of petitioner No.2, named Tariq Mr. Another writ petition titled Mumbai Raoul Mir v. Azad Government and others was filed before this Court on 19-4-2006 by respondent No.6 which was dismissed on 10-11-2006 as being not pressed. The learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated grounds of the writ and further contended that respondent No.5 was transferred from District Hospital, Mirror on 6-12-2005 while the agreement in question was executed after his transfer on 7-12- 2005 which is illegal, against the law, violation of fundamental rights and constitutional provisions. He further contended that respondent No. has no authority to grant permission to any private person to construct any* sort of building on Government property. He further contended that respondent No.6, with collusion of respondent No.5, executed an agreement on 7-12- 2005. He further contended that respondent No.5 did not follow the law and also did not inform his high officials. He further contended that the said contract/agreement has been executed without sanction of the Government which has no legal effect. He further contended that the letter of respondent No.5 and approval of respondent No.2 are violative of the Constitution and male FIDE to provide shelter to illegal contract which was executed on 7-12-2005. He further contended that the subsequent agreement executed on 25-1-2007 is also illegal and without lawful authority. He further contended that the aforesaid contracts have been executed without inviting tenders and calling applications from the aspirants. He further contended that mode which was adopted to award the contract to respondent No.6 has not been recognized in the eye of law. ' J The learned counsel for respondent No.6 reiterated grounds of written statement and further contended that respondent No.5, Dr. Abdul Adieus, was working as Medical Superintendent of District Hospital Mirror, and he handed over the charge on 7-12- 2005, and he was competent to execute the contract in question. He further contented that one of the petitioners, Saber Hussain, has withdrawn his name from the writ petition and petitioner No.2, Tariq Muir, has failed to show his personal right. He further contended that the petitioner is not aggrieved person in the eye of law and the writ petition is not maintainable. He further contended that contract dated 7-12-2005 was later on approved by the high officials of the Government through agreement executed on 25-1- 2007 and the said contracts are legally executed. He further contended that writ petition is not maintainable because disputed questions of facts are evolved and question of contractual ability is also involved. He further contended that every one is equal before law. He further contended that the petitioner wants to construct his own medical store in premises of the hospital. In support of his version, he cited following case-law:-- PLD 2006 Keir. 629, PLD 1999 LAH. 313, PLD 1962 SC 108, 1995 CLC 1662 and an unreported case titled Heidi Abdul Karim v. Chairman A.K. M.I.D.C. decided by the apex Court on 9-8-2002. 1] have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record carefully. The real controversy between the parties in the case in hand is that whether the agreement executed between respondent No.S and respondent No.6, dated 7- 12-2005 is legal? The said contract was made by respondent No.5 as Medical Superintendent of District Headquarter Hospital, Mirror on 7-12-2005, while he was transferred from the said post on 6-12-2005, and he was legally not authorized to enter into the contract with private person. Another aspect of the contract is that according to law the Medical Superintendent has no power to make any contract without permission of higher officials of his department and he was not granted any permission to make contract with respondent No.6. The said contract was made by respondent No.S with respondent No.6 without inviting tenders and calling applications from the aspirants. The mode which was adopted for construction of canteen in the hospital’s premises, establishment of Dialysis Centre, Car Parking, General Store and P.C.O. has not been adopted by respondent No.5 in the aforesaid contract. It is very interesting that according to subsequent contract, executed on 25-1-2007 approval was given by Secretary, Health of Government and shelter was provided to make it legal. Its meaning is that the said contract dated 7-12-2005 was not legal and later on respondent No.6 with collusion of officials of Health Department obtained approval of agreement vide No.786 Medical/ General Store. The proceeding regarding the approval of subsequent contract has completed within a day on 25-1-2007, which is not possible because the place of sitting of Secretary Health is m Muzaffarabad which is far away from Mirror. Now the position is settled that the contract executed between respondent No.5 and respondent No.6 is illegal and any type of further proceeding by officials of Health Department to legalize the earlier contract has no legal sanctity in the eye of law. The next question arises in this case is regarding contractual rights and contractual liability. The objection raised by the learned counsel for respondent No.6 that writ petition cannot he regard mg contractual rights is not attainable because this Court in exercise of its constitutional jurisdiction has power to exam me the validity of the order FM respect to grant a contract and can strike down the same on the basis of male FIDE, unfairness and lack of transparency, provided that challenge is promptly made and question of fact is not involved. It was held in case titled Messes Airport Support Services v. The Airport Manager. Quiet- Adam International Airport, Karachi and others reported in 1998 SCMR 2268, which reads as under:- “Further a contract, carrying elements of public interest, concluded by functionaries of the State, has to be just, fair, transparent, reasonable and free of any taint of male Fides, all such aspects remaining, open for judicial review. The rule TS founded on the premises that public functionaries, deriving authority from or under law, are obligated to act justly, fairly equitably, reasonably, without any element of discrimination and squarely within the parameters of law, as applicable in a given situation. Deviations, if of substance, can be corrected through appropriate orders under Article 199 of the Constitution. In such, behalf even where a contract, pure and simple, is involved, always provided that public element presents itself and the dispute does not entail evidentiary fact sofa disputed nature, redress may be provided. s It was also held entitled case Messes Pacific Multinational (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Inspector- General of Police, Sindh Police Headquarters and 2 others reported in PLD 1992 Keir. 283, which reads as under:- “There could be no cavil with the proposition that enforcement of a purely contractual obligation could not properly form the subject-matter of proceedings under Article 199 of the Constitution. However, it could not be ignored that the State had a constitutional obligation to act fairly even when performing an administrative function. Therefore, when a party comp lamed before the Court that the State while awarding a contract to a party had acted in an unfair or arbitrary manner or had discriminated against one of the parties who contested for the award of the contract, such grievance could be looked into by superior Court in exercise of its powers of judicial review under Article 199 of the Constitution and if the Court was satisfied that the Government while enter mg MTO a contract had acted arbitrarily or in an unfair manner or had discriminated between the parties before it in matter of awarding the contract, it could interfere and strike down such action. ” ~a ft It was also held m the case titled Nawab Khan v. Azad Government and 6 others reported in 1999 SCR 112=1999 CLC 559 which reads as under: 4 “(b) Writ- -Writ, maintainability of- Violation of rule 7 proved-Minister USAF not an authority under WAAF Properties Act and violated the Act and Rules-Clear case of violation of law apart from contract-Writ was maintainable. Coming to the case in hand, no question of fact is involved in this case and the petitioner has not filed the writ petition to enforce a contract. It is settled principle of law that writ can lie if the act is without lawful authority and law has been violated. These ingredients are available in this case. Male FIDE conduct of the respondents is apparent on the record. It was held in case titled Ch. Muhammad Mahmood v. Aurangzeb and 6 others reported in 1997 SCR 14 1997 CLC 1708, which reads as under:- “(a) Writ- -Disputed questions of facts-Where no other adequate ' remedy available it is the duty of the Court to decide disputed question, if possible, in light of affidavit or other evidence produced by the parties. ” I do not agree with learned counsel for respondent No.6 that the petitioner is not aggrieved person in the eye of law. It was held in case titled Main Fatal Din v. Lahore Improvement Trust, Lahore and another reported m PLD 1969 SC 223, which reads as under: “(b) Constitution of Pakistan (1962), Art. 981-Right considered sufficient for maintaining proceeding in writ jurisdiction-Need not necessarily be a right MN strict juristic sense-Enough if petitioner can show that he had a personal interest in performance of a legal duty which had not been performed m manner required by late.”’ Again it was held in case titled Hay Muhammad Ashraf and another v. Development Authority Muzaffarabad, through its Chairman and another reported in PU 1995 AJK 5=1995 CLC 596, which reads as under: “(i) Aggrieved person- -Acquisition of land for public park-Diversion of use of Challenge to- Whether petitioners are aggrieved persons-Question of-- Petitioners have listed their second grievance that for first time, citizens of capital of AJK were provided with a facility of park and they BMG residents of capital city, were also entitled to avail benefit of that park-Held; Respondent-Authority having decided to utilize land for a housing scheme, petitioners were aggrieved persons and entitled to evoke jurisdiction of High Court.” The objection raised by the learned counsel for respondent No.6 that writ has been withdrawn by petitioner No.1 is not attainable because it makes no difference while petitioner No.2 is contesting the writ petition. It is pertinent to note that respondent No.6 has filed writ petition in respect of contract in question dated 7-12-2005 and also filed two suits in Civil Court which were withdrawn along with writ petition, on account of that adverse inference goes against respondent No.6. BIN view of above, the writ petition is accepted and the agreement between respondents Nos.5 and 6 and the agreement dated 25-1-2007, letter of respondent No.4 and approval of respondent No.2 accorded on 25-1-2007 are contrary to law and having no legal force, are hereby cancelled. Tie respondents are restrained to act further upon the same; Respondent No.4 is also directed to vacate the medical store which has been constructed in hospital’s premises immediately. ' k Petition accepted. Petition accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 803?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 803 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-01-29): RAFIULLAH SULTANI, J.- This writ petition TS directed under section 44 of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974. Brief facts giving rise to the instant writ petition, as alleged, are that an agreement executed between respondent No.5 and respondent No.6 on 7-12-2005 and the agreement, dated 25-1-2007, letter of respondent No.4 and approval of respondent No.2 accorded on 25-1-2007 are illegal and liable to be cancelled. It is alleged that respondent No.6 with collusion of respondent No.5,* as Medical Superintendent District Headquarter Hospital, Mirror executed an agreement on 7-12-2005, whereby permission was granted for construction of medical store in the premises of District Hospital, Mirror. Respondent No.5 has constructed a medical store and is utilizing the same for business. It is alleged that the petitioners were also eligible for that and intended to obtain the said contract but without inviting tenders and calling applications from the aspirants, the contract has been p awarded which is violation of the fundamental rights as well as without jurisdictional competence. It is further alleged that on 25-1-2007, respondent No.4 addressed/wrote a letter to respondent No.2 for approval of a new agreement, in shape of Iqrarnama “786 Medical Store Mirror’ on the basis of said letter. Respondent No.2 accorded approval i of the same on the same day on 25-1-2007. It is further alleged that action of the official respondents is illegal and violative of the constitutional provisions as well as the fundamental rights granted by the Constitution. It is prayed in the writ petition that the agreements dated w 7-12-2005 and 25-1-2007, respectively, may be cancelled. Respondents’ submitted written statement in which they negated the allegations levelled in the wait petition. Dur mg pendency of the writ petition, petitioner No.] has withdrawn his name from the writ petition and now the petition is continued to the extent of petitioner No.2, named Tariq Mr. Another writ petition titled Mumbai Raoul Mir v. Azad Government and others was filed before this Court on 19-4-2006 by respondent No.6 which was dismissed on 10-11-2006 as being not pressed. The learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated grounds of the writ and further contended that respondent No.5 was transferred from District Hospital, Mirror on 6-12-2005 while the agreement in question was executed after his transfer on 7-12- 2005 which is illegal, against the law, violation of fundamental rights and constitutional provisions. He further contended that respondent No. has no authority to grant permission to any private person to construct any* sort of building on Government property. He further contended that respondent No.6, with collusion of respondent No.5, executed an agreement on 7-12- 2005. He further contended that respondent No.5 did not follow the law and also did not inform his high officials. He further contended that the said contract/agreement has been executed without sanction of the Government which has no legal effect. He further contended that the letter of respondent No.5 and approval of respondent No.2 are violative of the Constitution and male FIDE to provide shelter

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 803?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 803 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-01-29): not inform his high officials. He further contended that the said contract/agreement has been executed without sanction of the Government which has no legal effect. He further contended that the letter of respondent No.5 and approval of respondent No.2 are violative of the Constitution and male FIDE to provide shelter to illegal contract which was executed on 7-12-2005. He further contended that the subsequent agreement executed on 25-1-2007 is also illegal and without lawful authority. He further contended that the aforesaid contracts have been executed without inviting tenders and calling applications from the aspirants. He further contended that mode which was adopted to award the contract to respondent No.6 has not been recognized in the eye of law. ' J The learned counsel for respondent No.6 reiterated grounds of written statement and further contended that respondent No.5, Dr. Abdul Adieus, was working as Medical Superintendent of District Hospital Mirror, and he handed over the charge on 7-12- 2005, and he was competent to execute the contract in question. He further contented that one of the petitioners, Saber Hussain, has withdrawn his name from the writ petition and petitioner No.2, Tariq Muir, has failed to show his personal right. He further contended that the petitioner is not aggrieved person in the eye of law and the writ petition is not maintainable. He further contended that contract dated 7-12-2005 was later on approved by the high officials of the Government through agreement executed on 25-1- 2007 and the said contracts are legally executed. He further contended that writ petition is not maintainable because disputed questions of facts are evolved and question of contractual ability is also involved. He further contended that every one is equal before law. He further contended that the petitioner wants to construct his own medical store in premises of the hospital. In support of his version, he cited following case-law:-- PLD 2006 Keir. 629, PLD 1999 LAH. 313, PLD 1962 SC 108, 1995 CLC 1662 and an unreported case titled Heidi Abdul Karim v. Chairman A.K. M.I.D.C. decided by the apex Court on 9-8-2002. 1] have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record carefully. The real controversy between the parties in the case in hand is that whether the agreement executed between respondent No.S and respondent No.6, dated 7- 12-2005 is legal? The said contract was made by respondent No.5 as Medical Superintendent of District Headquarter Hospital, Mirror on 7-12-2005, while he was transferred from the said post on 6-12-2005, and he was legally not authorized to enter into the contract with private person. Another aspect of the contract is that according to law the Medical Superintendent has no power to make any contract without permission of higher officials of his department and he was not granted any permission to make contract with respondent No.6. The said contract was made by respondent No.S with respondent No.6 without inviting tenders and calling applications from the aspirants. The mode which was adopted for construction of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 803?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 803 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-01-29): contract without permission of higher officials of his department and he was not granted any permission to make contract with respondent No.6. The said contract was made by respondent No.S with respondent No.6 without inviting tenders and calling applications from the aspirants. The mode which was adopted for construction of canteen in the hospital’s premises, establishment of Dialysis Centre, Car Parking, General Store and P.C.O. has not been adopted by respondent No.5 in the aforesaid contract. It is very interesting that according to subsequent contract, executed on 25-1-2007 approval was given by Secretary, Health of Government and shelter was provided to make it legal. Its meaning is that the said contract dated 7-12-2005 was not legal and later on respondent No.6 with collusion of officials of Health Department obtained approval of agreement vide No.786 Medical/ General Store. The proceeding regarding the approval of subsequent contract has completed within a day on 25-1-2007, which is not possible because the place of sitting of Secretary Health is m Muzaffarabad which is far away from Mirror. Now the position is settled that the contract executed between respondent No.5 and respondent No.6 is illegal and any type of further proceeding by officials of Health Department to legalize the earlier contract has no legal sanctity in the eye of law. The next question arises in this case is regarding contractual rights and contractual liability. The objection raised by the learned counsel for respondent No.6 that writ petition cannot he regard mg contractual rights is not attainable because this Court in exercise of its constitutional jurisdiction has power to exam me the validity of the order FM respect to grant a contract and can strike down the same on the basis of male FIDE, unfairness and lack of transparency, provided that challenge is promptly made and question of fact is not involved. It was held in case titled Messes Airport Support Services v. The Airport Manager. Quiet- Adam International Airport, Karachi and others reported in 1998 SCMR 2268, which reads as under:- “Further a contract, carrying elements of public interest, concluded by functionaries of the State, has to be just, fair, transparent, reasonable and free of any taint of male Fides, all such aspects remaining, open for judicial review. The rule TS founded on the premises that public functionaries, deriving authority from or under law, are obligated to act justly, fairly equitably, reasonably, without any element of discrimination and squarely within the parameters of law, as applicable in a given situation. Deviations, if of substance, can be corrected through appropriate orders under Article 199 of the Constitution. In such, behalf even where a contract, pure and simple, is involved, always provided that public element presents itself and the dispute does not entail evidentiary fact sofa disputed nature, redress may be provided. s It was also held entitled case Messes Pacific Multinational (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Inspector- General of Police, Sindh Police Headquarters and 2 others reported in PLD 1992 Keir. 283, which reads as under:- “There could

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 803?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 803 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-01-29): and the dispute does not entail evidentiary fact sofa disputed nature, redress may be provided. s It was also held entitled case Messes Pacific Multinational (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Inspector- General of Police, Sindh Police Headquarters and 2 others reported in PLD 1992 Keir. 283, which reads as under:- “There could be no cavil with the proposition that enforcement of a purely contractual obligation could not properly form the subject-matter of proceedings under Article 199 of the Constitution. However, it could not be ignored that the State had a constitutional obligation to act fairly even when performing an administrative function. Therefore, when a party comp lamed before the Court that the State while awarding a contract to a party had acted in an unfair or arbitrary manner or had discriminated against one of the parties who contested for the award of the contract, such grievance could be looked into by superior Court in exercise of its powers of judicial review under Article 199 of the Constitution and if the Court was satisfied that the Government while enter mg MTO a contract had acted arbitrarily or in an unfair manner or had discriminated between the parties before it in matter of awarding the contract, it could interfere and strike down such action. ” ~a ft It was also held m the case titled Nawab Khan v. Azad Government and 6 others reported in 1999 SCR 112=1999 CLC 559 which reads as under: 4 “(b) Writ- -Writ, maintainability of- Violation of rule 7 proved-Minister USAF not an authority under WAAF Properties Act and violated the Act and Rules-Clear case of violation of law apart from contract-Writ was maintainable. Coming to the case in hand, no question of fact is involved in this case and the petitioner has not filed the writ petition to enforce a contract. It is settled principle of law that writ can lie if the act is without lawful authority and law has been violated. These ingredients are available in this case. Male FIDE conduct of the respondents is apparent on the record. It was held in case titled Ch. Muhammad Mahmood v. Aurangzeb and 6 others reported in 1997 SCR 14 1997 CLC 1708, which reads as under:- “(a) Writ- -Disputed questions of facts-Where no other adequate ' remedy available it is the duty of the Court to decide disputed question, if possible, in light of affidavit or other evidence produced by the parties. ” I do not agree with learned counsel for respondent No.6 that the petitioner is not aggrieved person in the eye of law. It was held in case titled Main Fatal Din v. Lahore Improvement Trust, Lahore and another reported m PLD 1969 SC 223, which reads as under: “(b) Constitution of Pakistan (1962), Art. 981-Right considered sufficient for maintaining proceeding in writ jurisdiction-Need not necessarily be a right MN strict juristic sense-Enough if petitioner can show that he had a personal interest in performance of a legal duty which had not been performed m

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 803?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 803 (HIGH COURT (AJ K), 2009-01-29): which reads as under: “(b) Constitution of Pakistan (1962), Art. 981-Right considered sufficient for maintaining proceeding in writ jurisdiction-Need not necessarily be a right MN strict juristic sense-Enough if petitioner can show that he had a personal interest in performance of a legal duty which had not been performed m manner required by late.”’ Again it was held in case titled Hay Muhammad Ashraf and another v. Development Authority Muzaffarabad, through its Chairman and another reported in PU 1995 AJK 5=1995 CLC 596, which reads as under: “(i) Aggrieved person- -Acquisition of land for public park-Diversion of use of Challenge to- Whether petitioners are aggrieved persons-Question of-- Petitioners have listed their second grievance that for first time, citizens of capital of AJK were provided with a facility of park and they BMG residents of capital city, were also entitled to avail benefit of that park-Held; Respondent-Authority having decided to utilize land for a housing scheme, petitioners were aggrieved persons and entitled to evoke jurisdiction of High Court.” The objection raised by the learned counsel for respondent No.6 that writ has been withdrawn by petitioner No.1 is not attainable because it makes no difference while petitioner No.2 is contesting the writ petition. It is pertinent to note that respondent No.6 has filed writ petition in respect of contract in question dated 7-12-2005 and also filed two suits in Civil Court which were withdrawn along with writ petition, on account of that adverse inference goes against respondent No.6. BIN view of above, the writ petition is accepted and the agreement between respondents Nos.5 and 6 and the agreement dated 25-1-2007, letter of respondent No.4 and approval of respondent No.2 accorded on 25-1-2007 are contrary to law and having no legal force, are hereby cancelled. Tie respondents are restrained to act further upon the same; Respondent No.4 is also directed to vacate the medical store which has been constructed in hospital’s premises immediately. ' k Petition accepted. Petition accepted.

Question: What is case 2009 CLC 1045 about?
Answer: Case 2009 CLC 1045 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K on 2009-03-06. The case involved SAMARA MOIN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS DISTRICT MAGISTRATE (DCCOLLECTOR) DISTRICT MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 44 DOMICILE. The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, CJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: In case 2009 CLC 1045, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) -S. 44 DOMICILE. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K and decided on 2009-03-06.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2009 CLC 1045 were: CH. M. IBRAHIM ZIA FOR PETITIONER. 'M. IDREES MUGHAL FOR RESPONDENT NO.3. -FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI FOR RESPONDENT NOS.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, CJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: The parties in case 2009 CLC 1045 were: SAMARA MOIN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS DISTRICT MAGISTRATE (DCCOLLECTOR) DISTRICT MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2009 CLC 1045.
Answer: . SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.- The petitioners and respondents Nos.3 and 5 are contestants for their nomination for admission in professional colleges against the seats reserved for the quota of Muzaffarabad District. Respondents 3 and 5 have been nominated by the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Formation Board for admission in professional colleges of Pakistan against the seats reserved for the quota of District in view of their merit position, whereas the petitioners, who admittedly belong to District Muzaffarabad and are holders of domicile of the said district, challenge the nomination of ’respondents 3 and 5 on the ground that they are not domicile and permanent resident of Muzaffarabad District. ' The case of the petitioners is that they, being domiciled of. Muzaffarabad District, passed F. Sc. examination and' their names appeared at Serial No.21,22,25 and 27 in the list of Muzaffarabad District candidates for M.B.B.S admission for the year, 2008-2009. In the above list, prepared by the nomination Board, respondents 3 and 5 are shown at serial Nos.] and 2, and they have been nom mated for M.B.B;S, course against the seats reserved for the quota of District Muzaffarabad whereas both the' respondents are neither, domiciled nor permanent residents of District Muzaffarabad. The said respondents, with the. connivance of official respondents Nos.| and 2, illegally maneuvered. and succeeded in obtaining the state subject, domicile and permanent resident certificates of District Muzaffarabad by playing fraud J and MAL practices. Respondent No.3 (Mariam Shaheen) is member of a refugee family who migrated in the year, 1947 from Dagos, Thesis Sumba District Jammu and her grandfather Ghulam Muhammad son of Jamal Din is permanently settled in Village Away, Thesis Avowal, Pakistan, therefore, she falls in the definition of refugees settled m Pakistan and can only claim admission against the quota reserved for refugees settled in Pakistan. She and her father Muhammad Ali Shaheen, by misstatement of facts and playing fraud have illegally obtained state subject, domicile and permanent resident certificates from District Muzaffarabad. Respondent No.2 submitted total untrue report on the basis of which respondent No.1 issued the certificates in favor of Mariam Shaheen. Respondent No.5, Wages Ahmed Being, is member of a T- family who migrated from Baal Not, Thesis Ur, Occupied Kashmir, and p his grandfather is permanently settled in Serial, Thesis Naval, District Bag whose father Mukhtar Ahmed Being is serving in N.B.P. who is also resident of Serial, Thesis Naval, District Bag. WW. He has obtained state subject, domicile and permanent resident certificates from District Muzaffarabad through deceitful means. The grandfather of t r respondent No.5, Ismael Being by name, migrated from occupied Kashmir and settled in Serial Thesis Naval District Bag. Respondents Nos.3 and 5, therefore, are not permanent residents and domicile of District Muzaffarabad, however, they have succeeded to get admission in M.B.B.S. course, by practicing fraud and misstatement of facts. Their formation, therefore, is against law and facts which needs reversal by accepting this writ petition. The official respondents failed to discharge their duties according to law on the subject while issuing the state subject, domicile and permanent resident certificates in favor of the said respondents. Thus, they may be directed, through a writ of mandamus, to withdraw the formation of the said respondents from the course of M.B.B.S. and after having done so, they may be directed to nominate the candidates from District Muzaffarabad, in view of the merit position against the seats reserved for District Muzaffarabad. Conversely, the case of respondent No.3 is that her father is a w state subject BOM in Pakistan in the year, 1961. Her grandfather, Ghulam Muhammad is a refugee from Jammu occupied Kashmir. Her father married to a woman (mother of respondent No.3) and settled in Muzaffarabad since long. Respondent, her brothers and sisters were born in Muzaffarabad and had been studying in Muzaffarabad. They never shifted to any other place. The father is running his. own business in Plate since 198S and is a voter in plate ward. Their elders on maternal side are buried at Muzaffarabad after their death. She has no intention to leave Muzaffarabad Azad Kashmir and similarly her father is also settled in Muzaffarabad for the last 20 years and has no intention to leave this place in the times to come. The certificates were issued in her favor after a detailed inquiry. The official respondents, before issuing of certificates, satisfied themselves through the evidence produced by her in this connection. She seeks dismissal of the writ petition, as no illegality has been committed by issuing the certificates in her favor and her formation against the reserved seat for District Muzaffarabad. The case of respondent No.5 is that petitioners herein have not come with clean hands, therefore, they are not entitled to equitable relief by this Court. They challenged the certificates, in favor of respondents, before District Magistrate, however, they failed in the petition which stood dismissed for want of proof: This fact of dismissal has been suppressed by the petitioners, therefore, their writ petition deserves to be -r dismissed. The writ petition is not maintainable in view of government notification dated 24-8-1972. The father of respondent Mukhtar Ahmed Being S/o Ismail Being completed his educational career from the institutions situated in Muzaffarabad city because his father, after migration, permanently settled in Muzaffarabad. The father of -the respondent and his two uncle also obtained state subject certificates from I District Magistrate Muzaffarabad, therefore, it was wrong to say that respondent No.5 was not state subject, domicile and permanent resident of District Muzaffarabad. The respondent completed his education up to intermediate from the educational institutions- in Muzaffarabad and his grandfather has also been buried in the same district; thus, according to him, the entire evidence, as stated above, when placed m before the official respondents they stood convinced and issued certificates showing him state subject, domicile and permanent resident of Muzaffarabad Azad Kashmir. He has rightly been nom mated for M.B.B.S. course against the seat reserved for District Muzaffarabad and there is no justification to withdraw him from the college he is studying in. The learned counsel for the petitioners by referring to the documentary evidence appended with the petition contended that it was satisfactorily proved that both the answering respondents were not domicile and permanent residents of Muzaffarabad district. Their families migrated from occupied Jammu Kashmir and settled in Pakistan and District Bag respectively in the capacity of refugees of the state. The official respondents fell in collusion with them and issued certificates of domicile and permanent residence in the favor, thus, deprived the petitioners of their legitimate right of education. He, during his arguments, relied upon 1999 MLD 261, PLD 1997 SC (AJ&K) and PLD 1985 SC (AJ&K)1 and submitted that in view of settled law, the w certificates issued in favor of answering respondents may be cancelled and as a consequence their nomination may be withdrawn with the direction to formation board to nom mate the candidates (out of petitioners) in view of the merit position* against the seats reserved for District Muzaffarabad. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents contended that the answering respondents were rightly nominated against the seats reserved for District Muzaffarabad arid the certificates in their favor have also been rightly issued. The respondents, according to the learned counsel, are admittedly State subjects,and in view of the -evidence brought on record, they have rightly been declared as domicile and permanent residents of Muzaffarabad District. The certificates in their favor were challenged before the competent authority who declined to allow the application by the petitioners!and they had alternate, remedy before AJK Council or the Government of AJ&K; but they failed to avail alternative remedy under law, therefore, the wait petition was not tamable in view of section 44 of the AJ&K Inter Constitution Act, 1974. After hearing the learned Advocates for the parties, it may be observed that both the answering respondents are admittedly stated subjects in view of the pleadings of the parties. The petitioners are found to have pleaded that families of the answering respondents migrated from occupied part of the State of J&K, therefore, they are admittedly state subjects. The only controversy is about the domicile and permanent resident certificates which needs resolution by this Court. It is also not disputed by the respondents that they initially settled in other units, however, they and their parents settled in Muzaffarabad long before the issuance of certificates. They completed their education in Muzaffarabad and have no intention to leave this place.’ 1. j- While dealing with the case of respondent No.3, Mariam ' Shaheen. it is proposed to put the pleadings and the evidence thereon together in order to arrive at a. definite conclusion. The evidence produced by the petitioners, on the basis of which they seek cancellation of domicile and permanent resident certificate issued in favor of the said respondent, consists of revenue record showing Ghulam Muhammad as owner of landed property m Away District Avowal Pakistan, the landed property of Alstom Begum, (paternal aunt of respondent) in tie same village, the landed property of Nadeem Tariq son of Ghulam Muhammad (paternal uncle of the respondent), the revenue report by. The officials of the revenue department of District Avowal showing sanction of mutation after the death of Ghulam Muhammad son of Jamal Din (Grandfather of respondent) and devolution of his legacy on his legal heirs include Muhammad Al Shaheen, Father of respondent, in village Away District Avowal Pakistan. Muhammad Ali Shaheen, according to this report, is real son of Ghulam Muhammad deceased. WW. The other evidence includes certificate of domicile issued under Pakistan Citizenship Act in favor of Muhammad Saved Khalid son of Ghulam Muhammad. The said person is real paternal uncle of the respondent. According to this certificate, the said person is resident of village Agarwal, District Avowal. Another piece of evidence is a transfer order Exb.PB/5, which shows Muhammad Saved Khalid son of Ghulam Muhammad deceased resident of District Avowal and his appointment in. AJ&K service, on. the same domicile. Likewise a certificate, Annexure “PB/6”, showing selection of Muhammad Asif Kamal son of Ghulam Muhammad as lecturer on the basis of domicile of District Avowal Pakistan is on the file. Muhammad Asif Kamal is a real son of Ghulam Muhammad and real paternal uncle of the respondent. This evidence, produced and relied upon by the petitioners, goes’ unrebutted on the side of answering respondent. Not only this, the written statement filed on her behalf would show that she does not dispute the fact of migration from Indian held Kashmir and settling in District Avowal -h Pakistan. Her evidence relates to the fact of running business by her r father at Muzaffarabad, different photographs show mg burial of her relatives on maternal side at Muzaffarabad. After examination of her evidence and pleadings it would become clear that she rests her claim on the fact that her parents are living in Muzaffarabad for a couple of years. She completed her education up to intermediate level at Muzaffarabad. Moreover, her mother belongs to Muzaffarabad District and on the basis of this fact she claims to be domiciled and permanent resident of Muzaffarabad District. From the perusal of her pleadings and the evidence thereon, it becomes clear that mitral migration from Indian held Kashmir to District Avowal Pakistan is not disputed. While dealing with the case of answering respondent Was Ahmed Being, TT may be observed that he also does not dispute the fact that he is a member of family, who initially migrated from Indian held Kashmir and settled in Serial Thesis Naval District Bag. The evidence relied upon and appended with this petition to the extent of said p- respondent consists of revenue record showing Mukhtar Ahmed, father of respondent, as owner of landed property in village Serial, Thesis Naval, District Bag. Similarly brothers of Mukhtar Ahmed are shown as owners in’ village Serial Naval. They are also shown as refugee from village Ballot, Thesis Ur, Indian held Kashmir. Muhammad Mukhtar Being and his brothers are also reported to be in possession of their landed property in village Serial, according to this report. Muhammad Ismael Being, father of Mukhtar Being and'others is reported ». WW. to be dead during earthquake and has been buried at Muzaffarabad. Mr. Mukhtar Being and his brothers, also inherit landed property as legal heirs m of therm other MST. ZANU Begum. MST. ZANU Begum is also reported to be buried in village Serial, Thesis Naval, District Bag, as report reveals. They are shown in possession of the said land merited through their mother. They own an orchard over the said land in the village Serial which has been leased out to the locals of the area. According to this report, Mukhtar Ahmed Being and his brothers visit their landed property off and on. This evidence goes unrebutted by the answering respondent. He simply based his claim on the fact of service of his father in Muzaffarabad and his education up to intermediate level and claims himself to be the domicile and permanent resident of District Muzaffarabad. wJB¥4* After having discussed the respective. claims and evidence thereon, it becomes evident that initial migration of the family of the answering respondents from Indian held Kashmir to Away District Avowal Pakistan and village Serial Thesis Naval District Bag respectively is not a disputed fact. Thus, it can. Safely be said that both the answering respondents are the state subjects. As stated earlier, the only controversy is about their domicile and permanent resident certificates, therefore, the question arises whether the answering respondents who initially settled in other units and, later on, in r connection with their service, education and business, shifted to Muzaffarabad can be accepted as domicile and permanent residents of District Muzaffarabad. Before answering this question, it would be useful to reproduce a government notification dated 24-8-1972 MN connection with the share or representation in service of Azad Jammu Kashmir on District wise quota. This notification is found to have been relied upon by answering respondent Was Ahmed Being, and it is Annexure “RB” which reads as under:. a-H v/ July/FS it- r- ←yes <.Y FIA - RR" This notification would show that any person who migrated from occupied Kashmir to Azad Kashmir would be deemed to be the domicile ' and resident of the district or the unit m which he initially settled after migration. Similarly those who migrated from Indian held Kashmir and settled in any part of Pakistan would be deemed and accepted as refugees settled in Pakistan, though they may shift to Azad Kashmir for service or business but their fact of shifting to Azad Kashmir in aforesaid connection would not allow them to claim themselves as domicile or permanent resident of the place where they shifted for business or service. WW. f- J » The case of answering respondents, when tested on the touchstone of the criteria laid down through the above sated government notification, would suggest saying that though the said notification deals with representation in service and there is no mention nomination in professional colleges, yet it has settled the principle of quota and it ICAN be applied equally in case of nomination for admission MN professional colleges in Pakistan and nominations are being made on the same principle since long. The evidence discussed in earlier part of this judgment satisfactorily proved that the families of both the answering respondents initially settled in other units and their parents still own property in the respective units. They and their parents are live in Muzaffarabad min connection with service and business etc. Moreover the intention of a person while resolving the controversy with regard to his permanent residence and domicile’ plays an important role. There is nothing on record on the side of answer mg respondents that their parents abandoned or surrendered their mitral residence or domicile and permanently shifted to Muzaffarabad. They could do so before the District Magistrate while seeking domicile and permanent resident certificates, through their statement before him, but unfortunately they even concealed the fact of their settlement in other units and their landed property owned and possessed by them and their paternal uncles etc. The official respondents were also legally obliged to satisfy themselves by directing the answering respondents to produce. confidence inspiring evidence, showing them to have abandoned their mitral residence and domicile. They neither inquired about it nor sought any evidence and simply relied upon the fact of residence, education and service etc. at Muzaffarabad. ' The learned counsel for answering respondent No.3 raised another argument that the mother of respondent No.3 belonged to Muzaffarabad, therefore, this fact also entitled her to be the permanent resident and domicile of District Muzaffarabad. The question arises whether she can be accepted as domicile and permanent resident of District Muzaffarabad on the basis of her mother belonging to Muzaffarabad. This proposition came before the Apex Court of the state of Azad Jammu Kashmir in President’s reference No.1 of 1996 PLD 1997 SC (AJ&K) 1, while dealing with the case of state subjects. In the said legal report it has been laid down that recognized principle is that nationality of father is decisive. Though the question of domicile and permanent resident certificate was not directly involved in the said report by the Apex Court, yet the principle laid down by the Supreme Court of } Azad Jammu Kashmir can be applied equally in case of domicile and permanent resident certificates. The domicile of father will prevail while deciding the domicile of child and not that of mother. The case of the respondents when seen on the strength of the principle settled by the Supreme Court'of AJ&K, leads to the conclusion that when father of the respondents is permanent resident and domicile of Away District Avowal and her mother belongs to District Muzaffarabad, the permanent residence and domicile of father will prevail, thus, respondent shall be deemed to be the permanent resident and domicile of Away, w Avowal Pakistan. She therefore, is included MN the category of refugees settled in Pakistan. She could claim her nomination for her.M.B.B.S. course against the seats reserved for refugees settled m Pakistan. It is settled by now that the quota system is to be observed strictly in case of services and formations to different professional colleges m Pakistan. 1* ’ The learned counsel for respondent No.5 raised objection regarding maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that petitioners initially challenged domicile and permanent resident certificate in favor of answering respondents before the District Magistrate and their application was dismissed for want of proof: They could file appeal before the government or seek cancellation of the said certificates from AJ&K council, failing which they could not evoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court, as an alternate and efficacious remedy was available to them under the relevant law. This objection has been examined in view of the case law like 1999 MLD 261 in which it has been held that remedy by way of appeal under Sate Subject Act is not adequate and similarly remedy before District Magistrate as well as council is also neither adequate nor efficacious. It has been held by the Honorable Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment that writ in such like position is maintainable and the High Court is fully competent to resolve the controversy in view of the evidence produced by the respective parties. a The conclusion, therefore, is that respondents Nos.3 and 5 are declared as domicile and permanent residents of District Avowal Pakistan and District Bag Azad Kashmir respectively. The domicile and permanent resident certificates issued m their favor are hereby cancelled. The nomination board of AJ&K is directed to Withdraw their formations from the colleges concerned- and shall nominate the candidates out of petitioners herein in view of their merit position in place of respondents Nos.3 and 5. H.B.T./5/H.C.(AJ&K) WWW WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 1045 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2009-03-06): . SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.- The petitioners and respondents Nos.3 and 5 are contestants for their nomination for admission in professional colleges against the seats reserved for the quota of Muzaffarabad District. Respondents 3 and 5 have been nominated by the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Formation Board for admission in professional colleges of Pakistan against the seats reserved for the quota of District in view of their merit position, whereas the petitioners, who admittedly belong to District Muzaffarabad and are holders of domicile of the said district, challenge the nomination of ’respondents 3 and 5 on the ground that they are not domicile and permanent resident of Muzaffarabad District. ' The case of the petitioners is that they, being domiciled of. Muzaffarabad District, passed F. Sc. examination and' their names appeared at Serial No.21,22,25 and 27 in the list of Muzaffarabad District candidates for M.B.B.S admission for the year, 2008-2009. In the above list, prepared by the nomination Board, respondents 3 and 5 are shown at serial Nos.] and 2, and they have been nom mated for M.B.B;S, course against the seats reserved for the quota of District Muzaffarabad whereas both the' respondents are neither, domiciled nor permanent residents of District Muzaffarabad. The said respondents, with the. connivance of official respondents Nos.| and 2, illegally maneuvered. and succeeded in obtaining the state subject, domicile and permanent resident certificates of District Muzaffarabad by playing fraud J and MAL practices. Respondent No.3 (Mariam Shaheen) is member of a refugee family who migrated in the year, 1947 from Dagos, Thesis Sumba District Jammu and her grandfather Ghulam Muhammad son of Jamal Din is permanently settled in Village Away, Thesis Avowal, Pakistan, therefore, she falls in the definition of refugees settled m Pakistan and can only claim admission against the quota reserved for refugees settled in Pakistan. She and her father Muhammad Ali Shaheen, by misstatement of facts and playing fraud have illegally obtained state subject, domicile and permanent resident certificates from District Muzaffarabad. Respondent No.2 submitted total untrue report on the basis of which respondent No.1 issued the certificates in favor of Mariam Shaheen. Respondent No.5, Wages Ahmed Being, is member of a T- family who migrated from Baal Not, Thesis Ur, Occupied Kashmir, and p his grandfather is permanently settled in Serial, Thesis Naval, District Bag whose father Mukhtar Ahmed Being is serving in N.B.P. who is also resident of Serial, Thesis Naval, District Bag. WW. He has obtained state subject, domicile and permanent resident certificates from District Muzaffarabad through deceitful means. The grandfather of t r respondent No.5, Ismael Being by name, migrated from occupied Kashmir and settled in Serial Thesis Naval District Bag. Respondents Nos.3 and 5, therefore, are not permanent residents and domicile of District Muzaffarabad, however, they have succeeded to get admission in M.B.B.S. course, by practicing fraud and misstatement of facts. Their formation, therefore, is against law and facts which needs reversal by accepting this writ petition. The official respondents failed to discharge their duties according

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 1045 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2009-03-06): not permanent residents and domicile of District Muzaffarabad, however, they have succeeded to get admission in M.B.B.S. course, by practicing fraud and misstatement of facts. Their formation, therefore, is against law and facts which needs reversal by accepting this writ petition. The official respondents failed to discharge their duties according to law on the subject while issuing the state subject, domicile and permanent resident certificates in favor of the said respondents. Thus, they may be directed, through a writ of mandamus, to withdraw the formation of the said respondents from the course of M.B.B.S. and after having done so, they may be directed to nominate the candidates from District Muzaffarabad, in view of the merit position against the seats reserved for District Muzaffarabad. Conversely, the case of respondent No.3 is that her father is a w state subject BOM in Pakistan in the year, 1961. Her grandfather, Ghulam Muhammad is a refugee from Jammu occupied Kashmir. Her father married to a woman (mother of respondent No.3) and settled in Muzaffarabad since long. Respondent, her brothers and sisters were born in Muzaffarabad and had been studying in Muzaffarabad. They never shifted to any other place. The father is running his. own business in Plate since 198S and is a voter in plate ward. Their elders on maternal side are buried at Muzaffarabad after their death. She has no intention to leave Muzaffarabad Azad Kashmir and similarly her father is also settled in Muzaffarabad for the last 20 years and has no intention to leave this place in the times to come. The certificates were issued in her favor after a detailed inquiry. The official respondents, before issuing of certificates, satisfied themselves through the evidence produced by her in this connection. She seeks dismissal of the writ petition, as no illegality has been committed by issuing the certificates in her favor and her formation against the reserved seat for District Muzaffarabad. The case of respondent No.5 is that petitioners herein have not come with clean hands, therefore, they are not entitled to equitable relief by this Court. They challenged the certificates, in favor of respondents, before District Magistrate, however, they failed in the petition which stood dismissed for want of proof: This fact of dismissal has been suppressed by the petitioners, therefore, their writ petition deserves to be -r dismissed. The writ petition is not maintainable in view of government notification dated 24-8-1972. The father of respondent Mukhtar Ahmed Being S/o Ismail Being completed his educational career from the institutions situated in Muzaffarabad city because his father, after migration, permanently settled in Muzaffarabad. The father of -the respondent and his two uncle also obtained state subject certificates from I District Magistrate Muzaffarabad, therefore, it was wrong to say that respondent No.5 was not state subject, domicile and permanent resident of District Muzaffarabad. The respondent completed his education up to intermediate from the educational institutions- in Muzaffarabad and his grandfather has also been buried in the same district; thus, according to him, the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 1045 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2009-03-06): therefore, it was wrong to say that respondent No.5 was not state subject, domicile and permanent resident of District Muzaffarabad. The respondent completed his education up to intermediate from the educational institutions- in Muzaffarabad and his grandfather has also been buried in the same district; thus, according to him, the entire evidence, as stated above, when placed m before the official respondents they stood convinced and issued certificates showing him state subject, domicile and permanent resident of Muzaffarabad Azad Kashmir. He has rightly been nom mated for M.B.B.S. course against the seat reserved for District Muzaffarabad and there is no justification to withdraw him from the college he is studying in. The learned counsel for the petitioners by referring to the documentary evidence appended with the petition contended that it was satisfactorily proved that both the answering respondents were not domicile and permanent residents of Muzaffarabad district. Their families migrated from occupied Jammu Kashmir and settled in Pakistan and District Bag respectively in the capacity of refugees of the state. The official respondents fell in collusion with them and issued certificates of domicile and permanent residence in the favor, thus, deprived the petitioners of their legitimate right of education. He, during his arguments, relied upon 1999 MLD 261, PLD 1997 SC (AJ&K) and PLD 1985 SC (AJ&K)1 and submitted that in view of settled law, the w certificates issued in favor of answering respondents may be cancelled and as a consequence their nomination may be withdrawn with the direction to formation board to nom mate the candidates (out of petitioners) in view of the merit position* against the seats reserved for District Muzaffarabad. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents contended that the answering respondents were rightly nominated against the seats reserved for District Muzaffarabad arid the certificates in their favor have also been rightly issued. The respondents, according to the learned counsel, are admittedly State subjects,and in view of the -evidence brought on record, they have rightly been declared as domicile and permanent residents of Muzaffarabad District. The certificates in their favor were challenged before the competent authority who declined to allow the application by the petitioners!and they had alternate, remedy before AJK Council or the Government of AJ&K; but they failed to avail alternative remedy under law, therefore, the wait petition was not tamable in view of section 44 of the AJ&K Inter Constitution Act, 1974. After hearing the learned Advocates for the parties, it may be observed that both the answering respondents are admittedly stated subjects in view of the pleadings of the parties. The petitioners are found to have pleaded that families of the answering respondents migrated from occupied part of the State of J&K, therefore, they are admittedly state subjects. The only controversy is about the domicile and permanent resident certificates which needs resolution by this Court. It is also not disputed by the respondents that they initially settled in other units, however, they and their parents settled in Muzaffarabad long before

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 1045 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2009-03-06): of J&K, therefore, they are admittedly state subjects. The only controversy is about the domicile and permanent resident certificates which needs resolution by this Court. It is also not disputed by the respondents that they initially settled in other units, however, they and their parents settled in Muzaffarabad long before the issuance of certificates. They completed their education in Muzaffarabad and have no intention to leave this place.’ 1. j- While dealing with the case of respondent No.3, Mariam ' Shaheen. it is proposed to put the pleadings and the evidence thereon together in order to arrive at a. definite conclusion. The evidence produced by the petitioners, on the basis of which they seek cancellation of domicile and permanent resident certificate issued in favor of the said respondent, consists of revenue record showing Ghulam Muhammad as owner of landed property m Away District Avowal Pakistan, the landed property of Alstom Begum, (paternal aunt of respondent) in tie same village, the landed property of Nadeem Tariq son of Ghulam Muhammad (paternal uncle of the respondent), the revenue report by. The officials of the revenue department of District Avowal showing sanction of mutation after the death of Ghulam Muhammad son of Jamal Din (Grandfather of respondent) and devolution of his legacy on his legal heirs include Muhammad Al Shaheen, Father of respondent, in village Away District Avowal Pakistan. Muhammad Ali Shaheen, according to this report, is real son of Ghulam Muhammad deceased. WW. The other evidence includes certificate of domicile issued under Pakistan Citizenship Act in favor of Muhammad Saved Khalid son of Ghulam Muhammad. The said person is real paternal uncle of the respondent. According to this certificate, the said person is resident of village Agarwal, District Avowal. Another piece of evidence is a transfer order Exb.PB/5, which shows Muhammad Saved Khalid son of Ghulam Muhammad deceased resident of District Avowal and his appointment in. AJ&K service, on. the same domicile. Likewise a certificate, Annexure “PB/6”, showing selection of Muhammad Asif Kamal son of Ghulam Muhammad as lecturer on the basis of domicile of District Avowal Pakistan is on the file. Muhammad Asif Kamal is a real son of Ghulam Muhammad and real paternal uncle of the respondent. This evidence, produced and relied upon by the petitioners, goes’ unrebutted on the side of answering respondent. Not only this, the written statement filed on her behalf would show that she does not dispute the fact of migration from Indian held Kashmir and settling in District Avowal -h Pakistan. Her evidence relates to the fact of running business by her r father at Muzaffarabad, different photographs show mg burial of her relatives on maternal side at Muzaffarabad. After examination of her evidence and pleadings it would become clear that she rests her claim on the fact that her parents are living in Muzaffarabad for a couple of years. She completed her education up to intermediate level at Muzaffarabad. Moreover, her mother belongs to Muzaffarabad District and on the basis of this fact she

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 1045 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2009-03-06): pleadings it would become clear that she rests her claim on the fact that her parents are living in Muzaffarabad for a couple of years. She completed her education up to intermediate level at Muzaffarabad. Moreover, her mother belongs to Muzaffarabad District and on the basis of this fact she claims to be domiciled and permanent resident of Muzaffarabad District. From the perusal of her pleadings and the evidence thereon, it becomes clear that mitral migration from Indian held Kashmir to District Avowal Pakistan is not disputed. While dealing with the case of answering respondent Was Ahmed Being, TT may be observed that he also does not dispute the fact that he is a member of family, who initially migrated from Indian held Kashmir and settled in Serial Thesis Naval District Bag. The evidence relied upon and appended with this petition to the extent of said p- respondent consists of revenue record showing Mukhtar Ahmed, father of respondent, as owner of landed property in village Serial, Thesis Naval, District Bag. Similarly brothers of Mukhtar Ahmed are shown as owners in’ village Serial Naval. They are also shown as refugee from village Ballot, Thesis Ur, Indian held Kashmir. Muhammad Mukhtar Being and his brothers are also reported to be in possession of their landed property in village Serial, according to this report. Muhammad Ismael Being, father of Mukhtar Being and'others is reported ». WW. to be dead during earthquake and has been buried at Muzaffarabad. Mr. Mukhtar Being and his brothers, also inherit landed property as legal heirs m of therm other MST. ZANU Begum. MST. ZANU Begum is also reported to be buried in village Serial, Thesis Naval, District Bag, as report reveals. They are shown in possession of the said land merited through their mother. They own an orchard over the said land in the village Serial which has been leased out to the locals of the area. According to this report, Mukhtar Ahmed Being and his brothers visit their landed property off and on. This evidence goes unrebutted by the answering respondent. He simply based his claim on the fact of service of his father in Muzaffarabad and his education up to intermediate level and claims himself to be the domicile and permanent resident of District Muzaffarabad. wJB¥4* After having discussed the respective. claims and evidence thereon, it becomes evident that initial migration of the family of the answering respondents from Indian held Kashmir to Away District Avowal Pakistan and village Serial Thesis Naval District Bag respectively is not a disputed fact. Thus, it can. Safely be said that both the answering respondents are the state subjects. As stated earlier, the only controversy is about their domicile and permanent resident certificates, therefore, the question arises whether the answering respondents who initially settled in other units and, later on, in r connection with their service, education and business, shifted to Muzaffarabad can be accepted as domicile and permanent residents of District Muzaffarabad. Before answering this question, it would be

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 1045 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2009-03-06): permanent resident certificates, therefore, the question arises whether the answering respondents who initially settled in other units and, later on, in r connection with their service, education and business, shifted to Muzaffarabad can be accepted as domicile and permanent residents of District Muzaffarabad. Before answering this question, it would be useful to reproduce a government notification dated 24-8-1972 MN connection with the share or representation in service of Azad Jammu Kashmir on District wise quota. This notification is found to have been relied upon by answering respondent Was Ahmed Being, and it is Annexure “RB” which reads as under:. a-H v/ July/FS it- r- ←yes <.Y FIA - RR" This notification would show that any person who migrated from occupied Kashmir to Azad Kashmir would be deemed to be the domicile ' and resident of the district or the unit m which he initially settled after migration. Similarly those who migrated from Indian held Kashmir and settled in any part of Pakistan would be deemed and accepted as refugees settled in Pakistan, though they may shift to Azad Kashmir for service or business but their fact of shifting to Azad Kashmir in aforesaid connection would not allow them to claim themselves as domicile or permanent resident of the place where they shifted for business or service. WW. f- J » The case of answering respondents, when tested on the touchstone of the criteria laid down through the above sated government notification, would suggest saying that though the said notification deals with representation in service and there is no mention nomination in professional colleges, yet it has settled the principle of quota and it ICAN be applied equally in case of nomination for admission MN professional colleges in Pakistan and nominations are being made on the same principle since long. The evidence discussed in earlier part of this judgment satisfactorily proved that the families of both the answering respondents initially settled in other units and their parents still own property in the respective units. They and their parents are live in Muzaffarabad min connection with service and business etc. Moreover the intention of a person while resolving the controversy with regard to his permanent residence and domicile’ plays an important role. There is nothing on record on the side of answer mg respondents that their parents abandoned or surrendered their mitral residence or domicile and permanently shifted to Muzaffarabad. They could do so before the District Magistrate while seeking domicile and permanent resident certificates, through their statement before him, but unfortunately they even concealed the fact of their settlement in other units and their landed property owned and possessed by them and their paternal uncles etc. The official respondents were also legally obliged to satisfy themselves by directing the answering respondents to produce. confidence inspiring evidence, showing them to have abandoned their mitral residence and domicile. They neither inquired about it nor sought any evidence and simply relied upon the fact of residence, education and service etc. at Muzaffarabad. ' The

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 1045 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2009-03-06): legally obliged to satisfy themselves by directing the answering respondents to produce. confidence inspiring evidence, showing them to have abandoned their mitral residence and domicile. They neither inquired about it nor sought any evidence and simply relied upon the fact of residence, education and service etc. at Muzaffarabad. ' The learned counsel for answering respondent No.3 raised another argument that the mother of respondent No.3 belonged to Muzaffarabad, therefore, this fact also entitled her to be the permanent resident and domicile of District Muzaffarabad. The question arises whether she can be accepted as domicile and permanent resident of District Muzaffarabad on the basis of her mother belonging to Muzaffarabad. This proposition came before the Apex Court of the state of Azad Jammu Kashmir in President’s reference No.1 of 1996 PLD 1997 SC (AJ&K) 1, while dealing with the case of state subjects. In the said legal report it has been laid down that recognized principle is that nationality of father is decisive. Though the question of domicile and permanent resident certificate was not directly involved in the said report by the Apex Court, yet the principle laid down by the Supreme Court of } Azad Jammu Kashmir can be applied equally in case of domicile and permanent resident certificates. The domicile of father will prevail while deciding the domicile of child and not that of mother. The case of the respondents when seen on the strength of the principle settled by the Supreme Court'of AJ&K, leads to the conclusion that when father of the respondents is permanent resident and domicile of Away District Avowal and her mother belongs to District Muzaffarabad, the permanent residence and domicile of father will prevail, thus, respondent shall be deemed to be the permanent resident and domicile of Away, w Avowal Pakistan. She therefore, is included MN the category of refugees settled in Pakistan. She could claim her nomination for her.M.B.B.S. course against the seats reserved for refugees settled m Pakistan. It is settled by now that the quota system is to be observed strictly in case of services and formations to different professional colleges m Pakistan. 1* ’ The learned counsel for respondent No.5 raised objection regarding maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that petitioners initially challenged domicile and permanent resident certificate in favor of answering respondents before the District Magistrate and their application was dismissed for want of proof: They could file appeal before the government or seek cancellation of the said certificates from AJ&K council, failing which they could not evoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court, as an alternate and efficacious remedy was available to them under the relevant law. This objection has been examined in view of the case law like 1999 MLD 261 in which it has been held that remedy by way of appeal under Sate Subject Act is not adequate and similarly remedy before District Magistrate as well as council is also neither adequate nor efficacious. It has been held by the Honorable Supreme Court

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 1045?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 1045 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2009-03-06): case law like 1999 MLD 261 in which it has been held that remedy by way of appeal under Sate Subject Act is not adequate and similarly remedy before District Magistrate as well as council is also neither adequate nor efficacious. It has been held by the Honorable Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment that writ in such like position is maintainable and the High Court is fully competent to resolve the controversy in view of the evidence produced by the respective parties. a The conclusion, therefore, is that respondents Nos.3 and 5 are declared as domicile and permanent residents of District Avowal Pakistan and District Bag Azad Kashmir respectively. The domicile and permanent resident certificates issued m their favor are hereby cancelled. The nomination board of AJ&K is directed to Withdraw their formations from the colleges concerned- and shall nominate the candidates out of petitioners herein in view of their merit position in place of respondents Nos.3 and 5. H.B.T./5/H.C.(AJ&K) WWW WW.

Question: What is case 2009 CLC 502 about?
Answer: Case 2009 CLC 502 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] on 2008-09-23. The case involved WAHEED AHMED AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE AND 17 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - SS. 42 AND 54 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - 8.96, O. XXXTX, RR. AND 2. The case was heard by MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2009 CLC 502?
Answer: In case 2009 CLC 502, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - SS. 42 AND 54 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - 8.96, O. XXXTX, RR. AND 2. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] and decided on 2008-09-23.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2009 CLC 502?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2009 CLC 502 were: MUHAMMAD REAZAKN: FOR APPELLANTS. M.Y. ARVI FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2009 CLC 502?
Answer: The parties in case 2009 CLC 502 were: WAHEED AHMED AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE AND 17 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)].

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2009 CLC 502.
Answer: ? MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR, J.- This appeal has been filed against, the order of learned District Judge, Mirror dated 4-8-2008, whereby the said Court vacated the status- duo already issued by him. ' The necessary facts precisely stated are that Waheed Ahmed and w other appellant herein filed a declaratory suit cum perpetual injunction per taming to Plot No. 62 measuring 2 Canals situated in Sector B/2 Mirror, in the Court of District Judge Mirror on 24-6-2008. The appellants/plaintiffs claimed in their suit that plot in dispute was allocated in the name of their father on 30-9-1964 and who deposited the price of the plot. According to the appellants/plaintiffs, that their father, after getting permission from relevant authority raised construction over the disputed plot in shape of Basement and after completing the same, applied for proprietary rights, which was not granted. The appellants/ plaintiffs further alleged that predecessor-in-interest of the appellants and pro forma- respondents felt that plot in dispute was insufficient for the residential purposes, made an effort to purchase a plot of Canals in sector F/2 Mirror. Due to this reason, he had sold the same through an agreement to sell to Muhammad Kiddie respondent N9.I on 21.-7-1971. According to the appellants, this sale was conditional which was ultimately revoked by the predecessor- in-interest of the appellants and pro form-respondents. Therefore, the appellants and pro form-respondents, are bona fide allottees and owners of the disputed plot. The appellants/plaintiffs maintained that their father died on 12-11-1985, their mother was Pardanasheen lady, whereas, appellants and pro forma respondents were minors, and they were ignorant about the allotment V ' made in the name of the father. The respondent/defendant No.], on the basis of revoked agreement deed applied for transfer of plot and same was transferred in his name by the Municipal Corporation Mirror through transfer order dated 6-4-2004. They further alleged that respondent No.1! secretly and fraudulently got transferred the plot in b dispute in his name, therefore, this transfer order dated 6-4-2004 was in operative against their rights and might be declared null and void against their interest. They further claimed that all the subsequent transfers made on the basis of above said transfer order were illegal, against the facts and also able to be cancelled. Lastly, they prayed for declaratory decree. Along.with the suit, the appellants/plaintiffs moved an application for adapter relief which was granted by the trial Court, but the same was vacated on the application of respondents/defendants vide judgment dated 4-8-2008. Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of the learned District Judge, the appellants/plaintiffs tiled an appeal before this Court. Mr. Real Adam, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants vehemently contended that impugned order is patently illegal, arbitrary and against facts of the case. He maintained that agreement to sell creates no rights to the respondent/defendant No. 1. According to the learned counsel, when the mitral transfer order was illegal and against the recognized mode of transfer, then subsequent transfers or transactions did not bestow any title to the transferees. He maintained that the Municipal Corporation was not lawfully justified to transfer the plot in dispute in favor of respondent/defendant No.1] on the basis of agreement to sell. The procedure or mode of transfer of plot is only y governed by the relevant law dealing with the affairs of Municipal Corporation. The learned counsel further contended that when the legal heirs of the allottee were alive and present, then allotment or other rights attached with the plot in dispute could only be transferred to the respondents or any other person through making a statement before the authority. He maintained that none of the legal heirs of allottee has appeared before the relevant authority, nor they made any statement regarding transfer of the nights or allotment m favor of Muhammad Kiddie respondent No.|, therefore, all the steps taken by the Municipal Corporation were in violation of procedure as laid down in the Local Government Act and Rules thereunder. He argued that learned District Judge has wrongly vacated the Status Quo order subject to furnish of undertaking. According to him, when the respondents are not bona fide owners of the plot in dispute, then how, they could be permitted to raise constructions over the plot owned by the appellants/plaintiffs. The learned counsel has placed reliance on 2001 CLC 1502, PLD 2006 SC (AJ&K) 19 2006 CLC 1872 and 2005 SCR 368. - 1 On the other hand, Mr. Muhammad Yonis Arvin, the learned counsel for the respondents strenuously controverted the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellants/plaintiffs and argued that appellants have miserably failed to make out an arguable case. According to the learned c'counsel, the plot in dispute was purchased by Muhammad Kiddie respondent No.1 from Raja Muhammad Islam Khan predecessor-in- interest of the appellants and pro forma respondents for a consideration of Rs.9,000 and its possession was also handed over to the purchaser, who constructed the Basement and thereafter same was transferred to Muhammad Suleman, Saber Hussain, Nadeem Akhtar APD lastly in the name of Tapir Mahmood respondent No.7 herein. Who after getting the site-plan from relevant authority completed the building over the plot in dispute, but the appellants remained silent over it. Even otherwise, acceding to the learned counsel allottee was died about IS years after selling of plot in dispute, and he has never challenged the agreement to sell during his lifetime despite having the knowledge. The learned counsel further argued that Municipal Corporation has lawfully transferred the rights of allotment, whereas the proprietary rights have not yet been transferred in favor of last transferee. According to him, rights of allotment can be transferred on the basis of agreement to sell. Alternately, he maintained that learned District Judge was not legally justified to make an order to the respondent to furnish undertaking because there was no such legal requirement. But, even then, the respondent has submitted undertaking in compliance of order of the learned District Judge. Lastly, the learned counsel made a vehemence that appellants have failed to establish a case of interference by this Court. In support of his contention, the learned counsel has cited PLD 1987 SC (AJ&K) 93 and an unreported judgment of Honorable Supreme Court titled Ch. Shankar Ali v. Muhammad Javier and others. I have heard the respective arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record very. Mutely and also gone through the reports cited by the learned counsel for the parties. It is pertinent to mention here, that it is an admitted fact between the parties that agreement to sell dated 21-7-1971 was executed by Raja Muhammad Islam Khan allottee in favor of Muhammad Kiddie through his representative Ch. Muhammad Bashir Advocate, regarding plot in dispute. It is also admitted position that same plot was transferred by the relevant authority in favor of purchaser/respondent No.1 herein on the basis of above-mentioned agreement to sell vide transfer order dated 6-4- 2004. All the subsequent transfers were made by virtue of transfer order dated 6-4-2004. The appellants/plaintiffs have called in question all the transfer orders in their declaratory suit. From the record available, it is also established that plot in dispute was in possession of last transferee the. Tapir Mahmood respondent No.7 herein, who after getting the permission from the relevant authority constructed 3 storeyed building over the above-mentioned plot. According to the learned District Judge, external work of the building has been completed only internal work/ finishing is left. No doubt, it is settled proposition of law, that agreement to sell does not bestow the ownership or declaratory decree cannot be granted on the basis of agreement to sell. But in the case in hand, factual position is altogether different. Only right of allotment was transferred on the basis of agreement to sell in favor of purchaser. Prima facie I am of the opinion, that relevant authority has the power to transfer the right of allotment on the basis of agreement to sell or through affidavit, because when the property allotted by the authority, its ownership also vests with that authority. In the start case, proprietary rights have never been given to the allottee or transferees. My this view finds support from case titled “Ch. Shankar Ali v. Muhammad Javier and others” Civil Appeal No.61 of 2002 decided by the Honorable Supreme Court on 21-5-2003. As far the plea of the appellants that agreement to sell had beer revoked by the allottee (predecessor-in-interest) of the appellants ANC pro forma respondents is concerned, this is a question of fact, which can! only be resolved after recording the evidence. This of course, would be decided by the trial Court in the suit at proper stage. Since, the plot in dispute is in the possession of the answering respondent Tar Mahmood then, how, his peaceful possession could be disturbed such an early stage. Even otherwise, the learned District Judge has rightly observed that temporary injunction stands vacated, if the undertaking is furnished by the respondent/Tapir Mahmood that he would not claim any compensation in case the suit of the appellants succeeds. The aforesaid view is fortified by the Apex Court in case titled Km. Unique Nadir v. Nazi Khalil.-Rehman and others 2001 YLR 3263. Thus, in the light of what has been stated above finding no force MN this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 502?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 502 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-09-23): ? MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR, J.- This appeal has been filed against, the order of learned District Judge, Mirror dated 4-8-2008, whereby the said Court vacated the status- duo already issued by him. ' The necessary facts precisely stated are that Waheed Ahmed and w other appellant herein filed a declaratory suit cum perpetual injunction per taming to Plot No. 62 measuring 2 Canals situated in Sector B/2 Mirror, in the Court of District Judge Mirror on 24-6-2008. The appellants/plaintiffs claimed in their suit that plot in dispute was allocated in the name of their father on 30-9-1964 and who deposited the price of the plot. According to the appellants/plaintiffs, that their father, after getting permission from relevant authority raised construction over the disputed plot in shape of Basement and after completing the same, applied for proprietary rights, which was not granted. The appellants/ plaintiffs further alleged that predecessor-in-interest of the appellants and pro forma- respondents felt that plot in dispute was insufficient for the residential purposes, made an effort to purchase a plot of Canals in sector F/2 Mirror. Due to this reason, he had sold the same through an agreement to sell to Muhammad Kiddie respondent N9.I on 21.-7-1971. According to the appellants, this sale was conditional which was ultimately revoked by the predecessor- in-interest of the appellants and pro form-respondents. Therefore, the appellants and pro form-respondents, are bona fide allottees and owners of the disputed plot. The appellants/plaintiffs maintained that their father died on 12-11-1985, their mother was Pardanasheen lady, whereas, appellants and pro forma respondents were minors, and they were ignorant about the allotment V ' made in the name of the father. The respondent/defendant No.], on the basis of revoked agreement deed applied for transfer of plot and same was transferred in his name by the Municipal Corporation Mirror through transfer order dated 6-4-2004. They further alleged that respondent No.1! secretly and fraudulently got transferred the plot in b dispute in his name, therefore, this transfer order dated 6-4-2004 was in operative against their rights and might be declared null and void against their interest. They further claimed that all the subsequent transfers made on the basis of above said transfer order were illegal, against the facts and also able to be cancelled. Lastly, they prayed for declaratory decree. Along.with the suit, the appellants/plaintiffs moved an application for adapter relief which was granted by the trial Court, but the same was vacated on the application of respondents/defendants vide judgment dated 4-8-2008. Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of the learned District Judge, the appellants/plaintiffs tiled an appeal before this Court. Mr. Real Adam, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants vehemently contended that impugned order is patently illegal, arbitrary and against facts of the case. He maintained that agreement to sell creates no rights to the respondent/defendant No. 1. According to the learned counsel, when the mitral transfer order was illegal and against the recognized mode of transfer, then subsequent transfers or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 502?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 502 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-09-23): that impugned order is patently illegal, arbitrary and against facts of the case. He maintained that agreement to sell creates no rights to the respondent/defendant No. 1. According to the learned counsel, when the mitral transfer order was illegal and against the recognized mode of transfer, then subsequent transfers or transactions did not bestow any title to the transferees. He maintained that the Municipal Corporation was not lawfully justified to transfer the plot in dispute in favor of respondent/defendant No.1] on the basis of agreement to sell. The procedure or mode of transfer of plot is only y governed by the relevant law dealing with the affairs of Municipal Corporation. The learned counsel further contended that when the legal heirs of the allottee were alive and present, then allotment or other rights attached with the plot in dispute could only be transferred to the respondents or any other person through making a statement before the authority. He maintained that none of the legal heirs of allottee has appeared before the relevant authority, nor they made any statement regarding transfer of the nights or allotment m favor of Muhammad Kiddie respondent No.|, therefore, all the steps taken by the Municipal Corporation were in violation of procedure as laid down in the Local Government Act and Rules thereunder. He argued that learned District Judge has wrongly vacated the Status Quo order subject to furnish of undertaking. According to him, when the respondents are not bona fide owners of the plot in dispute, then how, they could be permitted to raise constructions over the plot owned by the appellants/plaintiffs. The learned counsel has placed reliance on 2001 CLC 1502, PLD 2006 SC (AJ&K) 19 2006 CLC 1872 and 2005 SCR 368. - 1 On the other hand, Mr. Muhammad Yonis Arvin, the learned counsel for the respondents strenuously controverted the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellants/plaintiffs and argued that appellants have miserably failed to make out an arguable case. According to the learned c'counsel, the plot in dispute was purchased by Muhammad Kiddie respondent No.1 from Raja Muhammad Islam Khan predecessor-in- interest of the appellants and pro forma respondents for a consideration of Rs.9,000 and its possession was also handed over to the purchaser, who constructed the Basement and thereafter same was transferred to Muhammad Suleman, Saber Hussain, Nadeem Akhtar APD lastly in the name of Tapir Mahmood respondent No.7 herein. Who after getting the site-plan from relevant authority completed the building over the plot in dispute, but the appellants remained silent over it. Even otherwise, acceding to the learned counsel allottee was died about IS years after selling of plot in dispute, and he has never challenged the agreement to sell during his lifetime despite having the knowledge. The learned counsel further argued that Municipal Corporation has lawfully transferred the rights of allotment, whereas the proprietary rights have not yet been transferred in favor of last transferee. According to him, rights of allotment can be transferred on the basis

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 502?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 502 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-09-23): to sell during his lifetime despite having the knowledge. The learned counsel further argued that Municipal Corporation has lawfully transferred the rights of allotment, whereas the proprietary rights have not yet been transferred in favor of last transferee. According to him, rights of allotment can be transferred on the basis of agreement to sell. Alternately, he maintained that learned District Judge was not legally justified to make an order to the respondent to furnish undertaking because there was no such legal requirement. But, even then, the respondent has submitted undertaking in compliance of order of the learned District Judge. Lastly, the learned counsel made a vehemence that appellants have failed to establish a case of interference by this Court. In support of his contention, the learned counsel has cited PLD 1987 SC (AJ&K) 93 and an unreported judgment of Honorable Supreme Court titled Ch. Shankar Ali v. Muhammad Javier and others. I have heard the respective arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record very. Mutely and also gone through the reports cited by the learned counsel for the parties. It is pertinent to mention here, that it is an admitted fact between the parties that agreement to sell dated 21-7-1971 was executed by Raja Muhammad Islam Khan allottee in favor of Muhammad Kiddie through his representative Ch. Muhammad Bashir Advocate, regarding plot in dispute. It is also admitted position that same plot was transferred by the relevant authority in favor of purchaser/respondent No.1 herein on the basis of above-mentioned agreement to sell vide transfer order dated 6-4- 2004. All the subsequent transfers were made by virtue of transfer order dated 6-4-2004. The appellants/plaintiffs have called in question all the transfer orders in their declaratory suit. From the record available, it is also established that plot in dispute was in possession of last transferee the. Tapir Mahmood respondent No.7 herein, who after getting the permission from the relevant authority constructed 3 storeyed building over the above-mentioned plot. According to the learned District Judge, external work of the building has been completed only internal work/ finishing is left. No doubt, it is settled proposition of law, that agreement to sell does not bestow the ownership or declaratory decree cannot be granted on the basis of agreement to sell. But in the case in hand, factual position is altogether different. Only right of allotment was transferred on the basis of agreement to sell in favor of purchaser. Prima facie I am of the opinion, that relevant authority has the power to transfer the right of allotment on the basis of agreement to sell or through affidavit, because when the property allotted by the authority, its ownership also vests with that authority. In the start case, proprietary rights have never been given to the allottee or transferees. My this view finds support from case titled “Ch. Shankar Ali v. Muhammad Javier and others” Civil Appeal No.61 of 2002 decided by the Honorable Supreme Court on 21-5-2003. As far

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 CLC 502?
Answer: From case 2009 CLC 502 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-09-23): vests with that authority. In the start case, proprietary rights have never been given to the allottee or transferees. My this view finds support from case titled “Ch. Shankar Ali v. Muhammad Javier and others” Civil Appeal No.61 of 2002 decided by the Honorable Supreme Court on 21-5-2003. As far the plea of the appellants that agreement to sell had beer revoked by the allottee (predecessor-in-interest) of the appellants ANC pro forma respondents is concerned, this is a question of fact, which can! only be resolved after recording the evidence. This of course, would be decided by the trial Court in the suit at proper stage. Since, the plot in dispute is in the possession of the answering respondent Tar Mahmood then, how, his peaceful possession could be disturbed such an early stage. Even otherwise, the learned District Judge has rightly observed that temporary injunction stands vacated, if the undertaking is furnished by the respondent/Tapir Mahmood that he would not claim any compensation in case the suit of the appellants succeeds. The aforesaid view is fortified by the Apex Court in case titled Km. Unique Nadir v. Nazi Khalil.-Rehman and others 2001 YLR 3263. Thus, in the light of what has been stated above finding no force MN this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 2009 PLD 501 about?
Answer: Case 2009 PLD 501 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 2009-05-04. The case involved JAN MUHAMMAD SHAH AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185(3) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - 8.28 AND ARTICLE 144 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2009/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2009_501.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:56 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2009/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2009_501.html. The case was heard by TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI AND 'e MIAN HAMID FAROQQ, JJ -.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: In case 2009 PLD 501, the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185(3) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ) ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - 8.28 AND ARTICLE 144 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2009/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2009_501.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:56 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2009/PLD/html_txt/PLD_2009_501.html. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 2009-05-04.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2009 PLD 501 were: CH. MUHAMMAD ASHRAF, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR PETITIONERS. PM. HANIF KHATANA, ADDL. A. G. (ON COURT'S NOTICE).. The judges presiding were: TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI AND 'e MIAN HAMID FAROQQ, JJ -.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: The parties in case 2009 PLD 501 were: JAN MUHAMMAD SHAH AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2009 PLD 501.
Answer: MIAN HAMID FAROOQ, J.-Petitioners seek leave to appeal against judgment dated 15- 3-2001, whereby the learned Lahore High Court at Multan dismissed their constitutional petition (Writ Petition No.230-R of 1980). 2. Facts of the case tabulated in the impugned judgment are reproduced below-- ' ‘2. Air Haman Shah (late), whose successors-in-interest are now before this Court had made an application under section 8 of the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1948 for a declaration that he was owner of 782 Canals and 11 Marla's of land situated in village Harman Thesis and District Montgomery (now Sahiwal). It was his case that he was owner of one half of the land whereas the rest of the half was in his adverse possession which had earlier been sold to one Lai Hand, an Evacuee. The Deputy Custodian vide order dated 31-3-1949 granted the declaration that the part of the land described in petition is an evacuee property. A revision was filed by Ahmed Allah and Anwar Thesean Ali Khan/respondents Nos.2 and 3 herein which was rejected by the custodian of evacuee property on 14-6-1960 as time-barred. He, however, sent for the record for finding out whether action for revising the deputy. custodian’s order So Moth was called for or not. On perusal of record, a notice was issued to Air Haman as to why the Deputy Custodian’s order should not be set aside under subsection (4) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. The learned Custodian took the view that the property in dispute was of the value of more than Rs.5000 and a device had been resorted to by undervaluing the property to prevent the Custodian to examine the case, as all cases involving property of the value of more than Rs.5000 were to be submitted to the Custodian for confirmation. It was thus observed that the order of the Deputy Custodian had not become operative as it was not duly confirmed by the Custodian. As to the claim of adverse possession for half of the land, the'learned Custodian took the view that he was not in possession of the land for more than 12 years nor there was evidence on record as to the ouster of Lai Hand, from the land. He thus, modified the order of the Deputy Custodian and declared that the respondent Haman Shah is owner of only one half share of the land in dispute and that the other half share is evacuee property being owned by Lai Hand. This was vide order dated 16-12-1960. It was challenged by the petitioners by filing petition (W.P. No. ) before this Court. The case of the petitioners before this Court was that since the property in dispute was not treated as evacuee property on or before 1- 1-1957, it could not be treated so nor any order, could be passed by the Custodian after the said date. For the view taken by late Karma Elaine Chauhan, J (KS he then was), that this aspect had not been adverted to by the Custodian while passing the said order, the case was remanded for fresh decision in accordance with law. This was vide judgment dated 9-101968. The petitioners challenged ’ this order through LPA No. which was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court oh 20-2- 1969. It was noticed by the learned Division Bench that in view of Rule 7(c) of Protection of Evacuee. Property Rules, 1948, the order of the Deputy Custodian heeded confirmation by the Custodian. It was observed that “an order passed by a deputy Custodian in respect of property which was. more than Rs.SOOO in value shall not become effective and be valid unless confirmed by the Custodian. If, therefore, the value of the property is more than Rs.5000 as held by the learned Custodian, then the order of the Deputy Custodian would clearly be invalid and ineffective MN the eyes of law and no advantage could occur to the appellants on the basis thereof. A petition for leave to appeal (C.P.S.L.A No. ) was filed by the petitioners, which was dismissed on 27-10-1969 by the Honorable Supreme Court. 3. In this context, the learned Custodian took up the matter and recorded a finding that there is nothing on record to show that Hand evacuee was ousted by Air Haman Shah, respondent No. 1, who later on occupied the land in question per force and continued in possession as such till the partition of the subcontinent of India. In the circumstances, plea of adverse possession raised by respondent No.1 cannot be accepted”. Adverting to the question of S.3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, he found that plea of adverse. possession having already been repealed, he can only be considered to be a tress passer. Since his authority to occupy the property was never confirmed by the Custodian, therefore, the property always vested in that authority. It is this order dated 19-2-1980 of the custodian, that is challenged through this petition. Petitioners’ constitutional petition (Writ Petition No.230-R of 1980) was dismissed by the learned Lahore High Court at Multan, vide impugned judgment dated 15-3-2001, hence the present petition. 3. Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the learned Custodian had no Jurisdiction to so moth revise or review the order dated 31-3-1949 passed by the Deputy Custodian, Sahiwal, who granted declaration, in favor of the predecessor-in- interest of the petitioners (Air Haman Shah), that he was in adverse possession of half of the property measuring 782 Canals 11 Marla's; that the said order of learned Deputy Custodian, Sahiwal dated 31-3-1949 still holds the field; that the learned Custodian, while passing order dated 16-12-1960, did not collect any evidence to show that the value of the property at the relevant time exceeded from Rs.5,000 and that Lai Hand was There Malik and There Shankar. Conversely, the learned Law Officer supported the impugned judgment. 4. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners tire learned Additional Advocate- General and examined the available record. It is true that the learned Deputy Custodian, vide order dated 31-3-1949, declared that Air Haman Shah was in adverse possession of half of the property, but it is also true that the said order was set aside by the learned Custodian, vide order dated 16-12-1960 in exercise of powers conferred upon him under section 43(4) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. The learned Custodian modified order dated 31-3-1949 and declared that Air Haman Shah was owner of only one half share of the land and other half share was an evacuee property, which was owned by Lai Hand. Even the said order dated 16-12-1960 passed by the learned Custodian was set aside by the learned Lahore High Court at Multan, vide order dated 9-10-1969, when it while deciding petitioners’ petition (W.P. No.26 of 1961) remanded the case to the Custodian for fresh disposal. With the passing of order dated 9- 10-1969 by the learned High Court the question of exercise of so moth powers by the learned Custodian had become inconsequential. In the said backdrop the contention of learned counsel regarding lack of so moth jurisdiction of Custodian and non determination of the value of the property is not worth consideration and need not be addressed to on two counts. Firstly, theYolearned High Court set aside the order passed by the custodian, in exercise of so moth powers conferred under section 43 (4) of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957 and secondly the petitioners did not agitate the plea of lack of exercise of so moth jurisdiction by the learned Custodian before the High Court. It. is evident from order dated 9-10-1969 that the petitioners did not agitate the said plea before the learned High Court, in their constitutional petition (W.P. No.26 of 1961) and primarily it was argued that the learned Custodian did not advert to the provisions of section 3 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957 thus rendered his decision without lawful authority. It was mainly in the said context that the learned High Court remanded the case to the learned Custodian, by setting aside its order dated 16-12- 1960, to decide whether the property in question could be treated as evacuee property under section 3 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) and whether Air Haman Shah occupied the property according to the Jacaranda for the years 1933-37, in 1933 and as such was in adverse possession for more than 12 years at the time of partition. We found from the order dated 9-10-1969 that the petitioners neither raised any such pleas nor it was dealt with and decided by the High Court and was not one of the references of the remand. It may be noted that the petitioners in. the subsequent round of litigation also did not urge the said plea at any post of time, mas much as, It was not pleaded before the learned High Court in their latest writ petition (Writ Petition No.230-R OL 1980). In view whereof, the petitioners are precluded from raising the said plea, which was not taken at any stage of the proceedings right from the year 1960, at this belated stage. 5. Next contention of the learned counsel that order dated 31-3-1949 passed by the learned Deputy Custodian, Sahiwal still holds the field is equally devoid of any force, as after the remand of the case by the learned High Court, vide judgment dated 9-10-1969, the learned Custodian took up the matter and after dealing with the terms of remand order, vide order dated 19-2-1980, reversed the order of Deputy Custodian, which is now being relied upon by the petitioners. It may be noted that the order passed by the Deputy Custodian was set aside twice, once by order dated 16-12-1960 and then on 19-2-1980. Even in the subsequent proceedings, the order of Deputy Custodian dated 31-3-1949 was never restored, therefore, TT could not be urged at this stage that order of Deputy Custodian declaring the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners in adverse possession of the property still hold the field. 6. Air Haman. Shah claimed that he was in adverse possession of half of the property in question on behalf of Lai Hand. Air Haman Shah’s said plea was although declared as correct by Deputy Custodian, yet thereafter it was consistently disbelieved by all the forums, inasmuch as, the learned custodian in the post remand proceedings held that there is nothing on record to show that Air Haman Shah came into possession of the property on behalf of Lai Hand or with his consent and he can only be considered as trespasser. The learned High Court after adverting to every aspect of the case rightly held that no material was placed before the learned Custodian, which could,show that Air Haman Shah was holding half of the land in adverse possession. We subscribe to the findings of the learned High Court, which are not only in accordance with record of the case but also in consonance with the law on subject. 7. There is another aspect of the case. Predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners was claiming half of the land on account of adverse possession. All the forums, except Deputy Custodian, refused to recognize his plea. Litigation started from the date of passing of order dated 31-3- 1949. The learned Sharia Appellate Bench of this Court in a case reported as MacBook Ahmed v. Hakoomat-e-Pakistan (1991 SCMR 2063)” declared section 28 and Article 144 of the Limitation Act, 1908 repugnant to the injunctions of Islam in so far as, same provided for extinguishment of right in the property, and it was held that decision of this Court would take effect from 31st August 1991, on which date petitioners’ constitutional petition was pending. It was neither finally concluded at any stage nor any decree was passed favoring the petitioners to the effect that Air Haman Shah was in adverse possession of half of the land. Petitioners’ constitutional petition was pending on the day, on which the judgment of MacBook Ahmed (ibid) was to take effect, thus it cannot be pleaded that the case of petitioners qua adverse possession was a past and closed transaction. In view of case of MacBook Ahmed (ibid), petitioners’ plea of adverse possession has lost its efficacy, if there was any. Learned counsel for the petitioners, when confronted with the case of MacBook Ahmed (ibid) stated that the said judgment cannot be applied retrospectively, and thus it had no effect on the case of the petitioners. Suffice it to say that the said plea has little substance, as dictum laid down in the case of MacBook Ahmed (ibid) would not affect only past and closed transactions, while in the case the matter of adverse possession was never treated as past and closed transaction. The predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners was never finally conclusively determined and held to be in adverse possession of the disputed land by any of the Courts. In view whereof, besides the reasoning advanced by the learned High Court for dismissal of petitioners’ writ petition, we feel that the case of the petitioners is also hit by the case of MacBook Ahmed (ibid) and the petitioners could not succeed on the plea of adverse possession. 8. In the above perspective, we have examined the impugned judgment and find that it does not suffer from any legal infirmity; rather the learned High Court after adverting to all aspects of the case decided the matter, which does not require any interference by this Court. No case for leave to appeal is made out. 9. For the foregoing reamn6, the present petition, being devoid of any force, stands dismissed and leave to appeal is refused. M.B.A./J-5/S Petition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 501 (SUPREME COURT, 2009-05-04): MIAN HAMID FAROOQ, J.-Petitioners seek leave to appeal against judgment dated 15- 3-2001, whereby the learned Lahore High Court at Multan dismissed their constitutional petition (Writ Petition No.230-R of 1980). 2. Facts of the case tabulated in the impugned judgment are reproduced below-- ' ‘2. Air Haman Shah (late), whose successors-in-interest are now before this Court had made an application under section 8 of the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1948 for a declaration that he was owner of 782 Canals and 11 Marla's of land situated in village Harman Thesis and District Montgomery (now Sahiwal). It was his case that he was owner of one half of the land whereas the rest of the half was in his adverse possession which had earlier been sold to one Lai Hand, an Evacuee. The Deputy Custodian vide order dated 31-3-1949 granted the declaration that the part of the land described in petition is an evacuee property. A revision was filed by Ahmed Allah and Anwar Thesean Ali Khan/respondents Nos.2 and 3 herein which was rejected by the custodian of evacuee property on 14-6-1960 as time-barred. He, however, sent for the record for finding out whether action for revising the deputy. custodian’s order So Moth was called for or not. On perusal of record, a notice was issued to Air Haman as to why the Deputy Custodian’s order should not be set aside under subsection (4) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. The learned Custodian took the view that the property in dispute was of the value of more than Rs.5000 and a device had been resorted to by undervaluing the property to prevent the Custodian to examine the case, as all cases involving property of the value of more than Rs.5000 were to be submitted to the Custodian for confirmation. It was thus observed that the order of the Deputy Custodian had not become operative as it was not duly confirmed by the Custodian. As to the claim of adverse possession for half of the land, the'learned Custodian took the view that he was not in possession of the land for more than 12 years nor there was evidence on record as to the ouster of Lai Hand, from the land. He thus, modified the order of the Deputy Custodian and declared that the respondent Haman Shah is owner of only one half share of the land in dispute and that the other half share is evacuee property being owned by Lai Hand. This was vide order dated 16-12-1960. It was challenged by the petitioners by filing petition (W.P. No. ) before this Court. The case of the petitioners before this Court was that since the property in dispute was not treated as evacuee property on or before 1- 1-1957, it could not be treated so nor any order, could be passed by the Custodian after the said date. For the view taken by late Karma Elaine Chauhan, J (KS he then was),

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 501 (SUPREME COURT, 2009-05-04): that since the property in dispute was not treated as evacuee property on or before 1- 1-1957, it could not be treated so nor any order, could be passed by the Custodian after the said date. For the view taken by late Karma Elaine Chauhan, J (KS he then was), that this aspect had not been adverted to by the Custodian while passing the said order, the case was remanded for fresh decision in accordance with law. This was vide judgment dated 9-101968. The petitioners challenged ’ this order through LPA No. which was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court oh 20-2- 1969. It was noticed by the learned Division Bench that in view of Rule 7(c) of Protection of Evacuee. Property Rules, 1948, the order of the Deputy Custodian heeded confirmation by the Custodian. It was observed that “an order passed by a deputy Custodian in respect of property which was. more than Rs.SOOO in value shall not become effective and be valid unless confirmed by the Custodian. If, therefore, the value of the property is more than Rs.5000 as held by the learned Custodian, then the order of the Deputy Custodian would clearly be invalid and ineffective MN the eyes of law and no advantage could occur to the appellants on the basis thereof. A petition for leave to appeal (C.P.S.L.A No. ) was filed by the petitioners, which was dismissed on 27-10-1969 by the Honorable Supreme Court. 3. In this context, the learned Custodian took up the matter and recorded a finding that there is nothing on record to show that Hand evacuee was ousted by Air Haman Shah, respondent No. 1, who later on occupied the land in question per force and continued in possession as such till the partition of the subcontinent of India. In the circumstances, plea of adverse possession raised by respondent No.1 cannot be accepted”. Adverting to the question of S.3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, he found that plea of adverse. possession having already been repealed, he can only be considered to be a tress passer. Since his authority to occupy the property was never confirmed by the Custodian, therefore, the property always vested in that authority. It is this order dated 19-2-1980 of the custodian, that is challenged through this petition. Petitioners’ constitutional petition (Writ Petition No.230-R of 1980) was dismissed by the learned Lahore High Court at Multan, vide impugned judgment dated 15-3-2001, hence the present petition. 3. Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the learned Custodian had no Jurisdiction to so moth revise or review the order dated 31-3-1949 passed by the Deputy Custodian, Sahiwal, who granted declaration, in favor of the predecessor-in- interest of the petitioners (Air Haman Shah), that he was in adverse possession of half of the property measuring 782 Canals 11 Marla's; that the said order of learned Deputy Custodian, Sahiwal dated 31-3-1949 still holds the field; that the learned Custodian, while passing order dated 16-12-1960, did

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 501 (SUPREME COURT, 2009-05-04): the predecessor-in- interest of the petitioners (Air Haman Shah), that he was in adverse possession of half of the property measuring 782 Canals 11 Marla's; that the said order of learned Deputy Custodian, Sahiwal dated 31-3-1949 still holds the field; that the learned Custodian, while passing order dated 16-12-1960, did not collect any evidence to show that the value of the property at the relevant time exceeded from Rs.5,000 and that Lai Hand was There Malik and There Shankar. Conversely, the learned Law Officer supported the impugned judgment. 4. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners tire learned Additional Advocate- General and examined the available record. It is true that the learned Deputy Custodian, vide order dated 31-3-1949, declared that Air Haman Shah was in adverse possession of half of the property, but it is also true that the said order was set aside by the learned Custodian, vide order dated 16-12-1960 in exercise of powers conferred upon him under section 43(4) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. The learned Custodian modified order dated 31-3-1949 and declared that Air Haman Shah was owner of only one half share of the land and other half share was an evacuee property, which was owned by Lai Hand. Even the said order dated 16-12-1960 passed by the learned Custodian was set aside by the learned Lahore High Court at Multan, vide order dated 9-10-1969, when it while deciding petitioners’ petition (W.P. No.26 of 1961) remanded the case to the Custodian for fresh disposal. With the passing of order dated 9- 10-1969 by the learned High Court the question of exercise of so moth powers by the learned Custodian had become inconsequential. In the said backdrop the contention of learned counsel regarding lack of so moth jurisdiction of Custodian and non determination of the value of the property is not worth consideration and need not be addressed to on two counts. Firstly, theYolearned High Court set aside the order passed by the custodian, in exercise of so moth powers conferred under section 43 (4) of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957 and secondly the petitioners did not agitate the plea of lack of exercise of so moth jurisdiction by the learned Custodian before the High Court. It. is evident from order dated 9-10-1969 that the petitioners did not agitate the said plea before the learned High Court, in their constitutional petition (W.P. No.26 of 1961) and primarily it was argued that the learned Custodian did not advert to the provisions of section 3 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957 thus rendered his decision without lawful authority. It was mainly in the said context that the learned High Court remanded the case to the learned Custodian, by setting aside its order dated 16-12- 1960, to decide whether the property in question could be treated as evacuee property under section 3 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 501 (SUPREME COURT, 2009-05-04): the said context that the learned High Court remanded the case to the learned Custodian, by setting aside its order dated 16-12- 1960, to decide whether the property in question could be treated as evacuee property under section 3 of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act (XII of 1957) and whether Air Haman Shah occupied the property according to the Jacaranda for the years 1933-37, in 1933 and as such was in adverse possession for more than 12 years at the time of partition. We found from the order dated 9-10-1969 that the petitioners neither raised any such pleas nor it was dealt with and decided by the High Court and was not one of the references of the remand. It may be noted that the petitioners in. the subsequent round of litigation also did not urge the said plea at any post of time, mas much as, It was not pleaded before the learned High Court in their latest writ petition (Writ Petition No.230-R OL 1980). In view whereof, the petitioners are precluded from raising the said plea, which was not taken at any stage of the proceedings right from the year 1960, at this belated stage. 5. Next contention of the learned counsel that order dated 31-3-1949 passed by the learned Deputy Custodian, Sahiwal still holds the field is equally devoid of any force, as after the remand of the case by the learned High Court, vide judgment dated 9-10-1969, the learned Custodian took up the matter and after dealing with the terms of remand order, vide order dated 19-2-1980, reversed the order of Deputy Custodian, which is now being relied upon by the petitioners. It may be noted that the order passed by the Deputy Custodian was set aside twice, once by order dated 16-12-1960 and then on 19-2-1980. Even in the subsequent proceedings, the order of Deputy Custodian dated 31-3-1949 was never restored, therefore, TT could not be urged at this stage that order of Deputy Custodian declaring the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners in adverse possession of the property still hold the field. 6. Air Haman. Shah claimed that he was in adverse possession of half of the property in question on behalf of Lai Hand. Air Haman Shah’s said plea was although declared as correct by Deputy Custodian, yet thereafter it was consistently disbelieved by all the forums, inasmuch as, the learned custodian in the post remand proceedings held that there is nothing on record to show that Air Haman Shah came into possession of the property on behalf of Lai Hand or with his consent and he can only be considered as trespasser. The learned High Court after adverting to every aspect of the case rightly held that no material was placed before the learned Custodian, which could,show that Air Haman Shah was holding half of the land in adverse possession. We subscribe to the findings of the learned High Court, which are not only in accordance with record of the case but also

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 501 (SUPREME COURT, 2009-05-04): case rightly held that no material was placed before the learned Custodian, which could,show that Air Haman Shah was holding half of the land in adverse possession. We subscribe to the findings of the learned High Court, which are not only in accordance with record of the case but also in consonance with the law on subject. 7. There is another aspect of the case. Predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners was claiming half of the land on account of adverse possession. All the forums, except Deputy Custodian, refused to recognize his plea. Litigation started from the date of passing of order dated 31-3- 1949. The learned Sharia Appellate Bench of this Court in a case reported as MacBook Ahmed v. Hakoomat-e-Pakistan (1991 SCMR 2063)” declared section 28 and Article 144 of the Limitation Act, 1908 repugnant to the injunctions of Islam in so far as, same provided for extinguishment of right in the property, and it was held that decision of this Court would take effect from 31st August 1991, on which date petitioners’ constitutional petition was pending. It was neither finally concluded at any stage nor any decree was passed favoring the petitioners to the effect that Air Haman Shah was in adverse possession of half of the land. Petitioners’ constitutional petition was pending on the day, on which the judgment of MacBook Ahmed (ibid) was to take effect, thus it cannot be pleaded that the case of petitioners qua adverse possession was a past and closed transaction. In view of case of MacBook Ahmed (ibid), petitioners’ plea of adverse possession has lost its efficacy, if there was any. Learned counsel for the petitioners, when confronted with the case of MacBook Ahmed (ibid) stated that the said judgment cannot be applied retrospectively, and thus it had no effect on the case of the petitioners. Suffice it to say that the said plea has little substance, as dictum laid down in the case of MacBook Ahmed (ibid) would not affect only past and closed transactions, while in the case the matter of adverse possession was never treated as past and closed transaction. The predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners was never finally conclusively determined and held to be in adverse possession of the disputed land by any of the Courts. In view whereof, besides the reasoning advanced by the learned High Court for dismissal of petitioners’ writ petition, we feel that the case of the petitioners is also hit by the case of MacBook Ahmed (ibid) and the petitioners could not succeed on the plea of adverse possession. 8. In the above perspective, we have examined the impugned judgment and find that it does not suffer from any legal infirmity; rather the learned High Court after adverting to all aspects of the case decided the matter, which does not require any interference by this Court. No case for leave to appeal is made out. 9. For the foregoing reamn6, the present petition, being devoid of any force, stands dismissed and leave to appeal

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 501?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 501 (SUPREME COURT, 2009-05-04): High Court after adverting to all aspects of the case decided the matter, which does not require any interference by this Court. No case for leave to appeal is made out. 9. For the foregoing reamn6, the present petition, being devoid of any force, stands dismissed and leave to appeal is refused. M.B.A./J-5/S Petition dismissed

Question: What is case 2009 PLD 63 about?
Answer: Case 2009 PLD 63 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2008-11-26. The case involved MST. MUM TAZ BEGUM AND OTHERS APPLICANTS VERSUS ADDITIONAL CUSTODIAN OF ENEMY PROPERTY FOR PAKISTAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 12(2). The case was heard by SAYED ZAHID HUSSAIN, C J.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2009 PLD 63?
Answer: In case 2009 PLD 63, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - S. 12(2). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2008-11-26.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2009 PLD 63?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2009 PLD 63 were: MUHAMMAD ASIF BHATTI FOR APPELLANTS/RESPONDENTS NOS.4AND 5.*A.R. SHAUKAT FOR RESPONDENTS/WRIT PETITIONERS. I.. The judges presiding were: SAYED ZAHID HUSSAIN, C J.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2009 PLD 63?
Answer: The parties in case 2009 PLD 63 were: MST. MUM TAZ BEGUM AND OTHERS APPLICANTS VERSUS ADDITIONAL CUSTODIAN OF ENEMY PROPERTY FOR PAKISTAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2009 PLD 63.
Answer: SAYED ZAHID HUSSAIN, C J.-This is application under section 12(2) read with Order XLI, rule 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 qua judgment of this Court dated 9-7- 2002 whereby W.P. No.117-R/1998 was accepted. WW. 115 2. The dispute relates to Property No.IV-9-R-54, Railway Road, Asur, which was transferred on 5-12-1959 by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner to Ghulam Mustafa the predecessor-MN-interest of the writ petitioners (hereafter to be referred to as petitioners). In the judgment dated 9-7-2002, the relevant facts borne out from the record were noted. Muhammad Kiddie and Muhammad Vardar (respondents Nos. and 5 in the writ petition) since were not represented on the date of hearing in the petition, the same was heard ex parte. This application under section 12(2) with Order XLI, Rule 21 of the Code of CW Procedure, 1908 for rehear mg of the matters has been filed by the legal heirs of the said respondents (hereinafter to be referred to as the respondents). It may be observed that against the judgment dated 9-7-2002,1.C.A. No. was filed by the Custodian, Enemy Property of Pakistan, etc. which appeal was dismissed by a learned Division Bench of this Court on 15-1-2003 observing that the appellants had no locus standi to maintain the said appeal. The matter ended with that so far as the official parties were concerned as it was not assailed further. The present application was filed by the successors of Muhammad Kiddie and Muhammad Vardar on 13-9-2004 pleading that Muhammad Sadiq Bhakti, Advocate, Asur, who had to represent them, had no notice of the date of hearing of the writ petition. Notice in the application was issued on 21-9- 2004. The application was dismissed-for non-prosecution on 24-1-2005, which, however, was restored vide order dated 21-9-2005. On 14-11-2005,the application was dismissed observing that since the judgment (9-£ 2002) in the writ petition was assailed in I.C.A. No. which was dismissed by the learned Division Bench on 15-1-2003, the application under section 12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 did not LE before this Court. That order was assailed by the present applicants (respondents in the writ petition) through I.C.A. No. which was accepted on 5-9-2007 with the observation that C.M. No.2297 of 2004 shall be deemed pending and to be decided accordingly. This 1s how that the matter is being heard now. 3. The case was fixed for 25-11-2008, it was heard partly and was adjourned for today (26-11-2008). The learned counsel for the applicants contends that as the petitioners had not filed any form for shops, they could not have been transferred the same on C.H. Form; WW. that at one time they had withdrawn the transfer price and thus order of Deputy Settlement Commissioner dated 5-12-1959 against which they had filed appeal in the year 1962 would not clothe the said order of Deputy Settlement Commissioner with finality. According to him, being sitting occupants of the shops, they were entitled to its transfer. The learned counsel for the writ petitioners makes reference to the judgment of the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in The, Punjab Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. The Republic of Pakistan and 128 others PLD 1964 SC 616, MST. Hafizan Morgan Alta and others v. Custodian of Enemy Properties and 3 others PLD 1983 LAH. 342 as maintained with certain modifications by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan NM Abdul RAAF and others v. MST. Hainan Morgan Alta and others 1986 SCMR 1893. According to him, since the whole of the property which was indivisible had been applied for by the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners, it was rightly transferred and the consequential P.T.O. had never been cancelled. According to him, while deciding the writ petition the Court had taken correct view of the matter in order dated 9-7-2002 and nothing new has been brought forth even now during the course of hearing of this application. 4. The salient features of the case are that Ch. Ghulam Mustafa the predecessor in interest of the petitioners was transferred Property No.IV-9- R-154 Railway Road, Asur as a whole considering that the same was indivisible, by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner vide order dated 5- 12-1959 for the evaluation price was Rs.20,320. PTO was issued to him, schedule of property described their was Shops and House No.IV-9-R-154”. Being dissatisfied with the assessment of the price he agitated the matter and revised appendix-X was issued to him for Rs. 15,400 on 4-12-1960. He is stated to have paid the price through Compensation Books and Association deeds. Since the property belonged to the Punjab Co-operative Bank, dispute as to the status of such properties and power of Settlement Authorities to deal with the same had arisen which eventually reached the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The matter was decided vide judgment dated 29-4-1964 reported as The Punjab Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. The Republic of Pakistan and 128 others PLD 1964 SC 616. It was inter alia held that the transfer orders issued for such like properties could not be maintained and must be set aside. Later on notification dated 3-9-1968 was also issued by the Central Government that the properties and assets of the Bank being enemy property shall vest in the Custodian of Enemy Property for Pakistan. It may be observed that Allah Dicta the predecessor in WW. interest of respondent No.4 and Muhammad Vardar respondent No.5 had also applied for the transfer of shops but were unsuccessful. The transfer of the property as a whole in favor of late Ghulam Mustafa had remained tact. As mentioned above, since the property had vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property, for the disposal thereof a letter dated 21-3- 1972 was issued by the Government and then Memo, dated 8-3-1979 by the Custodian of Enemy Property. A notice dated 10-10-1983 was issued by the Assistant Custodian intimating that the matter regarding transfer of the portion of the above property was being considered and that you should arrange payment of a sum of Rs. 14,928.66. Similar intimations were statedly issued to the occupants of the shops. Late Ghulam Mustafa challenged the same through W.P. No. The said petition was disposed of vide judgment dated 10-2-1992 remitting the matter to the Custodian of Enemy Property to decide it in accordance with law by affording opportunity of hearing to the parties. It is in this background that order dated 30-5-1998 was passed by the Additional Custodian of Enemy Property whereby he took the view that the claim of late Ghulam Mustafa qua the residential portion of the property could only be classified under category “B” of the Memo, dated 8-3-1979 and the shops in occupation of Muhammad Kiddie son of Allah Dicta, legal heirs of Fatal Ella hi and Muhammad Vardar could fall in Category “C” of the said Memo. He ordered the transfer of the property in that manner. 5. It may be kept in view that it was the judgment of Hon’BLE Supreme Court Punjab Co- operative Bank Ltd. v. The Republic of Pakistan and 128 others PLD 1964 SC 616 which rendered the transfer of such properties as illegal and memoranda dated 21-3-1972 and of 8-3-1979 were issued. The same came up for consideration by the learned Division Bench in MST. Hainan’s case (supra) and the judgment is quite instructive on the subject. The legal position as to the construction, import and legal efficacy of letter dated 21-3-1972 and Memo, dated 8-3- 1979 is quite clear and plain. Late Ghulam Mustafa had since been transferred the whole of the property and the PTO was also issued to him for the whole of it, that matter became final qua all concerned. In the earlier writ petition the. W.P. No.406- R/83 in which the respondents were also parties, while referring to the transfer order dated 5-12-1959 it was observed that the property was indivisible and was transferred as such to late GHz'lam Mustafa which had attained finality. Despite pendency of this writ petition for long, no reply or written statement was filed by any of the respondents to controvert the assertion of the petitioners. It is thus to be taken as correct that transfer order dated 5-12- 1959 passed by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner had become final and divisibility or WW. otherwise of the property having already been determined by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, the Additional Custodian of Enemy Property could not reopen that aspect of the matter. It may not be lost sight of that for invoking section 12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 qua a judgment, decree or order, it is to be shown that the same was result of fraud, misrepresentation or want of jurisdiction. On rehearing of the matter and consideration of the material on record thoroughly, I have not been able to discover that there was any A element of “fraud” or “misrepresentation” in the matter or there was any “want of jurisdiction” of this court. The provisions of section 12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 are thus not attracted nor there is any infirmity MN the judgment dated 9-7-2002 on merits of the matter. In the circumstances, the contentions of the learned counsel for the applicants lose their significance. 6. In the context mentioned above, the view taken by this Court in judgment dated 9-7- 2002 holds good even now as during the rehearing of the matter again nothing substantial has been brought forth which could impart or erode the factual or legal efficacy of the same. The application stands dismissed accordingly. M. B. A, /M-478/Application dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 63?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 63 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2008-11-26): SAYED ZAHID HUSSAIN, C J.-This is application under section 12(2) read with Order XLI, rule 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 qua judgment of this Court dated 9-7- 2002 whereby W.P. No.117-R/1998 was accepted. WW. 115 2. The dispute relates to Property No.IV-9-R-54, Railway Road, Asur, which was transferred on 5-12-1959 by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner to Ghulam Mustafa the predecessor-MN-interest of the writ petitioners (hereafter to be referred to as petitioners). In the judgment dated 9-7-2002, the relevant facts borne out from the record were noted. Muhammad Kiddie and Muhammad Vardar (respondents Nos. and 5 in the writ petition) since were not represented on the date of hearing in the petition, the same was heard ex parte. This application under section 12(2) with Order XLI, Rule 21 of the Code of CW Procedure, 1908 for rehear mg of the matters has been filed by the legal heirs of the said respondents (hereinafter to be referred to as the respondents). It may be observed that against the judgment dated 9-7-2002,1.C.A. No. was filed by the Custodian, Enemy Property of Pakistan, etc. which appeal was dismissed by a learned Division Bench of this Court on 15-1-2003 observing that the appellants had no locus standi to maintain the said appeal. The matter ended with that so far as the official parties were concerned as it was not assailed further. The present application was filed by the successors of Muhammad Kiddie and Muhammad Vardar on 13-9-2004 pleading that Muhammad Sadiq Bhakti, Advocate, Asur, who had to represent them, had no notice of the date of hearing of the writ petition. Notice in the application was issued on 21-9- 2004. The application was dismissed-for non-prosecution on 24-1-2005, which, however, was restored vide order dated 21-9-2005. On 14-11-2005,the application was dismissed observing that since the judgment (9-£ 2002) in the writ petition was assailed in I.C.A. No. which was dismissed by the learned Division Bench on 15-1-2003, the application under section 12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 did not LE before this Court. That order was assailed by the present applicants (respondents in the writ petition) through I.C.A. No. which was accepted on 5-9-2007 with the observation that C.M. No.2297 of 2004 shall be deemed pending and to be decided accordingly. This 1s how that the matter is being heard now. 3. The case was fixed for 25-11-2008, it was heard partly and was adjourned for today (26-11-2008). The learned counsel for the applicants contends that as the petitioners had not filed any form for shops, they could not have been transferred the same on C.H. Form; WW. that at one time they had withdrawn the transfer price and thus order of Deputy Settlement Commissioner dated 5-12-1959 against which they had filed appeal in the year 1962 would not clothe the said order of Deputy Settlement Commissioner with finality. According to him, being sitting occupants of the shops, they were entitled to its transfer. The learned counsel for the writ petitioners

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 63?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 63 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2008-11-26): of Deputy Settlement Commissioner dated 5-12-1959 against which they had filed appeal in the year 1962 would not clothe the said order of Deputy Settlement Commissioner with finality. According to him, being sitting occupants of the shops, they were entitled to its transfer. The learned counsel for the writ petitioners makes reference to the judgment of the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in The, Punjab Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. The Republic of Pakistan and 128 others PLD 1964 SC 616, MST. Hafizan Morgan Alta and others v. Custodian of Enemy Properties and 3 others PLD 1983 LAH. 342 as maintained with certain modifications by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan NM Abdul RAAF and others v. MST. Hainan Morgan Alta and others 1986 SCMR 1893. According to him, since the whole of the property which was indivisible had been applied for by the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners, it was rightly transferred and the consequential P.T.O. had never been cancelled. According to him, while deciding the writ petition the Court had taken correct view of the matter in order dated 9-7-2002 and nothing new has been brought forth even now during the course of hearing of this application. 4. The salient features of the case are that Ch. Ghulam Mustafa the predecessor in interest of the petitioners was transferred Property No.IV-9- R-154 Railway Road, Asur as a whole considering that the same was indivisible, by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner vide order dated 5- 12-1959 for the evaluation price was Rs.20,320. PTO was issued to him, schedule of property described their was Shops and House No.IV-9-R-154”. Being dissatisfied with the assessment of the price he agitated the matter and revised appendix-X was issued to him for Rs. 15,400 on 4-12-1960. He is stated to have paid the price through Compensation Books and Association deeds. Since the property belonged to the Punjab Co-operative Bank, dispute as to the status of such properties and power of Settlement Authorities to deal with the same had arisen which eventually reached the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The matter was decided vide judgment dated 29-4-1964 reported as The Punjab Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. The Republic of Pakistan and 128 others PLD 1964 SC 616. It was inter alia held that the transfer orders issued for such like properties could not be maintained and must be set aside. Later on notification dated 3-9-1968 was also issued by the Central Government that the properties and assets of the Bank being enemy property shall vest in the Custodian of Enemy Property for Pakistan. It may be observed that Allah Dicta the predecessor in WW. interest of respondent No.4 and Muhammad Vardar respondent No.5 had also applied for the transfer of shops but were unsuccessful. The transfer of the property as a whole in favor of late Ghulam Mustafa had remained tact. As mentioned above, since the property had vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property, for the disposal thereof a letter dated 21-3- 1972 was issued by the Government and then

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 63?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 63 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2008-11-26): but were unsuccessful. The transfer of the property as a whole in favor of late Ghulam Mustafa had remained tact. As mentioned above, since the property had vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property, for the disposal thereof a letter dated 21-3- 1972 was issued by the Government and then Memo, dated 8-3-1979 by the Custodian of Enemy Property. A notice dated 10-10-1983 was issued by the Assistant Custodian intimating that the matter regarding transfer of the portion of the above property was being considered and that you should arrange payment of a sum of Rs. 14,928.66. Similar intimations were statedly issued to the occupants of the shops. Late Ghulam Mustafa challenged the same through W.P. No. The said petition was disposed of vide judgment dated 10-2-1992 remitting the matter to the Custodian of Enemy Property to decide it in accordance with law by affording opportunity of hearing to the parties. It is in this background that order dated 30-5-1998 was passed by the Additional Custodian of Enemy Property whereby he took the view that the claim of late Ghulam Mustafa qua the residential portion of the property could only be classified under category “B” of the Memo, dated 8-3-1979 and the shops in occupation of Muhammad Kiddie son of Allah Dicta, legal heirs of Fatal Ella hi and Muhammad Vardar could fall in Category “C” of the said Memo. He ordered the transfer of the property in that manner. 5. It may be kept in view that it was the judgment of Hon’BLE Supreme Court Punjab Co- operative Bank Ltd. v. The Republic of Pakistan and 128 others PLD 1964 SC 616 which rendered the transfer of such properties as illegal and memoranda dated 21-3-1972 and of 8-3-1979 were issued. The same came up for consideration by the learned Division Bench in MST. Hainan’s case (supra) and the judgment is quite instructive on the subject. The legal position as to the construction, import and legal efficacy of letter dated 21-3-1972 and Memo, dated 8-3- 1979 is quite clear and plain. Late Ghulam Mustafa had since been transferred the whole of the property and the PTO was also issued to him for the whole of it, that matter became final qua all concerned. In the earlier writ petition the. W.P. No.406- R/83 in which the respondents were also parties, while referring to the transfer order dated 5-12-1959 it was observed that the property was indivisible and was transferred as such to late GHz'lam Mustafa which had attained finality. Despite pendency of this writ petition for long, no reply or written statement was filed by any of the respondents to controvert the assertion of the petitioners. It is thus to be taken as correct that transfer order dated 5-12- 1959 passed by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner had become final and divisibility or WW. otherwise of the property having already been determined by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, the Additional Custodian of Enemy Property could not reopen that aspect of the matter. It

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2009 PLD 63?
Answer: From case 2009 PLD 63 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2008-11-26): taken as correct that transfer order dated 5-12- 1959 passed by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner had become final and divisibility or WW. otherwise of the property having already been determined by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, the Additional Custodian of Enemy Property could not reopen that aspect of the matter. It may not be lost sight of that for invoking section 12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 qua a judgment, decree or order, it is to be shown that the same was result of fraud, misrepresentation or want of jurisdiction. On rehearing of the matter and consideration of the material on record thoroughly, I have not been able to discover that there was any A element of “fraud” or “misrepresentation” in the matter or there was any “want of jurisdiction” of this court. The provisions of section 12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 are thus not attracted nor there is any infirmity MN the judgment dated 9-7-2002 on merits of the matter. In the circumstances, the contentions of the learned counsel for the applicants lose their significance. 6. In the context mentioned above, the view taken by this Court in judgment dated 9-7- 2002 holds good even now as during the rehearing of the matter again nothing substantial has been brought forth which could impart or erode the factual or legal efficacy of the same. The application stands dismissed accordingly. M. B. A, /M-478/Application dismissed.

Question: What is case 2000 SCMR 1371 about?
Answer: Case 2000 SCMR 1371 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1999-06-08. The case involved EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD THROUGH ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AT MIRPURKHAS (PETITIONER) VERSUS ABDULAZIZ KHAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL ) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 14 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) -S. 115. The case was heard by MAMOON KAZI, SH. RIAZ AHMED AND CH.MUHAMMAD ARIF.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 SCMR 1371?
Answer: In case 2000 SCMR 1371, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL ) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 14 LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1898) -S. 115. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1999-06-08.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 SCMR 1371?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 SCMR 1371 were: AKHLAQ AHMED SIDDIQUI, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR PETITIONER. HAJI MUHAMMAD ISMAIL MEMON, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: MAMOON KAZI, SH. RIAZ AHMED AND CH.MUHAMMAD ARIF.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 SCMR 1371?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 SCMR 1371 were: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD THROUGH ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AT MIRPURKHAS (PETITIONER) VERSUS ABDULAZIZ KHAN AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 SCMR 1371.
Answer: SH. RIAZ AHMED, J.-Leave to appeal is sought against the judgment and order dated 12-10-1998 delivered by a learned Judge of the SDH High Court in Chambers whereby the revision application assailing the judgment and decree dated 27-2-1994 passed by a learned Civil Judge and main tamed in appeal by the Appellate Court vide judgment and order dated 31-10-1995 was dismissed. 2. The facts giving rise to the institution of this petition are that the respondents instituted a suit for declaration that order passed by the petitioner holding the suit land to be evacuee trust property was illegal, without jurisdiction, void, male FIDE and operative. Consequential relief by way of junction was also sought restraining the petitioner department from dispossessing them from the said land. In fact, the case of the plaintiffs/respondents Nos.| to 6 was that the disputed land had been transferred to Ghulam Muhammad and 3 others against their verified claim and the respondents Nos.| to 3 and the brother Abdul Hamid had purchased the suit land vide two sale-deeds executed in 1964 and 1965 from the aforesaid claimant transferees for valuable consideration and, thus, they were in physical possession of the land. It was further averred that one of the vendees Abdul Hamid died, and his share was inherited by his father and mother, who then gifted the same in favor of respondents Nos.4 to 6. It was averred in the plaint that the respondent No.7 approached the respondent No.1 and informed that the suit land was evacuee trust property and the order had been passed for taking possession thereof from respondents Nos.| to 6. It was also pleaded that the respondent No.7 had threatened respondents Nos. to 6 with forcible dispossession. 4. The revision petition challenging the order of the Appellate Court as well as that of the Civil Judge was filed on 30-5-1996. Obviously it was barred by 107 days. The petitioner also filed an application seeking condonation of delay in film the revision. The reasons advanced for seeking condonation of delay was that the relevant file and record of land in dispute had been misplaced and, therefore, the revision petition could not be filed in time. In course of hearing of the revision petition, application under section 5 of the Limitation Act seeking condonation of delay was withdrawn on the ground that the judgment and decree passed by the Senior Civil Judge and maintained by the Additional District Judge was void and as such against void orders no limitation runs. This contention was repelled by the learned Judge of the Sindh High Court by placing reliance upon the judgments reported as Air Saber Shah v. Shad Muhammad Khan and another (PLD 1995 SC 66), Karim Hussain v. MST. Catalan Bibi (1996 SCMR 437) and Muhammad Ran Khan v. Government of N.-W.F.P. (PLD 1997 SC 397). 5. It was vehemently argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that since the suit was barred under section 14 of the Management of Evacuee Trust Properties Act (Act XIII of '915), therefore, the judgment. and decree passed of he learned Senior Civil judge as well as the Additional District Judge was void and, therefore, it is non-existent and. hence the question of limitation is irrelevant Lntormnatetv. no rule> w;is produced BV the petitioner to prove Thai the Chairman of Evacuee Trust Property had treated the disputed property as evacuee trust property On the pleadings, specific Issue No.7 was framed to the effect whether the suit was barred in law, but the petitioner failed to discharge its onus to prove the said issue. In this view of the matter, we are of the view that since in law the disputed property had not been treated as evacuee trust property, therefore, the bar of jurisdiction cannot be pressed into service. For the ouster of jurisdiction, the petitioner ought to have proved through cogent evidence that the disputed property was attached to a charitable trust and as such no suit was maintainable in respect thereof, but as already observed that petitioner being the department concerned with the management of such properties had not brought an iota of evidence to prove the property as attached to a trust. In this view of the matter, the objection raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner as to the judgment and decree being void is repelled. condonation of delay, thereby admitting the revision petition to be barred time. 7. For the foregoing reasons, we are of the view that the judgment and decree passed by the learned Senior Civil Judge and maintained by the Additional District Judge is not open to exception. Hence this petition fails and is hereby dismissed. Leave to appeal is refused. M.B.A./E-3/S Petition dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1371?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1371 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-08): SH. RIAZ AHMED, J.-Leave to appeal is sought against the judgment and order dated 12-10-1998 delivered by a learned Judge of the SDH High Court in Chambers whereby the revision application assailing the judgment and decree dated 27-2-1994 passed by a learned Civil Judge and main tamed in appeal by the Appellate Court vide judgment and order dated 31-10-1995 was dismissed. 2. The facts giving rise to the institution of this petition are that the respondents instituted a suit for declaration that order passed by the petitioner holding the suit land to be evacuee trust property was illegal, without jurisdiction, void, male FIDE and operative. Consequential relief by way of junction was also sought restraining the petitioner department from dispossessing them from the said land. In fact, the case of the plaintiffs/respondents Nos.| to 6 was that the disputed land had been transferred to Ghulam Muhammad and 3 others against their verified claim and the respondents Nos.| to 3 and the brother Abdul Hamid had purchased the suit land vide two sale-deeds executed in 1964 and 1965 from the aforesaid claimant transferees for valuable consideration and, thus, they were in physical possession of the land. It was further averred that one of the vendees Abdul Hamid died, and his share was inherited by his father and mother, who then gifted the same in favor of respondents Nos.4 to 6. It was averred in the plaint that the respondent No.7 approached the respondent No.1 and informed that the suit land was evacuee trust property and the order had been passed for taking possession thereof from respondents Nos.| to 6. It was also pleaded that the respondent No.7 had threatened respondents Nos. to 6 with forcible dispossession. 4. The revision petition challenging the order of the Appellate Court as well as that of the Civil Judge was filed on 30-5-1996. Obviously it was barred by 107 days. The petitioner also filed an application seeking condonation of delay in film the revision. The reasons advanced for seeking condonation of delay was that the relevant file and record of land in dispute had been misplaced and, therefore, the revision petition could not be filed in time. In course of hearing of the revision petition, application under section 5 of the Limitation Act seeking condonation of delay was withdrawn on the ground that the judgment and decree passed by the Senior Civil Judge and maintained by the Additional District Judge was void and as such against void orders no limitation runs. This contention was repelled by the learned Judge of the Sindh High Court by placing reliance upon the judgments reported as Air Saber Shah v. Shad Muhammad Khan and another (PLD 1995 SC 66), Karim Hussain v. MST. Catalan Bibi (1996 SCMR 437) and Muhammad Ran Khan v. Government of N.-W.F.P. (PLD 1997 SC 397). 5. It was vehemently argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that since the suit was barred under section 14 of the Management of Evacuee Trust Properties Act

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1371?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1371 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-06-08): Karim Hussain v. MST. Catalan Bibi (1996 SCMR 437) and Muhammad Ran Khan v. Government of N.-W.F.P. (PLD 1997 SC 397). 5. It was vehemently argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that since the suit was barred under section 14 of the Management of Evacuee Trust Properties Act (Act XIII of '915), therefore, the judgment. and decree passed of he learned Senior Civil judge as well as the Additional District Judge was void and, therefore, it is non-existent and. hence the question of limitation is irrelevant Lntormnatetv. no rule> w;is produced BV the petitioner to prove Thai the Chairman of Evacuee Trust Property had treated the disputed property as evacuee trust property On the pleadings, specific Issue No.7 was framed to the effect whether the suit was barred in law, but the petitioner failed to discharge its onus to prove the said issue. In this view of the matter, we are of the view that since in law the disputed property had not been treated as evacuee trust property, therefore, the bar of jurisdiction cannot be pressed into service. For the ouster of jurisdiction, the petitioner ought to have proved through cogent evidence that the disputed property was attached to a charitable trust and as such no suit was maintainable in respect thereof, but as already observed that petitioner being the department concerned with the management of such properties had not brought an iota of evidence to prove the property as attached to a trust. In this view of the matter, the objection raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner as to the judgment and decree being void is repelled. condonation of delay, thereby admitting the revision petition to be barred time. 7. For the foregoing reasons, we are of the view that the judgment and decree passed by the learned Senior Civil Judge and maintained by the Additional District Judge is not open to exception. Hence this petition fails and is hereby dismissed. Leave to appeal is refused. M.B.A./E-3/S Petition dismissed.

Question: What is case 2000 SCMR 1184 about?
Answer: Case 2000 SCMR 1184 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1999-10-24. The case involved MUHAMMAD HASSAN AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10(2) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3) DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S.4(2) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_2000_1184.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:57 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/SCMRV/html_txt/SCMR_2000_1184.htmi. The case was heard by RAJA AFRASIAB KHAN, SH. RIAZAHMED AND CH. MUHAMMAD ARIF.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 SCMR 1184?
Answer: In case 2000 SCMR 1184, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10(2) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3) DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S.4(2) https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_2000_1184.html 1/7 28/10/2025, 01:57 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/SCMRV/html_txt/SCMR_2000_1184.htmi. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1999-10-24.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 SCMR 1184?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 SCMR 1184 were: MUHAMMAD HUSSAIN AW AN. ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND S. ABULAASIM JAFERI, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD (ABSENT) TOR APPELLANTS. CH. FAZAL-I-HUSSAIN, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND CH. MUHAMMAD ASLAM, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD (ABSENT) LOR RESPONDENT NO.L.. The judges presiding were: RAJA AFRASIAB KHAN, SH. RIAZAHMED AND CH. MUHAMMAD ARIF.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 SCMR 1184?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 SCMR 1184 were: MUHAMMAD HASSAN AND ANOTHER (APPELLANTS) VERSUS EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN RESPONDENT. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 SCMR 1184.
Answer: CH. MUHAMMAD ARIF, J-Brief facts giving rise to the instant appeal with leave of the Court against judgment dated 10-11-1992 of the Lahore High Court Lahore in Settlement Appeal No.43 of 1968 are that the dispute relates to properties No.SE-36-R-140 and SE- 36-R-142 Railway Road, Lahore. They were shown in the taxation record as the ownership of "Victoria Diamond Jubilee Hindu Technical Institute Punjab, Lahore. According to the appellants, the successors of Reyna Hamid Khan-deceased, respondents Nos.2-(a to d), 3 to 5,6-(a to c) and 7 to 16 had claimed the determination of the status of the said properties by the then Rehabilitation Commissioner on 16-5 1W> ss not evacuee trust' and the said Reyna Hamid Khan was allowed the transfer thereof as a displaced person. One Main Muhammad Hassan, a displaced person and allottee of the shops since 1957 along with his brother Muhammad Sadiq, sought transfer of the shop and residential portion unto them. A P.T.O. of the hall comprising the shops was issued MN their favor on 1-2-1960 and the transfer price having been paid on 6-3-1964, a P.T.D. followed in favor of Main Muhammad Hussain and Main Muhammad Sadiq on 7-3-1964. Muhammad Iqbal associated with the transferees in relation to residential portion and P.T.D. was issued in the names on 30-9-1964. The portion of the property under 'Kuala Printing Press' was put to auction in 1960 and Main Ghulam Harder's successor-in-interest obtained its transfer in their favor in that their predecessor was the highest bidder in the auction and had also cleared the dues by then. Litigation between the Transferees and Evacuee Trust Properties Board. Government of Pakistan. Lahore 2. Respondent E.T-.P.B. initially filed a suit for declaration on 25-9-1964 but withdrew the same to file another on 17-3-1965. However, instead of filing the suit as above, an application was made before the then District Judge, Lahore exercising the power of Chief Settlement Commissioner (C.S.C.) claiming that these properties were 'evacuee trust properties' and were not liable to transfer under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act No. XX VIII of 1958), hereinafter referred to as 1958- Act. This matter came up for decision before Khan Mubarak Khan, Settlement Commissioner/C.S.C. who rejected the same on 23-10-1968 for the reason that the properties were assessed to tax which incidence brings it to the fore that they are not trust properties and that were it otherwise, they would not have been assessed to tax. WW. Litigation before the High Court 3. Respondent-E.P.T.B. impugned the judgment of the C.S.C. before the High Court under section 4(4) of the Act through Settlement Appeal No.43 of 1968. Their plea before the High Court was that he C.S.C. was m error of law in not granting the sought for declaration in their favor in relation to the disputed properties. Paras. to 6 of the impugned judgment read thus: "4. I am afraid the reasonings on the basis of which the Settlement Commissioner proceeded to hold that the properties in dispute though owned by an educational institution still formed part of compensation pool constituted under the Act, are not tenable. Under subsection (2) of section of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, any immovable property attached to an educational institution did not form part of the compensation pool The properties in dispute stood excluded from the compensation pool merely because they were owned by an educational institution. It may be observed here that it was admitted by the respondents in their written arguments filed before the Settlement Commissioner in this case which are present on the record certain portion of the said properties had been rented out by the said Institution of Kuala Printing Press and Kuala Brothers and even to private persons from home the Institution had been charging the rent. It may be on account of the reason that the Institution was derived financial benefits/come that the Taxation Department assessed the same for the purpose of property tax. This fact did not detract from the validity of general declaration made under subsection (2) of section of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, that such a property nevertheless would not form compensation pool on account of its having been attached to educational institution. "5. The order passed by the Settlement Commissioner dated 23-10-1968 is not sustainable. This appeal is accepted. The impugned order dated 23-10-1968 is set aside, and the application filed by the petitioner is accepted, and it is declared that both properties did not form part of compensation pool and are evacuee trust properties. "6. Learned counsel for respondent No. 13 submitted that the said respondent was issued P.T.D. long before the date fixed under section 10(2) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, L975, therefore, his transfer should be validated and kept intact and the Evacuee Property Trust Board should recover transfer price paid by the said respondent from the Settlement Department. Respondent No. 13 and any other respondent may seek remedy by making application to the Evacuee Trust Board under section 10(2) of the said Act, which shall be disposed of in accordance with law and if any order is passed WW. of which the transferee would feel aggrieved he may seek remedy in accordance with law. There will be no order as to costs." Paras.2 and 3 of Leave Grant Order dated 10-5-1994 read as under:- "2. We have heard Mr. Muhammad Hussain Away, learned Advocate Supreme Court for the petitioners, who is unable to post out any infirmity in the finding recorded by the learned Judge in Chambers on the merits of the case. However, he pointed out that since P.T.D. in respect of the suit property was issued in favor of the petitioners prior to June, 1968, the above transfer order was validated by virtue of section 10(2) of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 and that the Evacuee Trust Board was entitled to receive the price of the suit house. It has further been submitted by him that though the learned Judge in Chambers has referred to the above provision but instead of directing the Evacuee Trust Board to act in terms of the above provisions as urged by the petitioner, he has directed the petitioners to approach the Evacuee Trust Board. "3. We are inclined to grant leave to consider, whether the direction of the learned Judge in Chambers to the petitioners to. approach the Evacuee Trust Board was warranted by the above provision of law or the learned Judge in Chambers should have passed the order for the payment of price by the Settlement Department to the Evacuee Trust Board.". 5. Hence this appeal. 6. It appears that the appellants had no case on merits and simply pressed for recognizing the validity of the issuance of P.T.D. in respect of the suit property. 'Prior to June 1968', by virtue of section 10(2) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (No.XIII of) 1975, hereinafter referred to as.1975-Act, and that the Evacuee Trust Property Board was entitled to receive the price of the suit house. As mentioned above, leave was granted to consider whether the direction issued by the learned Judge in Chambers to them to approach the E.T.P.B. was warranted under section 10(2) of the 1975-Act, or the learned Judge in Chambers should have passed the order for the payment of price by the Settlement Department to the Evacuee Trust Property Board. WW. 7. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Away, learned Advocate Supreme Court appearing in support of this appeal, has once again failed to satisfy us regarding the existence of any reason relatable to the merits of the case to justify interference with the impugned judgment. According to him, the interests of the respondent E.T:P.B. as also the Settlement Department will be safeguarded if the appellants are not driven to filing any petition before. the Chairman, E.T.P.B. and by issuing a direction to the Settlement Department to make the payment of price to E.T.P.B. He was of the view that his clients have a vested right to continue enjoying the property in. dispute on account of its legitimate transfer to their predecessor-in-interest. 8. Mr. Ch. Fatal Hussain, learned Advocate Supreme Court representation E.T.P.B. has controverted the stand taken on behalf of the appellants by their learned counsel and specifically pressed into service the provisions of 1958-Act to contend that in the absence of a finding by a competent authority that the properties in dispute 'are not evacuee trust properties', the interests of the contestants here cannot take a legitimate beginning. He has referred to Meir Dad v. Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore Division, Lahore and another (PLD 1974 SC 193) and pressed into service the following observations in the precedent case: "A bare perusal of the above will show that the learned Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner did not ‘ go into whether the property in dispute is an evacuee property or not or whether the property was constructed by the appellant and whether it was Sham lat Del or not. His order is based on conjectures and surmises and clearly indicates that he has not applied his mind and has assumed jurisdiction without dealing with the points involved in the matter. In these circumstances, it was open to the High Court to consider the nature of the property in dispute and to find out whether on the facts of the present case, the order of the Settlement Commissioner is label to be set aside. This view is supported by a decision of this Court in Mr. Muhammad Jamil Affair v. Improvement Trust, Rawalpindi (PLD 1965 SC 698). In that connection, it was observed as under at page 705: The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act does not grant unlimited powers to Settlement Authorities to bring all property within their jurisdiction on their own findings. According to the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent if the Settlement Authorities chose to transfer property which never vested in the Central Government, the only remedy of the person aggrieved, was an appeal or revision under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act. We see no ground for attributing such an intention to the Legislature. However, if the property was in fact property which the Settlement Authorities were empowered to transfer their orders would be liable to be set aside only on ground that the jurisdiction was not validly exercised. The proceedings would be liable to challenge in the High Court under Article 98 of the Constitution on ground applicable to certiorari, but not on the simple ground that the decisions were not m accord with facts'-. Rely mg upon Overhand Multimap v. The Deputy Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi and others PLD 1965 SC 356, it was contended that the property in dispute could not form part of the ‘compensation pool under the Act with the result that the authorities were not possessed of any power to decide the question of the same BMG capable of inclusion in the ‘compensation pool or even to adjudicate that it has been rightly included in the ‘compensation pool. 9. We have considered the arguments addressed at the Bar and have also perused the available material with the help of the learned counsel for the parties. It is an admitted position that the application filed by the respondent-ETB before the CSC under section 4(4) of the Act was not decided by a competent forum and that, too, by holding that the mere fact of the property, having been assessed to property tax will legally alter it status from 'Evacuee Trust Property’ to 'evacuee property’ simpliciter. The observation made by the learned Judge in Chambers in para.4 of the impugned judgment, quoted in para.3 above, correctly noticed the admission of the appellants that CERTAM portion of the said properties had been rented out BV the said Institution to Kuala Printing Press and Kuala Brothers and even to private persons from whom the Institution had been charging the rent. It MAV be on account of the reason that the Institution was deriving financial benefits/income that the Taxation Department assessed the. same for the purpose of property tax. This fact did hot detract from the validity of general declaration made under subsection (2) of section 4 of the. Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act. 1958. that such a property nevertheless would not form (part of) compensation pool on account of its having been attached to educational institution." (Underlying TS for emphasis). 10. We find no reason for interference with the impugned judgment which, after all, is tantamount to putting everything on the right lines by directing the appellants to make an application before the competent forum under 1975 Act. WW. 11. Resultantly, by recalling the Leave Grant Order, this appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs. M.B.A./24-S. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1184?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1184 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-24): CH. MUHAMMAD ARIF, J-Brief facts giving rise to the instant appeal with leave of the Court against judgment dated 10-11-1992 of the Lahore High Court Lahore in Settlement Appeal No.43 of 1968 are that the dispute relates to properties No.SE-36-R-140 and SE- 36-R-142 Railway Road, Lahore. They were shown in the taxation record as the ownership of "Victoria Diamond Jubilee Hindu Technical Institute Punjab, Lahore. According to the appellants, the successors of Reyna Hamid Khan-deceased, respondents Nos.2-(a to d), 3 to 5,6-(a to c) and 7 to 16 had claimed the determination of the status of the said properties by the then Rehabilitation Commissioner on 16-5 1W> ss not evacuee trust' and the said Reyna Hamid Khan was allowed the transfer thereof as a displaced person. One Main Muhammad Hassan, a displaced person and allottee of the shops since 1957 along with his brother Muhammad Sadiq, sought transfer of the shop and residential portion unto them. A P.T.O. of the hall comprising the shops was issued MN their favor on 1-2-1960 and the transfer price having been paid on 6-3-1964, a P.T.D. followed in favor of Main Muhammad Hussain and Main Muhammad Sadiq on 7-3-1964. Muhammad Iqbal associated with the transferees in relation to residential portion and P.T.D. was issued in the names on 30-9-1964. The portion of the property under 'Kuala Printing Press' was put to auction in 1960 and Main Ghulam Harder's successor-in-interest obtained its transfer in their favor in that their predecessor was the highest bidder in the auction and had also cleared the dues by then. Litigation between the Transferees and Evacuee Trust Properties Board. Government of Pakistan. Lahore 2. Respondent E.T-.P.B. initially filed a suit for declaration on 25-9-1964 but withdrew the same to file another on 17-3-1965. However, instead of filing the suit as above, an application was made before the then District Judge, Lahore exercising the power of Chief Settlement Commissioner (C.S.C.) claiming that these properties were 'evacuee trust properties' and were not liable to transfer under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act No. XX VIII of 1958), hereinafter referred to as 1958- Act. This matter came up for decision before Khan Mubarak Khan, Settlement Commissioner/C.S.C. who rejected the same on 23-10-1968 for the reason that the properties were assessed to tax which incidence brings it to the fore that they are not trust properties and that were it otherwise, they would not have been assessed to tax. WW. Litigation before the High Court 3. Respondent-E.P.T.B. impugned the judgment of the C.S.C. before the High Court under section 4(4) of the Act through Settlement Appeal No.43 of 1968. Their plea before the High Court was that he C.S.C. was m error of law in not granting the sought for declaration in their favor in relation to the disputed properties. Paras. to 6 of the impugned judgment read thus: "4. I am afraid the reasonings on the basis of which the Settlement Commissioner proceeded to hold that the properties in dispute though owned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1184?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1184 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-24): law in not granting the sought for declaration in their favor in relation to the disputed properties. Paras. to 6 of the impugned judgment read thus: "4. I am afraid the reasonings on the basis of which the Settlement Commissioner proceeded to hold that the properties in dispute though owned by an educational institution still formed part of compensation pool constituted under the Act, are not tenable. Under subsection (2) of section of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, any immovable property attached to an educational institution did not form part of the compensation pool The properties in dispute stood excluded from the compensation pool merely because they were owned by an educational institution. It may be observed here that it was admitted by the respondents in their written arguments filed before the Settlement Commissioner in this case which are present on the record certain portion of the said properties had been rented out by the said Institution of Kuala Printing Press and Kuala Brothers and even to private persons from home the Institution had been charging the rent. It may be on account of the reason that the Institution was derived financial benefits/come that the Taxation Department assessed the same for the purpose of property tax. This fact did not detract from the validity of general declaration made under subsection (2) of section of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, that such a property nevertheless would not form compensation pool on account of its having been attached to educational institution. "5. The order passed by the Settlement Commissioner dated 23-10-1968 is not sustainable. This appeal is accepted. The impugned order dated 23-10-1968 is set aside, and the application filed by the petitioner is accepted, and it is declared that both properties did not form part of compensation pool and are evacuee trust properties. "6. Learned counsel for respondent No. 13 submitted that the said respondent was issued P.T.D. long before the date fixed under section 10(2) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, L975, therefore, his transfer should be validated and kept intact and the Evacuee Property Trust Board should recover transfer price paid by the said respondent from the Settlement Department. Respondent No. 13 and any other respondent may seek remedy by making application to the Evacuee Trust Board under section 10(2) of the said Act, which shall be disposed of in accordance with law and if any order is passed WW. of which the transferee would feel aggrieved he may seek remedy in accordance with law. There will be no order as to costs." Paras.2 and 3 of Leave Grant Order dated 10-5-1994 read as under:- "2. We have heard Mr. Muhammad Hussain Away, learned Advocate Supreme Court for the petitioners, who is unable to post out any infirmity in the finding recorded by the learned Judge in Chambers on the merits of the case. However, he pointed out that since P.T.D. in respect of the suit property was issued in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1184?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1184 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-24): Muhammad Hussain Away, learned Advocate Supreme Court for the petitioners, who is unable to post out any infirmity in the finding recorded by the learned Judge in Chambers on the merits of the case. However, he pointed out that since P.T.D. in respect of the suit property was issued in favor of the petitioners prior to June, 1968, the above transfer order was validated by virtue of section 10(2) of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 and that the Evacuee Trust Board was entitled to receive the price of the suit house. It has further been submitted by him that though the learned Judge in Chambers has referred to the above provision but instead of directing the Evacuee Trust Board to act in terms of the above provisions as urged by the petitioner, he has directed the petitioners to approach the Evacuee Trust Board. "3. We are inclined to grant leave to consider, whether the direction of the learned Judge in Chambers to the petitioners to. approach the Evacuee Trust Board was warranted by the above provision of law or the learned Judge in Chambers should have passed the order for the payment of price by the Settlement Department to the Evacuee Trust Board.". 5. Hence this appeal. 6. It appears that the appellants had no case on merits and simply pressed for recognizing the validity of the issuance of P.T.D. in respect of the suit property. 'Prior to June 1968', by virtue of section 10(2) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act (No.XIII of) 1975, hereinafter referred to as.1975-Act, and that the Evacuee Trust Property Board was entitled to receive the price of the suit house. As mentioned above, leave was granted to consider whether the direction issued by the learned Judge in Chambers to them to approach the E.T.P.B. was warranted under section 10(2) of the 1975-Act, or the learned Judge in Chambers should have passed the order for the payment of price by the Settlement Department to the Evacuee Trust Property Board. WW. 7. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Away, learned Advocate Supreme Court appearing in support of this appeal, has once again failed to satisfy us regarding the existence of any reason relatable to the merits of the case to justify interference with the impugned judgment. According to him, the interests of the respondent E.T:P.B. as also the Settlement Department will be safeguarded if the appellants are not driven to filing any petition before. the Chairman, E.T.P.B. and by issuing a direction to the Settlement Department to make the payment of price to E.T.P.B. He was of the view that his clients have a vested right to continue enjoying the property in. dispute on account of its legitimate transfer to their predecessor-in-interest. 8. Mr. Ch. Fatal Hussain, learned Advocate Supreme Court representation E.T.P.B. has controverted the stand taken on behalf of the appellants by their learned counsel and specifically pressed into service the provisions of 1958-Act to contend that in the absence of a

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1184?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1184 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-24): account of its legitimate transfer to their predecessor-in-interest. 8. Mr. Ch. Fatal Hussain, learned Advocate Supreme Court representation E.T.P.B. has controverted the stand taken on behalf of the appellants by their learned counsel and specifically pressed into service the provisions of 1958-Act to contend that in the absence of a finding by a competent authority that the properties in dispute 'are not evacuee trust properties', the interests of the contestants here cannot take a legitimate beginning. He has referred to Meir Dad v. Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore Division, Lahore and another (PLD 1974 SC 193) and pressed into service the following observations in the precedent case: "A bare perusal of the above will show that the learned Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner did not ‘ go into whether the property in dispute is an evacuee property or not or whether the property was constructed by the appellant and whether it was Sham lat Del or not. His order is based on conjectures and surmises and clearly indicates that he has not applied his mind and has assumed jurisdiction without dealing with the points involved in the matter. In these circumstances, it was open to the High Court to consider the nature of the property in dispute and to find out whether on the facts of the present case, the order of the Settlement Commissioner is label to be set aside. This view is supported by a decision of this Court in Mr. Muhammad Jamil Affair v. Improvement Trust, Rawalpindi (PLD 1965 SC 698). In that connection, it was observed as under at page 705: The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act does not grant unlimited powers to Settlement Authorities to bring all property within their jurisdiction on their own findings. According to the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent if the Settlement Authorities chose to transfer property which never vested in the Central Government, the only remedy of the person aggrieved, was an appeal or revision under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act. We see no ground for attributing such an intention to the Legislature. However, if the property was in fact property which the Settlement Authorities were empowered to transfer their orders would be liable to be set aside only on ground that the jurisdiction was not validly exercised. The proceedings would be liable to challenge in the High Court under Article 98 of the Constitution on ground applicable to certiorari, but not on the simple ground that the decisions were not m accord with facts'-. Rely mg upon Overhand Multimap v. The Deputy Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Karachi and others PLD 1965 SC 356, it was contended that the property in dispute could not form part of the ‘compensation pool under the Act with the result that the authorities were not possessed of any power to decide the question of the same BMG capable of inclusion in the ‘compensation pool or even to adjudicate that it has been rightly included in the ‘compensation pool. 9.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1184?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1184 (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-24): part of the ‘compensation pool under the Act with the result that the authorities were not possessed of any power to decide the question of the same BMG capable of inclusion in the ‘compensation pool or even to adjudicate that it has been rightly included in the ‘compensation pool. 9. We have considered the arguments addressed at the Bar and have also perused the available material with the help of the learned counsel for the parties. It is an admitted position that the application filed by the respondent-ETB before the CSC under section 4(4) of the Act was not decided by a competent forum and that, too, by holding that the mere fact of the property, having been assessed to property tax will legally alter it status from 'Evacuee Trust Property’ to 'evacuee property’ simpliciter. The observation made by the learned Judge in Chambers in para.4 of the impugned judgment, quoted in para.3 above, correctly noticed the admission of the appellants that CERTAM portion of the said properties had been rented out BV the said Institution to Kuala Printing Press and Kuala Brothers and even to private persons from whom the Institution had been charging the rent. It MAV be on account of the reason that the Institution was deriving financial benefits/income that the Taxation Department assessed the. same for the purpose of property tax. This fact did hot detract from the validity of general declaration made under subsection (2) of section 4 of the. Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act. 1958. that such a property nevertheless would not form (part of) compensation pool on account of its having been attached to educational institution." (Underlying TS for emphasis). 10. We find no reason for interference with the impugned judgment which, after all, is tantamount to putting everything on the right lines by directing the appellants to make an application before the competent forum under 1975 Act. WW. 11. Resultantly, by recalling the Leave Grant Order, this appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs. M.B.A./24-S. Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 2000 SCMR 1929 about?
Answer: Case 2000 SCMR 1929 was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1998-11-17. The case involved DEPUTYADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY, KARACHI AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS ABDUL SATTAR AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XM OF 1975) -SS. AND 10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 185(3) AND 199 HINDU LAW DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10 DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_2000_1929.html 1/5 28/10/2025, 01:57 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_2000_1929.htmI REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIH OF 1958) - S.4 EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10 DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVUI OF 1958) -S. EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND_DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10. The case was heard by NASIR ASLAM ZAHID, MAMOON KAZI AND WAJIHUDDIN AHMED.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 SCMR 1929?
Answer: In case 2000 SCMR 1929, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XM OF 1975) -SS. AND 10 CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLES 185(3) AND 199 HINDU LAW DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIII OF 1958) - S. EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10 DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_2000_1929.html 1/5 28/10/2025, 01:57 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/SCMR/html_txt/SCMR_2000_1929.htmI REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVIH OF 1958) - S.4 EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10 DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) ACT (XXVUI OF 1958) -S. EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND_DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 10. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1998-11-17.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 SCMR 1929?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 SCMR 1929 were: S.H. FANT, ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT AND R.A. QURESHI, ADVOCATE-ON-RECOD FOR APPELLANTS.AHMADULLAH FARUQI, ADVOCATE-ON-RECORD FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: NASIR ASLAM ZAHID, MAMOON KAZI AND WAJIHUDDIN AHMED.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 SCMR 1929?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 SCMR 1929 were: DEPUTYADMINISTRATOR, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY, KARACHI AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS ABDUL SATTAR AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 SCMR 1929.
Answer: MAMOON KAZI, J,-Abdul Attar and Abdul Jabbar, the respondents in these two appeals, were transferred tenements Nos. G-l and G-3 and respectively by the Settlement Authorities in Property bear mg No. NP-, situated in Napier Quarters, Karachi and PTDs were issued to them on 31-3-1971 and 25-5-1970 respectively against payment of the entire price for the said properties. 2. Subsequently, on> reference made by the Deputy Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Karachi (appellant No.1) under sections 8 and 10 of the Evacuee Trust Property (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975), the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board (appellant No.2) vide order dated 7-8-1983, declared the said property as evacuee trust property, BMG owned by one Tamil Wieland Sada Birth Trust. The respondents filed revision against the said order before the Secretary, Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities, Islamabad (appellant No.3), but without any success and hence the order was challenged before the High Court of Sindh under its Constitutional jurisdiction. 3. The petitions were allowed by the High Court as mere ex face registration of property as 'Sada Birth' Trust was found to be insufficient to lead one to a conclusion that it was a public charitable trust. 4. Leave was granted by this Court to examine whether the findings arrived at by the appellant No.2, which were based upon material on record, could be interfered with by the High Court under its Constitutional jurisdiction. 5. There appears to be no controversy in regard to the fact that "Sada Birth" itself is an expression which denotes public or charitable purpose, as has been noticed by the learned Judges themselves in the impugned I judgment. Mr. Fans has sought support from Sir Hard WW. Singh Four's; Commentary on the HINDU CODE where at page 1167,' "Salazar" signifies public charity or utility, classified as a form of public endowment. In addition, record of the case indicates that the appellant No.2, while passing the said order, had relied upon an extract from record-of rights and that of the Land Manager, Karachi Metropolitan Corporation, respectively to determine the character of the said property. Reliance had also been placed by the appellant No.2 upon two notifications in the Gazette, dated the 19th May, 1962 and the 9th August, 1963 respectively which indicated that the property in dispute had been classified as an evacuee trust property. The said documents led the said appellant to conclude that the property in dispute was an evacuee trust property and not open for transfer to the said respondents. 6. Reference to section 4(2) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 indicates that, immovable. Evacuee property attached to any charitable, religious or educational trust or institution had been excluded from the compensation pool, referred to in subsection (1) of section 4. Consequently, no such property, which had been expressly - excluded from the evacuee pool, could be validly transferred to any person. Mr. Fans has pointed out that no distinction can be drawn in this regard ' between public and private endowments. Support had been sought by the learned counsel from Evacuee District Trust Committee, Hyderabad v. Muhammad Ismail (PLD 1978 Keir. 252), which was subsequently noticed with approval by this Court in MST. Natives Begum v. Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Hyderabad (1989 SCMR 1963). In the said case, decided by the High Court of Sindh, it was held that hot only the three expressions, ‘charitable’, 'religious' and ‘educational’ occurring infection 4(2) were to be interpreted disjunctively, but no qualification could be imported in the meaning of the term "religious" to confine it to religious trusts of public nature only. Thus, the expression "religious trust" was held to be wide enough to embrace both public and private religious tests. 7. When Act XII of 1975 was passed, only bona fide transfer of certain classes of evacuee trust properties were saved under section 10 thereof. if they had been made against satisfaction of a verified claim or where a Permanent Transfer Deed had been issued prior to June, 1968. The ‘ said section provided:- "10. Validation of certain transfers.-(1) An immovable evacuee trust property- (a) if situated m a rural area and utilized bona fide under any Act prior to June, 1964, for allotment against the satisfaction of verified claims; and ‘ (b) if situated in an urban area and utilized bona fide under any Act 1. for transfer WW. against the satisfaction of verified claims in respect of which Permanent Transfer Deeds were issued prior to June, 1968, shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and the sale proceeds thereof shall be reimbursed to the Board and shall form part of the Trust Pool. (2) If a question arises whether a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is bona fide or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (3) If it is decided that a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is not bona fide, the Chairman may pass an order cancelling the allotment or transfer of such property: Provided that no decision under subsection (2) or order under subsection (3) shall be taken or passed in respect of any property without giving the persons affected a reasonable opportunity of being heard." In the present case, admittedly, Permanent Transfer Deeds were issued in favor of the respondents on 31-3-1971 and 25-5- 1970 respectively, which were after June, 1968. Therefore, according to Mr. Fans, the said transfers could not be deemed to be valid in terms of section 10 of the said Act. 8. It may be posted out that, such question was examined by a Full Bench of the High Court of Sindh in MST. Mariam Bi v. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (PLD 1990 Keir. 427) and it was held that all such transfers of properties referred to in subsection (2) of section under the Schemes prepared by the Chief Settlement Commissioner for disposal of properties forming part of the compensation pool constituted under subsection (1) of section were void ab Emilio and under section 10 of Act XIII of 1975 only such transfers of evacuee trust properties had been validated which could satisfy the conditions laid down by the said section. It was, therefore, held that only bona fide transfers of such immovable evacuee trust properties could be validated where allotment had been made against satisfaction of verified claim or where PTD had been issued prior to June, 1968. The said judgment was upheld by this Court in MST. Mariam Bai and others v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1993 SCMR 515). 9. Although, Mr. Abdullah Farsi, learned counsel for the respondents did not challenge the said contentions, but he has, however, contended that the evidence relied upon by the appellant No.2 was not sufficient for a conclusion that the property in question was attached to a religious endowment, Reliance was placed by him on Deputy Administrator, WW. Evacuee Trust Property, Lahore v. A.R. Chaudhary (1981 CLC 1006), reference wherein had been made to a judgment of this Court in Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee v. Abdullah (1970 SCMR 503). In this case, a mere entry in a sale-deed was not considered sufficient to establish existence of Trust. 10. The case relied upon by Mr. Farsi, however, lends little support to the cause of the respondents, as in our view, the evidence relied upon by the appellant No.2 in the present case, was sufficient to indicate that the property in dispute was attached to a charitable endowment. Coupled with the fact that, protection to transfers of such properties was not available under section 10 of Act XIII of 1975, as the Permanent Transfer Deeds had not been issued prior to June, 1968 and that also not against satisfaction of verified claims, the learned Judges in the High Court appear to be clearly in error while allow mg the petitions and setting aside the orders passed by the. appellants Nos. and 3 respectively. 11. In the result, the appeals are allowed and the common judgment of the High Court in the two petitions is set aside. There shall be no order as to costs in view of the questions raised in these appeals. Q.M.H./M.A.K./D-8/S. Appeals allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1929?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1929 (SUPREME COURT, 1998-11-17): MAMOON KAZI, J,-Abdul Attar and Abdul Jabbar, the respondents in these two appeals, were transferred tenements Nos. G-l and G-3 and respectively by the Settlement Authorities in Property bear mg No. NP-, situated in Napier Quarters, Karachi and PTDs were issued to them on 31-3-1971 and 25-5-1970 respectively against payment of the entire price for the said properties. 2. Subsequently, on> reference made by the Deputy Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Karachi (appellant No.1) under sections 8 and 10 of the Evacuee Trust Property (Management and Disposal) Act (XIII of 1975), the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board (appellant No.2) vide order dated 7-8-1983, declared the said property as evacuee trust property, BMG owned by one Tamil Wieland Sada Birth Trust. The respondents filed revision against the said order before the Secretary, Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities, Islamabad (appellant No.3), but without any success and hence the order was challenged before the High Court of Sindh under its Constitutional jurisdiction. 3. The petitions were allowed by the High Court as mere ex face registration of property as 'Sada Birth' Trust was found to be insufficient to lead one to a conclusion that it was a public charitable trust. 4. Leave was granted by this Court to examine whether the findings arrived at by the appellant No.2, which were based upon material on record, could be interfered with by the High Court under its Constitutional jurisdiction. 5. There appears to be no controversy in regard to the fact that "Sada Birth" itself is an expression which denotes public or charitable purpose, as has been noticed by the learned Judges themselves in the impugned I judgment. Mr. Fans has sought support from Sir Hard WW. Singh Four's; Commentary on the HINDU CODE where at page 1167,' "Salazar" signifies public charity or utility, classified as a form of public endowment. In addition, record of the case indicates that the appellant No.2, while passing the said order, had relied upon an extract from record-of rights and that of the Land Manager, Karachi Metropolitan Corporation, respectively to determine the character of the said property. Reliance had also been placed by the appellant No.2 upon two notifications in the Gazette, dated the 19th May, 1962 and the 9th August, 1963 respectively which indicated that the property in dispute had been classified as an evacuee trust property. The said documents led the said appellant to conclude that the property in dispute was an evacuee trust property and not open for transfer to the said respondents. 6. Reference to section 4(2) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958 indicates that, immovable. Evacuee property attached to any charitable, religious or educational trust or institution had been excluded from the compensation pool, referred to in subsection (1) of section 4. Consequently, no such property, which had been expressly - excluded from the evacuee pool, could be validly transferred to any person. Mr. Fans has pointed out that no distinction can be drawn in this regard '

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1929?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1929 (SUPREME COURT, 1998-11-17): been excluded from the compensation pool, referred to in subsection (1) of section 4. Consequently, no such property, which had been expressly - excluded from the evacuee pool, could be validly transferred to any person. Mr. Fans has pointed out that no distinction can be drawn in this regard ' between public and private endowments. Support had been sought by the learned counsel from Evacuee District Trust Committee, Hyderabad v. Muhammad Ismail (PLD 1978 Keir. 252), which was subsequently noticed with approval by this Court in MST. Natives Begum v. Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property, Hyderabad (1989 SCMR 1963). In the said case, decided by the High Court of Sindh, it was held that hot only the three expressions, ‘charitable’, 'religious' and ‘educational’ occurring infection 4(2) were to be interpreted disjunctively, but no qualification could be imported in the meaning of the term "religious" to confine it to religious trusts of public nature only. Thus, the expression "religious trust" was held to be wide enough to embrace both public and private religious tests. 7. When Act XII of 1975 was passed, only bona fide transfer of certain classes of evacuee trust properties were saved under section 10 thereof. if they had been made against satisfaction of a verified claim or where a Permanent Transfer Deed had been issued prior to June, 1968. The ‘ said section provided:- "10. Validation of certain transfers.-(1) An immovable evacuee trust property- (a) if situated m a rural area and utilized bona fide under any Act prior to June, 1964, for allotment against the satisfaction of verified claims; and ‘ (b) if situated in an urban area and utilized bona fide under any Act 1. for transfer WW. against the satisfaction of verified claims in respect of which Permanent Transfer Deeds were issued prior to June, 1968, shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to the Chief Settlement Commissioner, and the sale proceeds thereof shall be reimbursed to the Board and shall form part of the Trust Pool. (2) If a question arises whether a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is bona fide or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (3) If it is decided that a transaction referred to in subsection (1) is not bona fide, the Chairman may pass an order cancelling the allotment or transfer of such property: Provided that no decision under subsection (2) or order under subsection (3) shall be taken or passed in respect of any property without giving the persons affected a reasonable opportunity of being heard." In the present case, admittedly, Permanent Transfer Deeds were issued in favor of the respondents on 31-3-1971 and 25-5- 1970 respectively, which were after June, 1968. Therefore, according to Mr. Fans, the said transfers could not be deemed to be valid in terms of section 10 of the said Act. 8. It may be posted out that, such question was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 SCMR 1929?
Answer: From case 2000 SCMR 1929 (SUPREME COURT, 1998-11-17): in favor of the respondents on 31-3-1971 and 25-5- 1970 respectively, which were after June, 1968. Therefore, according to Mr. Fans, the said transfers could not be deemed to be valid in terms of section 10 of the said Act. 8. It may be posted out that, such question was examined by a Full Bench of the High Court of Sindh in MST. Mariam Bi v. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (PLD 1990 Keir. 427) and it was held that all such transfers of properties referred to in subsection (2) of section under the Schemes prepared by the Chief Settlement Commissioner for disposal of properties forming part of the compensation pool constituted under subsection (1) of section were void ab Emilio and under section 10 of Act XIII of 1975 only such transfers of evacuee trust properties had been validated which could satisfy the conditions laid down by the said section. It was, therefore, held that only bona fide transfers of such immovable evacuee trust properties could be validated where allotment had been made against satisfaction of verified claim or where PTD had been issued prior to June, 1968. The said judgment was upheld by this Court in MST. Mariam Bai and others v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (1993 SCMR 515). 9. Although, Mr. Abdullah Farsi, learned counsel for the respondents did not challenge the said contentions, but he has, however, contended that the evidence relied upon by the appellant No.2 was not sufficient for a conclusion that the property in question was attached to a religious endowment, Reliance was placed by him on Deputy Administrator, WW. Evacuee Trust Property, Lahore v. A.R. Chaudhary (1981 CLC 1006), reference wherein had been made to a judgment of this Court in Divisional Evacuee Trust Committee v. Abdullah (1970 SCMR 503). In this case, a mere entry in a sale-deed was not considered sufficient to establish existence of Trust. 10. The case relied upon by Mr. Farsi, however, lends little support to the cause of the respondents, as in our view, the evidence relied upon by the appellant No.2 in the present case, was sufficient to indicate that the property in dispute was attached to a charitable endowment. Coupled with the fact that, protection to transfers of such properties was not available under section 10 of Act XIII of 1975, as the Permanent Transfer Deeds had not been issued prior to June, 1968 and that also not against satisfaction of verified claims, the learned Judges in the High Court appear to be clearly in error while allow mg the petitions and setting aside the orders passed by the. appellants Nos. and 3 respectively. 11. In the result, the appeals are allowed and the common judgment of the High Court in the two petitions is set aside. There shall be no order as to costs in view of the questions raised in these appeals. Q.M.H./M.A.K./D-8/S. Appeals allowed.

Question: What is case 2000 MLD 484 about?
Answer: Case 2000 MLD 484 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 1999-08-13. The case involved MUHAMMAD FAROOQ—PETITIONER VERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTYAND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - SS.8(1)G3), AND 14 PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (1 OF 1981) - ARTICLE 9. The case was heard by ALI NAWAZ CHOWHAN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 MLD 484?
Answer: In case 2000 MLD 484, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - SS.8(1)G3), AND 14 PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER (1 OF 1981) - ARTICLE 9. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 1999-08-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 MLD 484?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 MLD 484 were: RAJA ABDUL GAHFOOR FOR PETITIONER. HAFIZSAEED AHMAD SH. FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: ALI NAWAZ CHOWHAN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 MLD 484?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 MLD 484 were: MUHAMMAD FAROOQ—PETITIONER VERSUS CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTYAND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 MLD 484.
Answer: This is a petition under Article 9 of the Provisional Constitution Order, 1981. The matter pertains to a property which is a shop and bears Municipal No.212-B-|-98. It is located on WW. him! Lower Mall, Murrey. It was purchased by the petitioner through an open auction which was arranged by the Settlement Department on 2-7-1970. A PTD was issued to him on 8- 9-1970. As per record of the Settlement Department, the property was shown as an evacuee property whose evacuee owner was one Thai Amber Singh. 2. Subsequently, the District Evacuee Trust Committee, Rawalpindi, made an application under section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, seeking the cancellation of transfer of property to the petitioner after declaring the property to be an Evacuee Trust Property. j 3. In the meanwhile the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 (Act XII of 1975) whereby the Management and Disposal of Evacuee Properties attached to charitable, religious or education trust or institution, were vested in the Evacuee Trust Property Board constituted under section 3 of this Act. Under section of this Act, the various functions to be performed by the Board were enumerated. Whereas, under section 6, all Evacuee Trust Properties were vested in the Federal Government. 4. Under section 8 of the Act, powers were given to the Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Board to declare whether an evacuee. property was Evacuee Trust Property or not and his decision was to be final ‘and unquestionable. Section 8 reads as follows-— "Declaration of property as evacuee trust property.—(1) IFA question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust of institution or not it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. ' (2) If the decision of the Chairman under subsection (1) is that an evacuee property is evacuee trust property, he shall, by Notification in the Official Gazette, declare such property to be evacuee trust property. m- (3) If a property is declared to be evacuee trust property under subsection the Chairman may pass an order cancelling the allotment or alienation, as the case may be, take possession and assume administrative control, management and maintenance thereof: 4 Provided that no declaration under subsection (2) or order under subsection (3) shall be made or passed in respect of any property without giving the persons having interest in that property a reasonable opportunity of being heard. "\ 5. The revisional powers against any order passed under section 8 were vested in the Federal Government under section 17 of the Act. ‘/ 6. Consequently, the application of the District Evacuee Trust Committee in respect of this property came under the jurisdiction of the Chairman so apported under'Act 13 of 1975. The matter was, therefore, taken up by the Chairman in accordance with law. Therefore, while exercising his powers under section 8 read with section 10 (Act XIII of 1975), the Chairman, vide his order, dated,29-1-1980, declared the property in dispute to be an evacuee trust property while cancelling the transfer order in favor of the petitioner. 7. The matter also came under review before the Secretary to the Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities Affairs, Islamabad, Revision Petition No.3(16)/80-ETP (16 of 1980), filed on 24th of February, 1980, against the order of the Chairman, whereby the order of the Chairman was upheld, and consequently the writ petition has been filed challenging both these orders. A 8. The precise question confronting the authorities below was whether the property in question was a simple evacuee property and its transfer by the Settlement Department to the petitioner was in order or was it an evacuee trust property attached to Gurdwara called’ as "Kerri Gurdwara" and was not a simple evacuee property and, thus, was not transferable to the petitioner. “* 9, The Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Property Board after hearing the counsel for the parties and after gong through such record which was produced and which consisted of record of the Municipal Committee, Murrey and,the Excise and Taxation Department, Murrey, came to the conclusion that the property in question was an evacuee trust property. The relevant portion of his finding based on the factual evidence which he appreciated, is reproduced below in extensor-—— "From what has been brought on record it is clear that the respondents have not produced any evidence to rebut the documentary evidence produced by the petitioner. The case was adjourned for various dates for want of the record of the Municipal Committee which was stated to be not available, and many adjournments were granted to the parties to produce the same. At last the Chief Officer Municipal Committee stated that the file regarding the construction of building No.212 (disputed one) was not traceable in the record. If the property file of the disputed building had been available with the Municipal Committee its Chief Officer had all rights to certify that the property in dispute was the personal property of Amar Singh evacuee but in the WW. absence of the file I fail to understand how could the Chief Officer say so. I, therefore, place no reliance on this certificate. During the proceedings of the case the representative of the Municipal Committee has admitted that there was no basic record with them, and they were dependent on the record of the Excise and Taxation Department. From the extracts of the Excise and Taxation record for the year 1952, the property is entered as owned by Kerri Gurdwara. Same is the position in the years 1961-62 and 1966-67. However, In the year 1972-73 a portion of the said property viz. shop had been shown to be owned by Farooq Khan, while rest of the property Le. 1st Floor and the Second Floor is continuously shown as Evacuee Trust Property—a Gurdwara. In the year 1977-78 also the portion of the property on the first floor and the second floor was shown as Evacuee Trust Property — Gurdwara. Keeping this documentary evidence in view it is established that the property was a Gurdwara known as Turn Gurdwara. The name of Farooq Khan entered in the year 1972-73 as owner is of no help to him because the said entry was obviously the result of the transfer of the property to him by the Settlement Department. The respondents have tried to confuse the matter by saying that no specific numbers were given to the various properties before 1947, but they have miserably failed in this respect because the various copies of the assessment registers show the names of the present occupants of this property. The exact location of the property, thus, stands confirmed which according to the Excise and Taxation record is proved to be a Gurdwara and not the property of any individual. The result is that the petition succeeds and the property in dispute is declared as Evacuee Trust Property. As the property was transferred to respondent No.2 as a result of auction held on 2-7-1970 its transfer is not saved being after the target date under section 10 of the Act No.XIII of 1975 and is hereby cancelled.” r m 10. The relevant portion of the order passed in revision by the Federal. Government in this connection is also reproduced below in extensor: - _ "T have seen a certified copy of the Assessment Register in Form P.T.I. Rating Area, Murrey for the year 1947 and an attested copy of the Survey Register of the Evacuee Trust Property Board produced before the lower Court. In the. ownership column of these J- documents, the owner of the property in dispute has been shown as the Kerri Gurdwara. WW. The property is a two-storied building and TS a part and has remained part of the Evacuee Trust Pool. The lower storey has been sold to the petitioner through auction held on 26th June, 1970 treating the same to be in the Compensation Pool while the upper storey has been excluded treating it as evacuee trust. The I Settlement Organization cannot obviously give two different’ treatments to two storeys of one and the same property. There is, therefore, no reason to suspect the trust character of the y property in dispute and I hold as such."1 11. These findings of the Authorities appointed under Act 13 of 1975 are based on their appreciation of the evidence whereby they concluded that this was the property attached to the Gurdwara called as Kerri Gurdwara. It is not the case of the petitioner that the findings were perverse, were based on evidence against record or no evidence at all. The question is, therefore, } whether this appreciation can be disturbed through this writ petition? 12. In the case of Secretary, District Evacuee Trust Property v. Nazi Habit Allah, PLD 1991 SC 586, the principle laid down was that if sufficient prima facie evidence was adduced for showing that the property in question was attached to a religious or charitable institution and this evidence was not displaced by any other reliable evidence, die burden of showing actual creation of trust, on the party asserting that the property was attached to a religious or charitable trust, was not essential and that the matter could be decided on the rule of preponderance of the evidence. 13. In the case of Evacuee Trust Property Board v. MST. Asia Begum. and others, 1992 SCMR 1313, the principle laid down was as follows—— NA perusal of the above would show that when a question arises whether a property is evacuee trust property the decision of the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board shall be final (section 8(1) and if it is so, the Chairman may cancel the allotment or alienation (section 8(3)), further, it shall be exempt from any process of Courts or other authority (section 9). Section 14 excludes jurisdiction of any Court in respect of any matter which is “determinable by any authority under the Act. However, section 10(1) provides that if an evacuee trust property has been utilized bona fide for transfer against satisfaction of claims in respect of which Permanent Transfer Deed was issued prior to June, 1968, that shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to Chief Settlement Commissioner and the proceeds shall be reimbursed to the Board. WW. In case, a question arises whether transfer is bona fide or not, it shall be the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question MN any Court (section 10(2)). 14. After hearing the learned counsel from both the sides, this Court is of the view that under the circumstances the orders passed by the Chairman of the Board were lawful and based on facts adduced through evidence, the appreciation of which was not perverse. Consequently, the matter does not call for interference through the present writ petition. The writ petition has no merits. It is dismissed. The parties are left to bear their own costs. Petition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 484?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 484 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1999-08-13): This is a petition under Article 9 of the Provisional Constitution Order, 1981. The matter pertains to a property which is a shop and bears Municipal No.212-B-|-98. It is located on WW. him! Lower Mall, Murrey. It was purchased by the petitioner through an open auction which was arranged by the Settlement Department on 2-7-1970. A PTD was issued to him on 8- 9-1970. As per record of the Settlement Department, the property was shown as an evacuee property whose evacuee owner was one Thai Amber Singh. 2. Subsequently, the District Evacuee Trust Committee, Rawalpindi, made an application under section 4(3) of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, seeking the cancellation of transfer of property to the petitioner after declaring the property to be an Evacuee Trust Property. j 3. In the meanwhile the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 (Act XII of 1975) whereby the Management and Disposal of Evacuee Properties attached to charitable, religious or education trust or institution, were vested in the Evacuee Trust Property Board constituted under section 3 of this Act. Under section of this Act, the various functions to be performed by the Board were enumerated. Whereas, under section 6, all Evacuee Trust Properties were vested in the Federal Government. 4. Under section 8 of the Act, powers were given to the Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Board to declare whether an evacuee. property was Evacuee Trust Property or not and his decision was to be final ‘and unquestionable. Section 8 reads as follows-— "Declaration of property as evacuee trust property.—(1) IFA question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust of institution or not it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. ' (2) If the decision of the Chairman under subsection (1) is that an evacuee property is evacuee trust property, he shall, by Notification in the Official Gazette, declare such property to be evacuee trust property. m- (3) If a property is declared to be evacuee trust property under subsection the Chairman may pass an order cancelling the allotment or alienation, as the case may be, take possession and assume administrative control, management and maintenance thereof: 4 Provided that no declaration under subsection (2) or order under subsection (3) shall be made or passed in respect of any property without giving the persons having interest in that property a reasonable opportunity of being heard. "\ 5. The revisional powers against any order passed under section 8 were vested in the Federal Government under section 17 of the Act. ‘/ 6. Consequently, the application of the District Evacuee Trust Committee in respect of this property came under the jurisdiction of the Chairman so apported under'Act 13 of 1975. The matter was, therefore, taken up by the Chairman in accordance with law. Therefore, while exercising his powers under section 8 read with section 10 (Act XIII of 1975), the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 484?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 484 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1999-08-13): Trust Committee in respect of this property came under the jurisdiction of the Chairman so apported under'Act 13 of 1975. The matter was, therefore, taken up by the Chairman in accordance with law. Therefore, while exercising his powers under section 8 read with section 10 (Act XIII of 1975), the Chairman, vide his order, dated,29-1-1980, declared the property in dispute to be an evacuee trust property while cancelling the transfer order in favor of the petitioner. 7. The matter also came under review before the Secretary to the Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Minorities Affairs, Islamabad, Revision Petition No.3(16)/80-ETP (16 of 1980), filed on 24th of February, 1980, against the order of the Chairman, whereby the order of the Chairman was upheld, and consequently the writ petition has been filed challenging both these orders. A 8. The precise question confronting the authorities below was whether the property in question was a simple evacuee property and its transfer by the Settlement Department to the petitioner was in order or was it an evacuee trust property attached to Gurdwara called’ as "Kerri Gurdwara" and was not a simple evacuee property and, thus, was not transferable to the petitioner. “* 9, The Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Property Board after hearing the counsel for the parties and after gong through such record which was produced and which consisted of record of the Municipal Committee, Murrey and,the Excise and Taxation Department, Murrey, came to the conclusion that the property in question was an evacuee trust property. The relevant portion of his finding based on the factual evidence which he appreciated, is reproduced below in extensor-—— "From what has been brought on record it is clear that the respondents have not produced any evidence to rebut the documentary evidence produced by the petitioner. The case was adjourned for various dates for want of the record of the Municipal Committee which was stated to be not available, and many adjournments were granted to the parties to produce the same. At last the Chief Officer Municipal Committee stated that the file regarding the construction of building No.212 (disputed one) was not traceable in the record. If the property file of the disputed building had been available with the Municipal Committee its Chief Officer had all rights to certify that the property in dispute was the personal property of Amar Singh evacuee but in the WW. absence of the file I fail to understand how could the Chief Officer say so. I, therefore, place no reliance on this certificate. During the proceedings of the case the representative of the Municipal Committee has admitted that there was no basic record with them, and they were dependent on the record of the Excise and Taxation Department. From the extracts of the Excise and Taxation record for the year 1952, the property is entered as owned by Kerri Gurdwara. Same is the position in the years 1961-62 and 1966-67. However, In the year 1972-73 a portion of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 484?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 484 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1999-08-13): on the record of the Excise and Taxation Department. From the extracts of the Excise and Taxation record for the year 1952, the property is entered as owned by Kerri Gurdwara. Same is the position in the years 1961-62 and 1966-67. However, In the year 1972-73 a portion of the said property viz. shop had been shown to be owned by Farooq Khan, while rest of the property Le. 1st Floor and the Second Floor is continuously shown as Evacuee Trust Property—a Gurdwara. In the year 1977-78 also the portion of the property on the first floor and the second floor was shown as Evacuee Trust Property — Gurdwara. Keeping this documentary evidence in view it is established that the property was a Gurdwara known as Turn Gurdwara. The name of Farooq Khan entered in the year 1972-73 as owner is of no help to him because the said entry was obviously the result of the transfer of the property to him by the Settlement Department. The respondents have tried to confuse the matter by saying that no specific numbers were given to the various properties before 1947, but they have miserably failed in this respect because the various copies of the assessment registers show the names of the present occupants of this property. The exact location of the property, thus, stands confirmed which according to the Excise and Taxation record is proved to be a Gurdwara and not the property of any individual. The result is that the petition succeeds and the property in dispute is declared as Evacuee Trust Property. As the property was transferred to respondent No.2 as a result of auction held on 2-7-1970 its transfer is not saved being after the target date under section 10 of the Act No.XIII of 1975 and is hereby cancelled.” r m 10. The relevant portion of the order passed in revision by the Federal. Government in this connection is also reproduced below in extensor: - _ "T have seen a certified copy of the Assessment Register in Form P.T.I. Rating Area, Murrey for the year 1947 and an attested copy of the Survey Register of the Evacuee Trust Property Board produced before the lower Court. In the. ownership column of these J- documents, the owner of the property in dispute has been shown as the Kerri Gurdwara. WW. The property is a two-storied building and TS a part and has remained part of the Evacuee Trust Pool. The lower storey has been sold to the petitioner through auction held on 26th June, 1970 treating the same to be in the Compensation Pool while the upper storey has been excluded treating it as evacuee trust. The I Settlement Organization cannot obviously give two different’ treatments to two storeys of one and the same property. There is, therefore, no reason to suspect the trust character of the y property in dispute and I hold as such."1 11. These findings of the Authorities appointed under Act 13 of 1975 are based

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 484?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 484 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 1999-08-13): cannot obviously give two different’ treatments to two storeys of one and the same property. There is, therefore, no reason to suspect the trust character of the y property in dispute and I hold as such."1 11. These findings of the Authorities appointed under Act 13 of 1975 are based on their appreciation of the evidence whereby they concluded that this was the property attached to the Gurdwara called as Kerri Gurdwara. It is not the case of the petitioner that the findings were perverse, were based on evidence against record or no evidence at all. The question is, therefore, } whether this appreciation can be disturbed through this writ petition? 12. In the case of Secretary, District Evacuee Trust Property v. Nazi Habit Allah, PLD 1991 SC 586, the principle laid down was that if sufficient prima facie evidence was adduced for showing that the property in question was attached to a religious or charitable institution and this evidence was not displaced by any other reliable evidence, die burden of showing actual creation of trust, on the party asserting that the property was attached to a religious or charitable trust, was not essential and that the matter could be decided on the rule of preponderance of the evidence. 13. In the case of Evacuee Trust Property Board v. MST. Asia Begum. and others, 1992 SCMR 1313, the principle laid down was as follows—— NA perusal of the above would show that when a question arises whether a property is evacuee trust property the decision of the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board shall be final (section 8(1) and if it is so, the Chairman may cancel the allotment or alienation (section 8(3)), further, it shall be exempt from any process of Courts or other authority (section 9). Section 14 excludes jurisdiction of any Court in respect of any matter which is “determinable by any authority under the Act. However, section 10(1) provides that if an evacuee trust property has been utilized bona fide for transfer against satisfaction of claims in respect of which Permanent Transfer Deed was issued prior to June, 1968, that shall be deemed to have been validly transferred by sale to Chief Settlement Commissioner and the proceeds shall be reimbursed to the Board. WW. In case, a question arises whether transfer is bona fide or not, it shall be the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question MN any Court (section 10(2)). 14. After hearing the learned counsel from both the sides, this Court is of the view that under the circumstances the orders passed by the Chairman of the Board were lawful and based on facts adduced through evidence, the appreciation of which was not perverse. Consequently, the matter does not call for interference through the present writ petition. The writ petition has no merits. It is dismissed. The parties are left to bear their own costs. Petition dismissed

Question: What is case 2000 MLD 100 about?
Answer: Case 2000 MLD 100 was decided by SINDH HIGH COURT on 1999-05-21. The case involved EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY AND OTHERS—APPLICANTSVERSUS MUHAMMAD RAMZAN AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 7(2) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) -S. 14. The case was heard by MUSHTAQ AHMED MEMON.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: In case 2000 MLD 100, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 7(2) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) -S. 14. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT and decided on 1999-05-21.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 MLD 100 were: HADI BUX SOORARO FOR APPLICANTS. 'A.K. BHUTTO FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: MUSHTAQ AHMED MEMON.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 MLD 100 were: EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY AND OTHERS—APPLICANTSVERSUS MUHAMMAD RAMZAN AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SINDH HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 MLD 100.
Answer: t 1 The applicants have questioned concurrent judgments in Civil Appeal No. 103 of 1989 and Civil Suit No. 210 CJF 1985 passed by the learned District Judge, Larkana and the learned Find Senior Civil Judge, Larkana respectively. - 2. The respondents Nos.| to 7 in their plaint had averred that the agricultural land measuring 102–22 acres situated in the Managed, Talk Farrah, District Larkana (herein after referred as the subject property), after inclusion in the schedule of Government land by the Barrage Department, was granted to the said respondents on full rate conditions by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage in open hatchery held on 13-4-1983. The grant was confirmed vide order dated 20-4-1983 and the possession of the subject land has uninterruptedly been with the said respondents who have improved it through substantial investment. It is further averred in the plaint that during last week of October, 1984 the said respondents came to know that the respondents No. to 12 had filed a Civil suit No. 93 of 1983 against the Colonization Officer and other Barrage authorities claiming themselves as lessees of the subject property through the applicants. The respondents No. to 7 domed the above referred proceedings under Order 1, Rule 10, C.P.C. and themselves filed suit No. 210 of 1985 with the following prayer:- V (1) That this Honorable Court may be pleased to declare that the treatment, utilization and disposal of the land MW suit as Evacuee Trust Property by defendants Nos.6, 7 and 8 so also its lease by them to defendants No. to 5 is without jurisdiction, male FIDE, illegal, void, ab MITIC and nullity in the eye of law. (i) Grant Perpetual Injunction restrain the defendants No.6, 7 8 from treating and utilize the property in suit as evacuee trust Property and from disposing the same by way of lease or. in any other manner or mode to defendants No.| to 5 or to any other person or persons and also restrain all the defendants from interfering in any way with the rights and possession of plaintiffs in the property in suit, (I'm) costs of the suit may be awarded to the plaintiff 3. It was averred in the plaint that the subject land was earlier granted on full rate conditions from Sharif 1938-39 to Sudan Shaken and Hukumchand for a total sum of Rs.6,743.12 Anna payable in 10 installments. Subsequently, on 19-12-1943, the grant was transferred by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage in favor of Gaooshalla (Public Trust). The lability for payment of installments was undertaken by Seth Lagoonal and Manorial. The further case of the said respondents No.1 to 7 is that only six installments were paid during the period from 10-5-1939 to 10-5-1945 thereafter further installments were not w. paid with the result that on 23-7-1947 the grant in favor of Gaooshalla was cancelled by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage. The subject land, resultantly, reverted to Government as Kabul land followed by its grant in favor of respondents Nos.| to 7 as noted here in above. 4. The suit filed by the respondents Nos.| to 7 was resisted by the applicants alone with the pleadings that the subject land had become evacuee property by operation of law by virtue of section 6 of Ordinance XV of 1949 the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949. The case of applicants further was that the management and control of the subject land was taken over through Notification, dated 7th January, 1979 issued by the applicant No.3 in exercise of authority under, section 8 of the Evacuee Trust ' 4. Property Act XIII. of 1975 in, view of the treatment of the subject property as evacuee and the. subsequent assumption of its management and control, it was urged that the disposal of the subject property by Barrage authorities was illegal and without jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the civil Court was also disputed on the basis, of bar created by section 14 of Act XIII of 1975. On the basis of pleadings of the contesting parties, the following issues were settled by the -»F Court /m.4. L F *'- J (1) Whether the suit is not main tamable according to law? -1(2) Whether the suit is within time? (3) Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form?. Whether the alleged sale/transfer not valid, legal and not binding on the defendants for the reasons shown in the written statement?. (5) Whether this Court has jurisdiction to hear the suit? (6) Whether the plaintiffs have no right to sue? V. (7) Whether the suit is incompetent by virtue of provisions of Evacuee Properties (Management Disposal) Act 1975? - (8) whether the suit is barred by section 14 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management Disposal) Act 1975? ‘w f (9) Whether the property in suit is the property of defendants Evacuee Trust Property Board and vest it in TT?. f' (10) What should the decree be?. M 5: After, recording evidence, the Trial Court decreed the suit in terms of the prayer. The judgment and decree passed, as above, has been maintained in r W appeal leading to the w. present revision application. 6. Mr. Heidi BUX Sewer has urged that upon promulgation of Ordinance XV of 1949 followed by Pakistan (Administration.of Evacuee Property) Act XII /! “, 10f 1957.the subject property, BMG Evacuee, vested MN the Custodian with <11 effect from first day of March, 1947 and stood acquired under section 3 of the displaced persons (Compensation Rehabilitation) Act of 1958 forming part of Trust Pool created under section 4-A of the said Act of 1958. It is further contended that on 7-1- 1979, the applicant No. had issued notification notifying the intention to take over and assume the administration, control and management of various properties including the subject property and objections were invited from persons having lie or claim to any of the said properties. The effect of such notification was all-pervading and no other party, including the Barrage authorities, could deal with the subject property nor could grant the same to any third person. The next contention of Mr. Heidi BUX Sewer is that by virtue of bar contained in section 14 of Act XIII of 1975 the jurisdiction of civil courts was specifically barred, and the two Courts below have wrongly assumed the jurisdiction in deal mg with the subject property. It 1s further urged that the respondents Nos.] to 7 could not obtain relief of declaration in the absence of proof of ownership by them. 7. Mr. A.K. Bhutto, in his reply, has contended that the respondents Nos.] to 7 had asserted ownership of the subject property by virtue of grant made in their favor on 13-4- 1983 which was not disputed with the result that no further proof of ownership was required to be adduced and declaration simpliciter could be granted. It is further urged that the subject property was never treated as Evacuee Property till 1-1-1957 and could not be so treated by virtue of cancellation of grant in favor of Gaooshalla (Public Trust) by Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage on 23-7-1947. As regards the question of bar of jurisdiction it is contended that the Civil Courts being the Courts of ultimate and plenary jurisdiction could examine the illegality of an order passed by an authority and set it at naught. The learned counsel for the respondents No. I to 7 has supported the two judgment s below and relied on the case of Hamid Hussain v. Government of West Pakistan and others reported in 1974 SCMR 356. 8. I have considered the arguments of two learned counsel and gone through the record. w. 9. The subject property had admittedly been granted to Gaooshalla which is a public trust. The payment of price was to be made in 10 installments out of which only six installments had been paid. The renaming installments were not paid with the result that the subject property could be resumed by the Barrage authorities, It is also an admitted position on record that the Barrage authorities had cancelled the grant in favor of Gaooshalla through order dated 23-7-1947. The said cancellation order had the effect of re-transfer of the subject property in favor of the Barrage authorities. The moot question is whether the cancellation order dated 23-7-1947 was valid and could be given effect. On 15th October, 1949, Ordinance XV of 1949 was promulgated and by virtue of section 6(1) thereof all evacuee properties became vested in the Custodian. It was further provided in the above statute that the properties vesting in the custodian would be deemed to have so vested from 1-3-1947. In the definition clause, "Evacuee Property" was to mean any property in which an evacuee had any right or merest or which was held for him I'm trust including the properties obtained from evacuee after 28th February, 1947 until the.answer was confirmed by the custodian. Similar provisions were retained in section 7 of Act XII of 1957. Also pertinent, in this behalf is subsection (2) of section 7 of Act XII of 1957 which reads as under-— ’(2) Where any evacuee property which has vested in the Custodian or of which possession has been taken by the Custodian is property m trust for a public purpose of a religious or charitable nature, it shall be lawful for the Central Government, notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument of trust or any law for the time being in force, to apport, by general or special order, new trustees in place of the ' evacuee trustees and the property shall remain vested in the Custodian or. in his possession only until such time as the new trustees are so appointed; and pending the- appointment of such. new trustees the trust property and the income thereof shall be applied. ’ by the Custodian for fulfilling, as far as possible, the purpose of the. trust." 10. Another provision of Act XII of 1957 which was referred with emphasis by Mr. A.K. Bhutto is Contained in section 3(1) thereof which reads as follows:— 4 ft 3. Property not to be treated as evacuee property on or after IST January. 1957.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the LST day of January, 1957, shall be treated as ' evacuee or, as the case may be, as evacuee property, on or after the said date."'. 11. IA the above background, Act XIII of 1957 was promulgated w. where under all evacuee trust properties were vested in the Federal Government and under section 7 thereof Trust Pool, consisting of the following, was constituted—— I m (a) all evacuee trust property which immediately before the commencement of this Act formed part of the Trust Pools constituted under-the Acts. WW (b) any evacuee property declared under section 8 to be evacuee trust property. -. try (c) government property or any other property exchanged with any evacuee trust property; V ft (d) any property purchased or constructed by the Board; (e) sale proceeds or any evacuee trust property; (0 all profits and income received or derived from any evacuee trust property; (g) all rents and other amounts received, realized or recoverable in respect of evacuee trust property. 12. As regards declaration of an evacuee property as the evacuee trust property, section 8 of Act XIII of 1957 conferred power on Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Property Board. The Provisions contained in section 8 of act XIII of 1957 are reproduced hereunder for convenient reference 8. Declaration of property as evacuee trust property.—(1) If a question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or institution or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (2 If the decision of the Chairman under subsection (1) is that an evacuee property 1s evacuee trust property, he shall, by notification in the official Gazette, declare such property to be evacuee trust property. (3) If a property is declared to be evacuee trust property under subsection the Chairman may pass an order cancelling the allotment, or alienation, as the case may be, take possession and assume administrative control, management and maintenance thereof Provided that no declaration under subsection (2) or order under subsection (3) shall be made or passed in respect of any property without giving the persons having interest in that property a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 13. I have referred to the various provisions and re-produced them harm A __ to appreciate and effect thereof with convenience. The contention of Mr. Sewer, as already noted, is based on the treatment of the subject property, firstly, as evacuee and, then as evacuee trust property by operation of law. The reliance by the learned counsel, evidently, is on the definition of evacuee property" contained in ordinance XV of 1949 and Act XII of 1957 which had rendered any transfer of right or merest in a property noneffective for the period from 1-3-1947 afterward. Obviously, the cancellation of grant by Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage on 23-7-1947 fell within the above said period and, therefore, was ineffective unless confirmed by the Custodian. The above argument, however, loses sight of two aspects which are important to the context. Firstly, the property which was effected by the said prohibition ought to have been obtained from an evacuee; and secondly, only such interest could be effected as was held by an evacuee. In the present case, the Gaooshalla had not m- _ become full owner of the subject property due to non-payment of some installments. The Gaooshalla, itself} did not become evacuee since the beneficiaries, or at least some of them, had continued to live in Pakistan. The trustees of Public religious trust do not enjoy ownership rights in respect of trust property and, therefore, even in cases where the trustees had migrated out of Pakistan, after partition, the right or interest, which came to vest in the Custodian, was only to the extent held by the trustees which was no more than management of affairs of trust. It was on account of the above reason that subsection (2) of section 7 of Act XII of 1957 was promulgated. Even otherwise, h' W RJ_ the powers of custodian were limited in relation to the twist properties. The position of private trusts was, however, different since the. migration, of beneficiaries thereof had the effect of rendering their interest as evacuee, attracting the deeming clause contained in section 6 of Ordinance XV of 1949 and section 7 of Act XII of 1957. Both the aspects noted hereinabove were lacking in the present case. Thus, the argument of Mr. Sewer that the subject property’ had become evacuee and then, an evacuee trust property does not appear to be correct. MMR 14. As regards the issuance of notification dated 7-1-1979, the contents of the notification are reflective of intention on the part of the respondent No.3 to take over management, administration, control and maintenance of the subject property. Obviously the notification did not amount to declaration of the subject property as evacuee. In any event, the:provisions of Act XIII of 1975, had contemplated declaration of an evacuee property alone, as evacuee trust property and section 8 thereof did not authorize declarations of non evacuee property as evacuee trust property. Moreover, the power* of declaration under "section 8 of Act XIII GF 1975 is conferred upon Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Property " Board, whereas the subject notification dated 7-1-1979 was issued by the Administrator of evacuee Trust property Board. The subject property did not, with. is no where pleaded, form part of the Trust Pool constituted under the Evacuee t. Laws nor had been treated as evacuee property at any stage whatsoever. The treatment of a property as evacuee, necessarily requires an overt act and none has been pointed out to me in relation to the subject property. The oral testimony of the rent controller of applicant department cannot be relied on for holding that the subject property was treated as evacuee property or evacuee trust property in the year 1960. Thus* the subject property, does not appear to have ever been declared or treated as evacuee property or evacuee trust property and, therefore, did not become amenable to jurisdiction under Act XIII of 1975» -1111 «15. Reverting to the question of bar of jurisdiction contained in section 14 of. Act XIII of 1975, a civil Court is debarred from having jurisdiction MRI*.r,. Ami respect of any matter which the Federal Government or any Officer appointed under the said Act is empowered to determine thereby. Mr. Soomro has referred to the exclusive jurisdiction enjoyed by the chairman. Evacuee Trust Property Board,under section 8 of Act XII.of 1975. Such power, again, is referable Io a dispute if an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious, educational, trust or. otherwise. The provisions of Act XII of 1975 do not create an authority J in any of the functionaries thereunder to determine if anon-evacuee property to be treated as an evacuee trust property. Consequently, the notification that 7-1-1979 was outside the scope of Act XIII of 1975 in relation to the sure property and was, therefore, unauthorized and without jurisdiction; and, a without jurisdiction can always be checked by a civil Court and the finding that effect recorded in the lower appellate judgment does not call for AJ interference. 16. I have discussed the various points which were argued by the learn counsel for the applicants since the same are of general importance. T judgment of the lower appellate Court contains reference to Sukkur Barra (Validation of Orders) Act, XXXV of 1974 to hold that validity of the order cancellation dated 23-7-1947 passed by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sunk Barrage cannot be examined at the touchstone of various statutes mention their. The said Act was promulgated with the avowed object of validating t orders passed by the Sukkur Barrage authorities and section 2 thereof reads follows:--- 2. Validation-notwithstanding anything contained in the Papist Rehabilitation Act, 1956 (XLII of 1956), the Pakistan (Admmiustrati of Evacuee Property Act, 1957) CXII of 1957) and the displaced Perse (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 (XLVIL of 1958), or any decree or on of any Court or other authority, any order passed by the Sulk Barrage Authorities cancelling the grant of land made to a non-Muslim who migrated to India or granting such land to any other person SB be deemed to have validly made and shall have, and shall be Dorr always to have had, effect accordingly.” T 17. this to be noticed that the above referred provision begins with a r obstinate clause and excludes the effect of the Pakistan. Rehabilitation Act, 19! the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 and the Display< Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 or any decree or order of any Court other authority. The above Act is promulgated as a special law deal mg with orders passed by the Sukkur Barrage Authorities and would, therefore, exile the various statutes of general application mentioned therein. The applicant case is obviously based on the laws which find mention in section 2 of -XXXV of 1974. The order dated 23-7-1947 passed by the Assistant Neva Officer, Sukkur Barrage enjoys immunity from the effect of the statutes refer in Act XXXV of 1974 with the result that the subject property could not become evacuee or formed part of the Trust Pool. 18. In the result, the revision application TS dismissed with c< throughout. Revision dismiss

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 100 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1999-05-21): t 1 The applicants have questioned concurrent judgments in Civil Appeal No. 103 of 1989 and Civil Suit No. 210 CJF 1985 passed by the learned District Judge, Larkana and the learned Find Senior Civil Judge, Larkana respectively. - 2. The respondents Nos.| to 7 in their plaint had averred that the agricultural land measuring 102–22 acres situated in the Managed, Talk Farrah, District Larkana (herein after referred as the subject property), after inclusion in the schedule of Government land by the Barrage Department, was granted to the said respondents on full rate conditions by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage in open hatchery held on 13-4-1983. The grant was confirmed vide order dated 20-4-1983 and the possession of the subject land has uninterruptedly been with the said respondents who have improved it through substantial investment. It is further averred in the plaint that during last week of October, 1984 the said respondents came to know that the respondents No. to 12 had filed a Civil suit No. 93 of 1983 against the Colonization Officer and other Barrage authorities claiming themselves as lessees of the subject property through the applicants. The respondents No. to 7 domed the above referred proceedings under Order 1, Rule 10, C.P.C. and themselves filed suit No. 210 of 1985 with the following prayer:- V (1) That this Honorable Court may be pleased to declare that the treatment, utilization and disposal of the land MW suit as Evacuee Trust Property by defendants Nos.6, 7 and 8 so also its lease by them to defendants No. to 5 is without jurisdiction, male FIDE, illegal, void, ab MITIC and nullity in the eye of law. (i) Grant Perpetual Injunction restrain the defendants No.6, 7 8 from treating and utilize the property in suit as evacuee trust Property and from disposing the same by way of lease or. in any other manner or mode to defendants No.| to 5 or to any other person or persons and also restrain all the defendants from interfering in any way with the rights and possession of plaintiffs in the property in suit, (I'm) costs of the suit may be awarded to the plaintiff 3. It was averred in the plaint that the subject land was earlier granted on full rate conditions from Sharif 1938-39 to Sudan Shaken and Hukumchand for a total sum of Rs.6,743.12 Anna payable in 10 installments. Subsequently, on 19-12-1943, the grant was transferred by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage in favor of Gaooshalla (Public Trust). The lability for payment of installments was undertaken by Seth Lagoonal and Manorial. The further case of the said respondents No.1 to 7 is that only six installments were paid during the period from 10-5-1939 to 10-5-1945 thereafter further installments were not w. paid with the result that on 23-7-1947 the grant in favor of Gaooshalla was cancelled by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage. The subject land, resultantly, reverted to Government as Kabul land followed by its grant in favor of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 100 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1999-05-21): period from 10-5-1939 to 10-5-1945 thereafter further installments were not w. paid with the result that on 23-7-1947 the grant in favor of Gaooshalla was cancelled by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage. The subject land, resultantly, reverted to Government as Kabul land followed by its grant in favor of respondents Nos.| to 7 as noted here in above. 4. The suit filed by the respondents Nos.| to 7 was resisted by the applicants alone with the pleadings that the subject land had become evacuee property by operation of law by virtue of section 6 of Ordinance XV of 1949 the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949. The case of applicants further was that the management and control of the subject land was taken over through Notification, dated 7th January, 1979 issued by the applicant No.3 in exercise of authority under, section 8 of the Evacuee Trust ' 4. Property Act XIII. of 1975 in, view of the treatment of the subject property as evacuee and the. subsequent assumption of its management and control, it was urged that the disposal of the subject property by Barrage authorities was illegal and without jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the civil Court was also disputed on the basis, of bar created by section 14 of Act XIII of 1975. On the basis of pleadings of the contesting parties, the following issues were settled by the -»F Court /m.4. L F *'- J (1) Whether the suit is not main tamable according to law? -1(2) Whether the suit is within time? (3) Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form?. Whether the alleged sale/transfer not valid, legal and not binding on the defendants for the reasons shown in the written statement?. (5) Whether this Court has jurisdiction to hear the suit? (6) Whether the plaintiffs have no right to sue? V. (7) Whether the suit is incompetent by virtue of provisions of Evacuee Properties (Management Disposal) Act 1975? - (8) whether the suit is barred by section 14 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management Disposal) Act 1975? ‘w f (9) Whether the property in suit is the property of defendants Evacuee Trust Property Board and vest it in TT?. f' (10) What should the decree be?. M 5: After, recording evidence, the Trial Court decreed the suit in terms of the prayer. The judgment and decree passed, as above, has been maintained in r W appeal leading to the w. present revision application. 6. Mr. Heidi BUX Sewer has urged that upon promulgation of Ordinance XV of 1949 followed by Pakistan (Administration.of Evacuee Property) Act XII /! “, 10f 1957.the subject property, BMG Evacuee, vested MN the Custodian with <11 effect from first day of March, 1947 and stood acquired under section 3 of the displaced persons (Compensation Rehabilitation) Act of 1958 forming part of Trust Pool created under section 4-A of the said Act of 1958. It is further contended that on 7-1- 1979, the applicant No. had issued notification notifying the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 100 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1999-05-21): day of March, 1947 and stood acquired under section 3 of the displaced persons (Compensation Rehabilitation) Act of 1958 forming part of Trust Pool created under section 4-A of the said Act of 1958. It is further contended that on 7-1- 1979, the applicant No. had issued notification notifying the intention to take over and assume the administration, control and management of various properties including the subject property and objections were invited from persons having lie or claim to any of the said properties. The effect of such notification was all-pervading and no other party, including the Barrage authorities, could deal with the subject property nor could grant the same to any third person. The next contention of Mr. Heidi BUX Sewer is that by virtue of bar contained in section 14 of Act XIII of 1975 the jurisdiction of civil courts was specifically barred, and the two Courts below have wrongly assumed the jurisdiction in deal mg with the subject property. It 1s further urged that the respondents Nos.] to 7 could not obtain relief of declaration in the absence of proof of ownership by them. 7. Mr. A.K. Bhutto, in his reply, has contended that the respondents Nos.] to 7 had asserted ownership of the subject property by virtue of grant made in their favor on 13-4- 1983 which was not disputed with the result that no further proof of ownership was required to be adduced and declaration simpliciter could be granted. It is further urged that the subject property was never treated as Evacuee Property till 1-1-1957 and could not be so treated by virtue of cancellation of grant in favor of Gaooshalla (Public Trust) by Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage on 23-7-1947. As regards the question of bar of jurisdiction it is contended that the Civil Courts being the Courts of ultimate and plenary jurisdiction could examine the illegality of an order passed by an authority and set it at naught. The learned counsel for the respondents No. I to 7 has supported the two judgment s below and relied on the case of Hamid Hussain v. Government of West Pakistan and others reported in 1974 SCMR 356. 8. I have considered the arguments of two learned counsel and gone through the record. w. 9. The subject property had admittedly been granted to Gaooshalla which is a public trust. The payment of price was to be made in 10 installments out of which only six installments had been paid. The renaming installments were not paid with the result that the subject property could be resumed by the Barrage authorities, It is also an admitted position on record that the Barrage authorities had cancelled the grant in favor of Gaooshalla through order dated 23-7-1947. The said cancellation order had the effect of re-transfer of the subject property in favor of the Barrage authorities. The moot question is whether the cancellation order dated 23-7-1947 was valid and could be given effect. On 15th October, 1949, Ordinance XV of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 100 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1999-05-21): favor of Gaooshalla through order dated 23-7-1947. The said cancellation order had the effect of re-transfer of the subject property in favor of the Barrage authorities. The moot question is whether the cancellation order dated 23-7-1947 was valid and could be given effect. On 15th October, 1949, Ordinance XV of 1949 was promulgated and by virtue of section 6(1) thereof all evacuee properties became vested in the Custodian. It was further provided in the above statute that the properties vesting in the custodian would be deemed to have so vested from 1-3-1947. In the definition clause, "Evacuee Property" was to mean any property in which an evacuee had any right or merest or which was held for him I'm trust including the properties obtained from evacuee after 28th February, 1947 until the.answer was confirmed by the custodian. Similar provisions were retained in section 7 of Act XII of 1957. Also pertinent, in this behalf is subsection (2) of section 7 of Act XII of 1957 which reads as under-— ’(2) Where any evacuee property which has vested in the Custodian or of which possession has been taken by the Custodian is property m trust for a public purpose of a religious or charitable nature, it shall be lawful for the Central Government, notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument of trust or any law for the time being in force, to apport, by general or special order, new trustees in place of the ' evacuee trustees and the property shall remain vested in the Custodian or. in his possession only until such time as the new trustees are so appointed; and pending the- appointment of such. new trustees the trust property and the income thereof shall be applied. ’ by the Custodian for fulfilling, as far as possible, the purpose of the. trust." 10. Another provision of Act XII of 1957 which was referred with emphasis by Mr. A.K. Bhutto is Contained in section 3(1) thereof which reads as follows:— 4 ft 3. Property not to be treated as evacuee property on or after IST January. 1957.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person or property not treated as evacuee or as evacuee property immediately before the LST day of January, 1957, shall be treated as ' evacuee or, as the case may be, as evacuee property, on or after the said date."'. 11. IA the above background, Act XIII of 1957 was promulgated w. where under all evacuee trust properties were vested in the Federal Government and under section 7 thereof Trust Pool, consisting of the following, was constituted—— I m (a) all evacuee trust property which immediately before the commencement of this Act formed part of the Trust Pools constituted under-the Acts. WW (b) any evacuee property declared under section 8 to be evacuee trust property. -. try (c) government property or any other property exchanged with any evacuee trust property; V ft (d) any property purchased or constructed by the Board; (e) sale proceeds or any evacuee

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 100 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1999-05-21): Pools constituted under-the Acts. WW (b) any evacuee property declared under section 8 to be evacuee trust property. -. try (c) government property or any other property exchanged with any evacuee trust property; V ft (d) any property purchased or constructed by the Board; (e) sale proceeds or any evacuee trust property; (0 all profits and income received or derived from any evacuee trust property; (g) all rents and other amounts received, realized or recoverable in respect of evacuee trust property. 12. As regards declaration of an evacuee property as the evacuee trust property, section 8 of Act XIII of 1957 conferred power on Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Property Board. The Provisions contained in section 8 of act XIII of 1957 are reproduced hereunder for convenient reference 8. Declaration of property as evacuee trust property.—(1) If a question arises whether an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious or educational trust or institution or not, it shall be decided by the Chairman whose decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (2 If the decision of the Chairman under subsection (1) is that an evacuee property 1s evacuee trust property, he shall, by notification in the official Gazette, declare such property to be evacuee trust property. (3) If a property is declared to be evacuee trust property under subsection the Chairman may pass an order cancelling the allotment, or alienation, as the case may be, take possession and assume administrative control, management and maintenance thereof Provided that no declaration under subsection (2) or order under subsection (3) shall be made or passed in respect of any property without giving the persons having interest in that property a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 13. I have referred to the various provisions and re-produced them harm A __ to appreciate and effect thereof with convenience. The contention of Mr. Sewer, as already noted, is based on the treatment of the subject property, firstly, as evacuee and, then as evacuee trust property by operation of law. The reliance by the learned counsel, evidently, is on the definition of evacuee property" contained in ordinance XV of 1949 and Act XII of 1957 which had rendered any transfer of right or merest in a property noneffective for the period from 1-3-1947 afterward. Obviously, the cancellation of grant by Assistant Revenue Officer, Sukkur Barrage on 23-7-1947 fell within the above said period and, therefore, was ineffective unless confirmed by the Custodian. The above argument, however, loses sight of two aspects which are important to the context. Firstly, the property which was effected by the said prohibition ought to have been obtained from an evacuee; and secondly, only such interest could be effected as was held by an evacuee. In the present case, the Gaooshalla had not m- _ become full owner of the subject property due to non-payment of some installments. The Gaooshalla, itself} did not become evacuee since the beneficiaries, or at least some of them, had

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 100 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1999-05-21): interest could be effected as was held by an evacuee. In the present case, the Gaooshalla had not m- _ become full owner of the subject property due to non-payment of some installments. The Gaooshalla, itself} did not become evacuee since the beneficiaries, or at least some of them, had continued to live in Pakistan. The trustees of Public religious trust do not enjoy ownership rights in respect of trust property and, therefore, even in cases where the trustees had migrated out of Pakistan, after partition, the right or interest, which came to vest in the Custodian, was only to the extent held by the trustees which was no more than management of affairs of trust. It was on account of the above reason that subsection (2) of section 7 of Act XII of 1957 was promulgated. Even otherwise, h' W RJ_ the powers of custodian were limited in relation to the twist properties. The position of private trusts was, however, different since the. migration, of beneficiaries thereof had the effect of rendering their interest as evacuee, attracting the deeming clause contained in section 6 of Ordinance XV of 1949 and section 7 of Act XII of 1957. Both the aspects noted hereinabove were lacking in the present case. Thus, the argument of Mr. Sewer that the subject property’ had become evacuee and then, an evacuee trust property does not appear to be correct. MMR 14. As regards the issuance of notification dated 7-1-1979, the contents of the notification are reflective of intention on the part of the respondent No.3 to take over management, administration, control and maintenance of the subject property. Obviously the notification did not amount to declaration of the subject property as evacuee. In any event, the:provisions of Act XIII of 1975, had contemplated declaration of an evacuee property alone, as evacuee trust property and section 8 thereof did not authorize declarations of non evacuee property as evacuee trust property. Moreover, the power* of declaration under "section 8 of Act XIII GF 1975 is conferred upon Chairman of the Evacuee Trust Property " Board, whereas the subject notification dated 7-1-1979 was issued by the Administrator of evacuee Trust property Board. The subject property did not, with. is no where pleaded, form part of the Trust Pool constituted under the Evacuee t. Laws nor had been treated as evacuee property at any stage whatsoever. The treatment of a property as evacuee, necessarily requires an overt act and none has been pointed out to me in relation to the subject property. The oral testimony of the rent controller of applicant department cannot be relied on for holding that the subject property was treated as evacuee property or evacuee trust property in the year 1960. Thus* the subject property, does not appear to have ever been declared or treated as evacuee property or evacuee trust property and, therefore, did not become amenable to jurisdiction under Act XIII of 1975» -1111 «15. Reverting to the question of bar of jurisdiction contained

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 100 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1999-05-21): property in the year 1960. Thus* the subject property, does not appear to have ever been declared or treated as evacuee property or evacuee trust property and, therefore, did not become amenable to jurisdiction under Act XIII of 1975» -1111 «15. Reverting to the question of bar of jurisdiction contained in section 14 of. Act XIII of 1975, a civil Court is debarred from having jurisdiction MRI*.r,. Ami respect of any matter which the Federal Government or any Officer appointed under the said Act is empowered to determine thereby. Mr. Soomro has referred to the exclusive jurisdiction enjoyed by the chairman. Evacuee Trust Property Board,under section 8 of Act XII.of 1975. Such power, again, is referable Io a dispute if an evacuee property is attached to a charitable, religious, educational, trust or. otherwise. The provisions of Act XII of 1975 do not create an authority J in any of the functionaries thereunder to determine if anon-evacuee property to be treated as an evacuee trust property. Consequently, the notification that 7-1-1979 was outside the scope of Act XIII of 1975 in relation to the sure property and was, therefore, unauthorized and without jurisdiction; and, a without jurisdiction can always be checked by a civil Court and the finding that effect recorded in the lower appellate judgment does not call for AJ interference. 16. I have discussed the various points which were argued by the learn counsel for the applicants since the same are of general importance. T judgment of the lower appellate Court contains reference to Sukkur Barra (Validation of Orders) Act, XXXV of 1974 to hold that validity of the order cancellation dated 23-7-1947 passed by the Assistant Revenue Officer, Sunk Barrage cannot be examined at the touchstone of various statutes mention their. The said Act was promulgated with the avowed object of validating t orders passed by the Sukkur Barrage authorities and section 2 thereof reads follows:--- 2. Validation-notwithstanding anything contained in the Papist Rehabilitation Act, 1956 (XLII of 1956), the Pakistan (Admmiustrati of Evacuee Property Act, 1957) CXII of 1957) and the displaced Perse (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 (XLVIL of 1958), or any decree or on of any Court or other authority, any order passed by the Sulk Barrage Authorities cancelling the grant of land made to a non-Muslim who migrated to India or granting such land to any other person SB be deemed to have validly made and shall have, and shall be Dorr always to have had, effect accordingly.” T 17. this to be noticed that the above referred provision begins with a r obstinate clause and excludes the effect of the Pakistan. Rehabilitation Act, 19! the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 and the Display< Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 or any decree or order of any Court other authority. The above Act is promulgated as a special law deal mg with orders passed by the Sukkur Barrage Authorities and would, therefore, exile the various statutes of general application mentioned therein. The applicant case

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 MLD 100?
Answer: From case 2000 MLD 100 (SINDH HIGH COURT, 1999-05-21): Display< Persons (Land Settlement) Act, 1958 or any decree or order of any Court other authority. The above Act is promulgated as a special law deal mg with orders passed by the Sukkur Barrage Authorities and would, therefore, exile the various statutes of general application mentioned therein. The applicant case is obviously based on the laws which find mention in section 2 of -XXXV of 1974. The order dated 23-7-1947 passed by the Assistant Neva Officer, Sukkur Barrage enjoys immunity from the effect of the statutes refer in Act XXXV of 1974 with the result that the subject property could not become evacuee or formed part of the Trust Pool. 18. In the result, the revision application TS dismissed with c< throughout. Revision dismiss

Question: What is case 2000 YLR 2326 about?
Answer: Case 2000 YLR 2326 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1999-11-19. The case involved SUB. (RTD.) BEHRAM KHAN (APPELLANT) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTYACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 3. 18-A AND 43 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR REHABILITATION ACT, 1974 -S. 11 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - SS.42 AND 44. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 YLR 2326?
Answer: In case 2000 YLR 2326, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTYACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 3. 18-A AND 43 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR REHABILITATION ACT, 1974 -S. 11 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - SS.42 AND 44. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1999-11-19.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 YLR 2326?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 YLR 2326 were: SH. ABDULAZIZ, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANT. SARDAR RAFIQUE MAHMOOD KHAN, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENT NO.5.. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 YLR 2326?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 YLR 2326 were: SUB. (RTD.) BEHRAM KHAN (APPELLANT) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 YLR 2326.
Answer: LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.-This appeal, by way of leave of the Court, is directed against an order passed by the High Court on 25-7-1998, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant, here, was dismissed. 2. The brief facts, giving rise to the present appeal, are that according to the appellant his father owned landed property in Occupied Kashmir Pooch MN village Satori and also in Azad area. The land measuring 31 Canals, Marla's, comprising Survey Nos.2832 and 2834, situate in village Patriot Rawalakot, which is the subject to dispute between the parties, was firstly allotted in favor of appellant which was cancelled on 11-10-1973, by Multiple Judge observing therein that the appellant did not fall within the definition of local destitute as. envisaged under Government Order. Against the aforesaid order the appellant filed a review petition before the Multiple Judge who dismissed the same on 14- 1-1983, by observing that the appellant may establish his claim as a refugee before the Rehabilitation Authorities m order to obtain allotment of evacuee land afresh. On 4-8- 1990 the appellant moved an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property that he being refugee is entitled to allotment of disputed land, which was made over the Additional’ Custodian. The Additional Custodian vide his order dated 27-12-1994, observed that the land left by the father of appellant in Occupied Kashmir had devolved on his son, the appellant, therefore he was entitled t 4. On the other hand Vardar Cacique Mahmood Khan, the learned counsel for respondent No.5, pressed into service the submission that the land in question stood cancelled from the name of appellant on 11-10-1973. Against this order of cancellation the appellant filed a review petition in April, 1983. It was for the first time in 1983 that the appellant claimed himself to be a refugee and submitted an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property for making allotment in his favor as a refugee. However, the Custodian made over the case to Additional Custodian who recommended in favor of appellant but the learned Custodian vide his order dated 14-11-1996, opined that the Additional Custodian or the Custodian were not competent to grant a declaration to the effect that the appellant was a refugee and thus entitled to the allotment. The learned counsel contended that before the High Court no document was appended by the appellant show mg therein that the land belonging to his father in the Occupied Kashmir devolved on the appellant. According to the learned counsel for respondent it is for the first time that the appellant appended a photostat copy of mutation in this Court which is inadmissible in evidence and cannot be WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y relied upon. The learned counsel for respondent contended that in the writ petition filed by the appellant in the High Court his prayer m the relief para, was that after setting aside the order of Custodian dated 14-11-1996, the order for allotment of the land in question be passed in his favor but during the course of arguments for the first time he raised a submission that the land in question stood allotted to him vide order of the A.R.C. dated 4- 12-1994. The learned counsel maintained that the appellant for the first time during the arguments raised a new point which was neither urged nor argued before the High Court and nor the same was raised in the memorandum of appeal before this Court or in the concise statement, as such he could not take a totally inconsistent and different stand. 5. After hearing the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record made available, it may be stated that the appellant's case throughout had been that initially the land in question was allotted to him but the same was cancelled vide the order of Multiple Judge dated 11-10-1973. The appellant submitted a review petition on 24-2-1983, against the aforesaid order of Multiple Judge which was dismissed on 14-11-1983. In the beginning the appellant had been trying to get the land allotted in his name as a local destitute. However, in 1983, for the first time he moved the Custodian by submitting that he was entitled for the allotment as a refugee. The case was made over to Additional Custodian who observed that the appellant being refugee was entitled for the allotment. However, this order was set aside by the Custodian on the ground that only Rehabilitation Authorities could decide the matter of entitlement of appellant for the allotment of the land in dispute and the Additional Custodian and the Custodian were not vested with any jurisdiction to issue a declaration that the appellant was a refugee and thus was entitled to any allotment. This order of the Custodian was assailed by filing a WNT petition in the High Court and the appellant along with his writ petition never appended any document on the basis of which the land left by his father devolved on him. It was for the first time in this Court that photostat copy of mutation sanctioned in favor of appellant was appended. This Court TS not obliged to look into those documents which were not placed on record before the High Court. Even otherwise the photostat copy being inadmissible in evidence cannot be relied upon. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y AB 6. We have also noticed that the appellant for the first time has raised a plea that the land in question stood allotted to him vide the order of A.R.C. dated 4-12-1994, and the same was not cancelled so far by any competent authority. It was urged that in presence of this allotment the allotment in favor of Muhammad Islam Khan and another on 14-7- 1998, was void. We are afraid that we cannot subscribe to the view of the learned counsel for the appellant as this point is a totally inconsistent and alien to the original stand taken by the appellant in his writ petition. No record whatsoever with regard to allotment made by A.R.C. in favor of appellant was placed on record either m the High Court or in this Court. Even the plea was not raised in the memorandum of appeal or m the concise statement. Therefore, this plea being inconsistent to the original plea raised by the appellant cannot be allowed to be raised during the arguments in this Court. Thus the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant stands repelled. 7. It is percent to note that the allotment made in favor of respondents on 14-7-1998, of the land in question was not challenged before any competent forum. Therefore the plea which is alien to the pleadings of the parties cannot be allowed to be raised at this stage. 8. The nutshell of the above discussion is that the appeal, having no merits in it, stands dismissed with costs. H.B.T./34/SC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed. WWW LR/html_TXT/Y 414

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2326?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2326 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-11-19): LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.-This appeal, by way of leave of the Court, is directed against an order passed by the High Court on 25-7-1998, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant, here, was dismissed. 2. The brief facts, giving rise to the present appeal, are that according to the appellant his father owned landed property in Occupied Kashmir Pooch MN village Satori and also in Azad area. The land measuring 31 Canals, Marla's, comprising Survey Nos.2832 and 2834, situate in village Patriot Rawalakot, which is the subject to dispute between the parties, was firstly allotted in favor of appellant which was cancelled on 11-10-1973, by Multiple Judge observing therein that the appellant did not fall within the definition of local destitute as. envisaged under Government Order. Against the aforesaid order the appellant filed a review petition before the Multiple Judge who dismissed the same on 14- 1-1983, by observing that the appellant may establish his claim as a refugee before the Rehabilitation Authorities m order to obtain allotment of evacuee land afresh. On 4-8- 1990 the appellant moved an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property that he being refugee is entitled to allotment of disputed land, which was made over the Additional’ Custodian. The Additional Custodian vide his order dated 27-12-1994, observed that the land left by the father of appellant in Occupied Kashmir had devolved on his son, the appellant, therefore he was entitled t 4. On the other hand Vardar Cacique Mahmood Khan, the learned counsel for respondent No.5, pressed into service the submission that the land in question stood cancelled from the name of appellant on 11-10-1973. Against this order of cancellation the appellant filed a review petition in April, 1983. It was for the first time in 1983 that the appellant claimed himself to be a refugee and submitted an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property for making allotment in his favor as a refugee. However, the Custodian made over the case to Additional Custodian who recommended in favor of appellant but the learned Custodian vide his order dated 14-11-1996, opined that the Additional Custodian or the Custodian were not competent to grant a declaration to the effect that the appellant was a refugee and thus entitled to the allotment. The learned counsel contended that before the High Court no document was appended by the appellant show mg therein that the land belonging to his father in the Occupied Kashmir devolved on the appellant. According to the learned counsel for respondent it is for the first time that the appellant appended a photostat copy of mutation in this Court which is inadmissible in evidence and cannot be WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y relied upon. The learned counsel for respondent contended that in the writ petition filed by the appellant in the High Court his prayer m the relief para, was that after setting aside the order of Custodian dated 14-11-1996, the order for allotment of the land in question be passed in his

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2326?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2326 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-11-19): upon. The learned counsel for respondent contended that in the writ petition filed by the appellant in the High Court his prayer m the relief para, was that after setting aside the order of Custodian dated 14-11-1996, the order for allotment of the land in question be passed in his favor but during the course of arguments for the first time he raised a submission that the land in question stood allotted to him vide order of the A.R.C. dated 4- 12-1994. The learned counsel maintained that the appellant for the first time during the arguments raised a new point which was neither urged nor argued before the High Court and nor the same was raised in the memorandum of appeal before this Court or in the concise statement, as such he could not take a totally inconsistent and different stand. 5. After hearing the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record made available, it may be stated that the appellant's case throughout had been that initially the land in question was allotted to him but the same was cancelled vide the order of Multiple Judge dated 11-10-1973. The appellant submitted a review petition on 24-2-1983, against the aforesaid order of Multiple Judge which was dismissed on 14-11-1983. In the beginning the appellant had been trying to get the land allotted in his name as a local destitute. However, in 1983, for the first time he moved the Custodian by submitting that he was entitled for the allotment as a refugee. The case was made over to Additional Custodian who observed that the appellant being refugee was entitled for the allotment. However, this order was set aside by the Custodian on the ground that only Rehabilitation Authorities could decide the matter of entitlement of appellant for the allotment of the land in dispute and the Additional Custodian and the Custodian were not vested with any jurisdiction to issue a declaration that the appellant was a refugee and thus was entitled to any allotment. This order of the Custodian was assailed by filing a WNT petition in the High Court and the appellant along with his writ petition never appended any document on the basis of which the land left by his father devolved on him. It was for the first time in this Court that photostat copy of mutation sanctioned in favor of appellant was appended. This Court TS not obliged to look into those documents which were not placed on record before the High Court. Even otherwise the photostat copy being inadmissible in evidence cannot be relied upon. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y AB 6. We have also noticed that the appellant for the first time has raised a plea that the land in question stood allotted to him vide the order of A.R.C. dated 4-12-1994, and the same was not cancelled so far by any competent authority. It was urged that in presence of this allotment the allotment in favor of Muhammad Islam Khan

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2326?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2326 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-11-19): time has raised a plea that the land in question stood allotted to him vide the order of A.R.C. dated 4-12-1994, and the same was not cancelled so far by any competent authority. It was urged that in presence of this allotment the allotment in favor of Muhammad Islam Khan and another on 14-7- 1998, was void. We are afraid that we cannot subscribe to the view of the learned counsel for the appellant as this point is a totally inconsistent and alien to the original stand taken by the appellant in his writ petition. No record whatsoever with regard to allotment made by A.R.C. in favor of appellant was placed on record either m the High Court or in this Court. Even the plea was not raised in the memorandum of appeal or m the concise statement. Therefore, this plea being inconsistent to the original plea raised by the appellant cannot be allowed to be raised during the arguments in this Court. Thus the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant stands repelled. 7. It is percent to note that the allotment made in favor of respondents on 14-7-1998, of the land in question was not challenged before any competent forum. Therefore the plea which is alien to the pleadings of the parties cannot be allowed to be raised at this stage. 8. The nutshell of the above discussion is that the appeal, having no merits in it, stands dismissed with costs. H.B.T./34/SC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed. WWW LR/html_TXT/Y 414

Question: What is case 2000 YLR 2367 about?
Answer: Case 2000 YLR 2367 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2000-06-15. The case involved MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM (APPELLANT) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTSMUHAMMAD AKRAM KHAN AND OTHERS APPELLANTSVERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 18-B PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS.L8-B AND 43(6) PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/Y LR’/html_txt/Y LR_2000_2367.html 1/14 28/10/2025, 01:58 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/Y LR/html_txt/Y LR_2000_2367.html PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. AND 18B AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: In case 2000 YLR 2367, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) -S. 18-B PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS.L8-B AND 43(6) PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/Y LR’/html_txt/Y LR_2000_2367.html 1/14 28/10/2025, 01:58 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/Y LR/html_txt/Y LR_2000_2367.html PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. AND 18B AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - S. 42. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2000-06-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 YLR 2367 were: ABDUL HAMID KHAN V. GHULAM AHMAD KHAN 1999 YLR 2440 REF.SHAIKH ABDUL AZIZ, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANT (IN CIVIL APPEAL NO. 147 OF 1999).. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 YLR 2367 were: MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM (APPELLANT) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTSMUHAMMAD AKRAM KHAN AND OTHERS APPELLANTSVERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 YLR 2367.
Answer: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH, J.-The above-noted two appeals relate to the same property. There is a fundamental legal question which is common in these appeals, and a factual post is also interconnected. Therefore, these two appeals are being decided by this single judgment. 2. Facts common to both the appeals are that Allah Dicta was owner of the land in dispute situated in village Tram, Thesis Rawalakot, but it was in occupation of occupancy-tenants who were non-Muslims. Allah Dicta initially put up a case that the occupancy-tenants surrendered their tenancy in 1946 AD and handed over possession to him. The other view, which has so far prevailed, is that the occupancy tenants actually left Azad Jammu and Kashmir due to war of liberation, and thus they became evacuees and resultantly the land in dispute became evacuee property. Treating it as evacuee property the land in dispute was allotted separately to Muhammad Afar Khan, respondent in both the appeals, and to Gulag Din who has passed away meanwhile and is now represented by his heirs MST. Razia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar who are respondents in C.A. No. 148 of 1999. The original owner, Allah Dicta, is also no more and his legal representatives are Muhammad Abram and others. They are respondents in both the appeals. In due course of time MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar obtained proprietary rights and sold part of the land to Muhammad Ashraf Khan, a respondent in C.A. No. 148 of 1999. Muhammad Afar Khan has also obtained proprietary rights. 3. Facts of Civil Appeal No. 147 of 1999 are that appellant Muhammad Ibrahim filed an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property on 6th March, 1996 in which he prayed that allotment of evacuee land measuring 57 Canals 16 Marla's out of the land in dispute may be cancelled from the name of Muhammad Afar, respondent No.3, and it may be allotted to him (Muhammad Ibrahim) as a refugee. The application was moved under section 12 of the Rehabilitation Act, section 18-B read with section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim is a refugee from occupied Pooch and resides in Rawalakot. He stated that Muhammad At'Sal Khan is WW. LR/html_TXT/Y 2114 LR/html_TXT/Y a local and, according to the official record, a report by Tonsilar Custodian, he was owner of 77 Canals of private land. It was stated that land belonging to Muhammad Afar Khan was in the Army use for which rent was being paid to him, He further stated that Muhammad Afar also owned some more land. It was stated MN the application that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was illegal because only refugees, dependents of Shaheed's, local destitute and disabled persons were entitled to get allotment of evacuee land. It was stated that Muhammad Agar Khan did not fall in any of these categories. It was also averred that Muhammad Afar Khan was a senior teacher in the Education Department and retired from service on IST December, 1980 from which TT was Clear that he had reasonable income. During arguments before the Custodian it was argued that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was violative of Council Order No. It was argued that the Custodian enjoyed wide powers which may be exercised for cancelling the allotment and the Provisional Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the said respondent. Cases reported as Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government and another v. Hakim Bashir Ahmad and others (1992 SCR 81) and Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another (1996 CLC 254) were cited before the Custodian. It was further prayed that the respondent may be ordered to pay rent for the period from 1965 to 1996 for use of the evacuee land. 4. The application was dismissed by the learned Custodian. It was held that Muhammad Ibrahim was neither in occupation of the disputed land nor was he its allottee, therefore, he could not be termed as an aggrieved person and thus could not file the petition. The Custodian also dealt with the question relating to Muhammad Afghan Khan's entitlement as local destitute and held that objection was previously raised and was rejected by the Custodian who had held that he was a destitute. The details of the order were however not mentioned. It was then observed that in another file, bearing No. 16, the learned Custodian had reaffirmed that Muhammad Afar Khan was a destitute. The learned Custodian therefore, held that this matter now could not be reconsidered once again. The learned Custodian also mentioned that Muhammad Abram and others had also taken the case to the High Court in which they had challenged the claim of Muhammad Afar Khan that he was a local destitute, but this objection had been rejected. It was observed that the matter could not re-examine due to the decision of the High Court in Muhammad Abram's case. It was observed by the learned Custodian that Muhammad Afar had been forcibly WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y dispossessed from his land so that it could be utilized for Army purposes. At the same time the learned Custodian observed that no person could be allotted land on the basis that his own land was in use of the Army and rehabilitation authorities should not continue with this practice and allotment must be made mm accordance with the Rehabilitation Act. It was further observed that there was no other manner in which evacuee land could be allotted to anyone. However the learned Custodian thought that it was not proper to cancel the allotment of Muhammad Afar Khan because in that case he would suffer irreparable loss. It was observed that upsetting status quo after such a long time would not advance the ends for which rehabilitation laws were made. In the ultimate analysis the learned Custodian recorded a statement of Muhammad Afar Khan that he would deposit the money which he had received as rent/compensation from the Army authorities and in return allowed him to retain possession of the allotted land. Muhammad Afar Khan also stated in the statement that he preferred the allotted land. It will be useful to reproduce the operative portion: "Since evacuee land could not be legally allotted to the respondent and allotment was made in peculiar circumstances. Thus respondent is unable to utilize both the lands which fact had been admitted by the respondent in his statement. Therefore, all the amount which the respondent has received as compensation from the military shall be deposited by him in the Custodian fund within two months. Manager Custodian shall receive the rent/compensation under reference and shall deposit it i the Custodian fund and in future also the compensation to be received would be regularly deposited with the Manager Custodian. In case the respondent fails to do so Manager will have the right to move for cancellation of evacuee land measuring 57 Canals, 16 Marla's which stands allotted to the respondent. In these circumstances the review petition is dismissed. If any stay order has been issued TT shall stand cancelled." 5. Muhammad Ibrahim filed a writ petition to challenge the order passed by the Custodian which has been dismissed. We will advert to the contents of the High Court judgment a little later. He was granted leave to appeal by this Court. 6. The learned counsel for respondent Muhammad Afar Khan, Mr.M. Tabasco Aftab Alvin, has raised a preliminary objection that Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner, Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner and Rehabilitation Commissioner were necessary parties but were not arrayed as respondents in the writ petition. It was contended that these rehabilitation authorities had allotted the land to the respondent and orders passed by them LR/html_TXT/Y 4114 LR/html_TXT/Y could not be cancelled by the High Court unless they were arrayed as respondents in the writ petition. Mr.M. Tabassum Aftab Alvin cited Mira Lai Hussain v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others 1992 SCR 214 and Abdul Hamid Khan v. Muhammad Career Khan and others 1990 MLD 1617 in support of his contention. 7. We do not find any force in this objection. Section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 confers wide powers on the Custodian which are free from technicalities. Prior to the section of section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act the scheme OL rehabilitation laws was that normally the allotment of evacuee property was made by the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner and an appeal was maintainable before the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. A further remedy was also available before the Rehabilitation Commissioner. Finally Custodian of Evacuee Property could hear revisions against allotment and cancellation of allotment etc. In the scheme of things as it existed at that time, an order of allotment would become final if it was not challenged before the higher forum within the prescribed time. However when it was decided to grant proprietary rights to the allottees and provision for it was made by inserting section 18-A in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, section 18-B was also enacted to give powers to the Custodian of Evacuee Property to cancel any allotment of evacuee property for the reason, inter alia, that it had been made in violation of law and without jurisdiction. This power was exercisable without any limit of time. It was also not necessary that an application be moved for getting an allotment cancelled, and thus the Custodian was given so moth powers. Relevant portion of section 18-B is as follows: "1 8-B.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law, for the time being in force, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers which already vest in him, the Custodian may cancel any allotment of evacuee property in the following cases:- (a) Where an allottee has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of allotment within the meaning of section 18 of the Act; (b) where an allottee has, to the satisfaction of the Custodian, voluntarily surrendered or abandoned the allotment; (c) where the allotment has been made I'm violation of law or is without jurisdiction; (d) where the evacuee property stands allotted to more than one person, and it is necessary to determine the entitlement to allotment; (e) where an allotment is MN excess of the prescribed scale, and it is necessary to bring the allotment within scale in order to confer proprietary rights in accordance with law, LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y upon such allottee. The Custodian shall exercise the powers of Multiple Judge under the Multiple Allotment Act, 1961, MN cases processed or being processed for the grant of proprietary rights." 8. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim moved the application before the Custodian under the provision of law reproduced above. Since power was exercisable so moth no technicalities were involved. It was not necessary to plead the rehabilitation authorities who had made or confirmed the order of allotment in favor of the respondent. Muhammad Ibrahim through his application laid information before the learned Custodian, and it was for the Custodian to examine the legality of the allotment order in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. The only requirement was that notice had to be issued to the allottees before passing any final order. The learned Custodian entertained the case, summoned respondent Muhammad Afar Khan and decided it in the manner which has been described above. When the appellant filed a writ petition he challenged the order of the Custodian and no other order. He duly imp leaded the Custodian as a respondent and there was no requirement beyond it because the order passed by the Custodian was in original jurisdiction and not in revisional jurisdiction, therefore, the rehabilitation authorities were not necessary parties in the writ petition. 9. Now we come to the merits of the case. From the portion of the judgment reproduced above it is clear that the learned Custodian himself was of the view that the allotment in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan was not legal, but he did not cancel the allotment on the ground that it was not proper to disturb status quo after such a long time. This is clearly unlawful. Section 18-B reproduced above reopened allotments which were made as far back as forty years, and it was clearly the intention of law that illegal allotments may be cancelled even though those had become final. Therefore, the learned Custodian had no authority to say that status quo may not be disturbed only because long time had elapsed. We fail to understand as to how m presence of section 18-B a purely illegal allotment could vest any right in the respondent so that the illegality may be perpetuated. The learned Custodian also failed to appreciate that the so-called status quo was entirely favorable to the respondent because he was enjoying the fruits of the evacuee land and also was getting compensation from the Army Authorities for his own land which means that he was getting double benefit. Admittedly the respondent was not covered by Government Order No. issued under section 7 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, as in force in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, which WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y lays down that locals who are dependents of "Shaheed's", disabled persons and destitute could be granted allotment of evacuee land MN addition to the refugees from Occupied Kashmir. The learned Custodian also observed that Muhammad Abram's case was still pending in the High Court and that it was not appropriate to decide whether Muhammad Assai’ Khan was a local destitute or not. We fail to appreciate as to how the case pending in the High Court was relevant. The question before the Custodian was whether the allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan had been made in violation of law or was without jurisdiction. Any other decision was not relevant because the finality attached to orders passed in appeal or revision by the Rehabilitation Authorities or the Custodian prior to enactment of section 18-B were taken away by the aforesaid section. It was an overriding provision and was meant to give special powers irrespective of limitation, res judicata etc. The learned Custodian then passed the order, reproduced above, that compensation paid by the Army Authorities will be deposited in the Custodian fund and the allotment shall continue. The learned Custodian failed to appreciate that the order which he passed was also not covered by any provision of law and, apart from being novel in nature, was void ab initio. 10. Thus the order passed by the learned Custodian should have been set aside by the High Court. The High Court brushed aside the matter by saying that there was no distinction between a refugee and a local and if a local was disturbed by the State or due to natural calamity he can be settled on evacuee property. The learned Judge m the High Court has not quoted the provision of law on which the view taken by him is based. We are not aware of any other legal instruments except Council Order No. which enables a Rehabilitation Authority to allot evacuee land to a local. We are only cognizant of Government Order No. which deals with locals so far as allotment of evacuee land is concerned, but it does not make any provision that evacuee property may be allotted to persons who may be disturbed by the State or by natural calamity. A 11. The High Court has mentioned that the case filed against allottee Muhammad Afar by Muhammad Abram, appellant herein, had already been dismissed by the Supreme Court. The High Court file contains certified copy of an order by which two writ petitions titled Muhammad Abram v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995 were dismissed in imine on 14th November 1995. In that order there is no verdict about the legality of allotment in favor of WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. Facts relating to that case need to be noticed. Allah Dicta, the original owner, moved review petitions before Custodian of Evacuee Property praying that the allotments in favor of Muhammad Afar and Gulag Dm and the subsequent Proprietary Rights Transfer Orders may be cancelled, but this application was rejected. Order passed by the Custodian was challenged before the High Court by filing writ petitions being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995. Both the writ petitions were dismissed in liming. In one wait petition Muhammad Afar was a respondent while in the other writ legal representatives of Gulag Din, Muhammad Abram and others, were amongst the respondents. The High Court took the view that MN light of section 22 of the Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 and sections 8 and 10 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, all rights, including occupancy rights, which vested in the non-Muslims had become vested in the Custodian. The High Court, therefore, took the view that allotment and proprietary rights were valid acts. This Court set aside the order of the High Court by holding that occupancy rights of evacuees vested in the Custodian, but law did not provide that where evacuees were occupancy-tenants the ownership rights of Muslim landowners would be extinguished. We noted that documents attached with the writ petition showed that heirs of Allah Dicta were still entered in ownership column, in light of this fact it was observed as follows: 'The question therefore arises whether the heirs of Allah Dicta have ceased to be owners of the land. If the answer is in negative then how property rights have been granted to the respondents. This controversy has not been resolved by the High Court." We, therefore, remanded the case to the High Court after setting aside the High Court order dated 14th November. 1995. The judgment of this Court was rendered on 7th July, 1996. 12. In the judgment under appeal the High Court has referred to the judgment of the High Court dated 14th November, 1995 but, as mentioned above, it was set aside on 7th July, 1996 by this Court and the case was remanded. On remand the High Court has decided the case afresh vide judgment of a Division Bench rendered on 31st May, 1999. The High Court has held that heirs of Allah Dicta continue to be the owners of the land but Muhammad Afar Khan will be treated as occupancy-tenant. This judgment was subject-matter of appeal NM Civil Appeal No. 148 of 1999 titled Muhammad Abram and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property which is being disposed of by this judgment. The judgment of the High Court is attached as Annexure "B" in the said file. Its perusal shows that, apart from points mentioned above, the High Court did not deal with the merits of the case as to WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y whether the allotments in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din were valid or not. Thus we reached the conclusion that the question of legality of allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar was not determined in the earlier round of litigation. Thus this reason recorded by the High Court is also not sustainable. 13. Even otherwise we do not think that the application moved by Muhammad Ibrahim before the Custodian of Evacuee Property for cancellation of allotment was in any way barred because another application was pending or had been disposed of. As already seen the Custodian of Evacuee Property has wide so moth powers which are exercisable at any time to set aside an illegal order of allotment. The Custodian also enjoys wide powers under section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 under which he can review earlier decisions to grant proprietary rights if he reaches the conclusion that TT was based on an illegal allotment order. If any authority is needed we may refer to Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another 1996 CLC 254. Therefore, it is clear that the learned Custodian failed to give effect to the clear legal provisions by not cancelling Muhammad Afar Khan's allotment after having himself reaching the conclusion that it was illegal. Similarly the High Court also fell in error in' upholding the order passed by the learned Custodian. 14.° Therefore, we accept the appeal filed by Muhammad Ibrahim C.A. No. 147 of 1999 and set aside the judgment of the High Court. For the same reasons writ petition filed by the appellant herein is accepted, and the order passed by the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property on IST August, 1997 is declared to have been passed without lawful authority and of no legal effect. A direction is issued to the learned Custodian to pass an order of cancellation of allotment made in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and also to cancel the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in his favor. B 15. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim himself is not entitled to any relief in respect of allotment of disputed land in his favor because powers of allotment are vested in the Rehabilitation Authorities who will consider his application for allotment in light of the relevant laws. However the/ will treat the. case of Muhammad Ibrahim on priority basis in view of his long struggle which is evident from the record. 16. Now we take up Civil Appeal No. 148 of 1999 titled Muhammad Abram and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others. The present round of litigation was mitigated by WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Muhammad Abram, the original owner's son, on 22nd July, 1990 when he filed an application under section 18-B read with section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 praying for cancellation of allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in the name of Muhammad Afar Khan. It was stated in the application that initially Allah Dicta and after his death his heirs were owners for the land in dispute, and it could not be legally allotted to respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. It was also stated that in any case the proprietary rights could not be granted to him. It was further stated that Muhammad Afar Khan was a local who owned more than 52 Canals of And which was under the use of Army and Muhammad Afar Khan was getting rent for it. It was stated that land could only be allotted to local if his case is covered by Council Order, but Muhammad Afar's case did not fall under the said Order. The report of Enforcement Staff against Muhammad Afar was attached with the petition. The petition was dismissed by the learned Custodian, but its date is not available from the present record, although an undated certified copy forms part of the paper books as Annexure J. The learned Custodian referred to the earlier decisions of the Additional Custodian and the Civil Court to repel the contention that non-Muslim occupancy-tenants had abandoned the land in their possession before the war of liberation. The learned Custodian also referred to some documents filed by Muhammad Abram and also give a separate finding that there was no proof in support of the allegation that the occupancy tenants had abandoned their tenancy by handing over the possession to the landowner. It was further held that the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued m favor of MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar, the legal representatives of allottee Gulag Din, conferred only those rights which vested in the non-Muslim occupancy-tenants and that the allottees would retain possession of the land in dispute as occupancy-tenants as was the case of the non-Muslim occupancy-tenants. The learned Custodian also rejected the plea that Muhammad Afar Khan was not entitled to allotment of evacuee land because he was not covered by Government Order. It was pointed out that the Custodian of Evacuee Property had held in his order passed on ATH April, 1979 that Muhammad Afar Khan was a local destitute. After dismissal of his petition, Muhammad Abram filed two writ petitions in the High Court on 3rd November, 1994 bearing No. 12 of 1994. Other heirs of Allah Dicta were subsequently added on 3 1st July, 1997. 17. Muhammad Abram also filed a similar application against the other allottee Gulag Din. It was moved on 22nd July, 1990 before the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y praying that the portion of the land in the ownership of Allah Dicta which had been allotted to Gulag Din may also be cancelled and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order may also be recalled. At that time Gulag Din had died and MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar, his legal representatives, as well as subsequent transferee, Muhammad Ashraf Khan, were imp leaded as respondents. This application was rejected on 29th March, 1995. The learned Custodian held that the land in dispute had been declared evacuee which matter could not be reopened. It was argued before the learned Custodian that when land was allotted to Gulag Din he was not in its possession, and it was also pleaded that the allotment in his favor did not in fact exist because it had been maneuvered through forgery. These pleas were rejected. The order of the learned Custodian was also challenged by filing a writ petition bearing No. 12 of 1995 on 4th June, 1995. 18. Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995 were dismissed in line by a single order on 14th November, 1995. Muhammad Abram and others brought appeal to this Court which was accepted on 7th July, 1996 and the case was remanded to the High Court. It will be useful to reproduce the relevant portion of the judgment:- "After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we have reached the conclusion that the High Court was not right in dismissing the writ petition in line. A perusal of the three provisions of law relied upon the High Court shows that occupancy rights of evacuees have been vested in the Custodian, but it is not provided in these provisions that evacuees were occupancy tenants (tie ownership rights of the Muslim landowners would be extinguished. The documents attached with the wrt show that name of Allah Dicta is still entered in ownership column. The question therefore, arises whether the heirs of Allah Dicta have ceased to be owners of the land. If the answer is in negative then how proprietary rights have been granted to the respondents. This controversy has not been resolved by the High Court it may be noticed that occupancy tenants were declared entitled to get ownership rights of property held by them after fulfilling certain requirements which were prescribed under the Land Reform Act. To resolve the controversy mentioned above provisions of Land Reform Act have also to be examined." 19. Both the writ petitions have been disposed of by a single judgment. There are two aspects of both the cases which have been decided. First it has been decided that land MN dispute is evacuee property and this question had already been decided in the previous round of litigation. However, it was clarified that the land was evacuee only to the extent of the interest which was held by the occupancy WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y tenants who had now become evacuees. Consequently, it was held that the allottees will be treated as occupancy tenants while heirs of Allah Dicta shall continue to be owners of the land. The petitions were accepted to that extent. The second aspect of the case related to the validity of the allotment orders MN favor of the allottees. The High Court has upheld the allotments of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din. 20. Muhammad Abram and others have filed the present appeal with leave of the-Court to challenge the consolidated judgment of the High Court. They have prayed that they are the owners of the land allotted to Gulag Din and Muhammad Afar Khan and are entitled to its possession in the capacity as rightful owners. They have prayed that direction may be given that they may be put in possession. They have also prayed that the loss occurred to the appellants due to dispossession as well as the cost of litigation may be compensated. They have also challenged the allotment orders in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din. About Gulag Din it is stated that "a gypsy was not entitled to allotment of land of which the status was yet to be determined". About Muhammad Afar Khan they have raised the same ports which have been mentioned above, 1e. that he is a local not covered by Council Order No. as he is owner of landed property and also because he had other source of income as a teacher. 21. We have heard Vardar Muhammad Kiddie Khan in support of this appeal. The respondents were represented by Raja Muhammad Han if Khan, Mr.M. Tabassum Aftab Alvin and Mr. Faroog Hussain Kas hmm Advocates. v- 22. We first advert to the status of the land in dispute. As has been repeatedly mentioned Allah Dicta Khan was owner of the land in dispute, and it was in occupation of non-Muslims as occupancy-tenants. On the factual side the appellants have been trying to prove during approximately for five decades that the occupancy tenants did not become evacuees, but they had already abandoned their tenancy by handing back the possession of Allah Dicta. This claim has been rejected a number of times by different Courts and Tribunals. This claim was reiterated before the learned Custodian in the present round, but this plea has been rejected once again. This question is purely factual in nature. The finding that the non-Muslims were in occupation as occupancy-tenants till the war of liberation is a finding of fact which, being recorded by a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, is sacrosanct. There 1s WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y nothing on the record to disprove this finding. In fact overwhelming evidence is available on the record which leads to the conclusion that the finding of fact recorded by the learned Custodian is unassailable. 23. Legal aspect of the stand concluded by judgment of this Court in Civil Appeal No. Ill of 1998 reported as Abdul Hamid Khan v. Ghulam Ahmad Khan 1999 YLR 2440 it was decided on 30th June, 1999 a few days after the judgment under appeal. It was a case in which the owners of the land were Muslims while occupancy tenants were evacuees. The following points have been decided in the said judgment:- (a) Since occupancy tenants had interest m the property falling under this category, it is evacuee property but to the extent of merest of the evacuees; (b) Muslim Owners continue as owners of the land falling in this category, and they shall continue to be so as long as the present laws are in operation; (c) Land falling in this category can be allotted under the Rehabilitation Law; and (d) Allottee of such land shall be entitled to keep possession of the land and would not be entitled to obtain proprietary rights. 24. The learned counsel for the parties have not been able to show that the view taken in the above-noted case needs to be reviewed. We, therefore, reiterate the views stated therein. The principles laid down therein would be applicable to the present case also. D 25. While dealing with Civil Appeal No. 147 of 1999 titled Muhammad Ibrahim v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others we have taken the view that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was illegal, and we have directed the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property to cancel the allotment as well as the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan. Therefore, we need not record separate findings about the legality of the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order MN favor of Muhammad Afar Khan. 26. So far as the allotment of Gulag Din is concerned nothing substantial has been shown to create any doubt in the validity of the aforesaid allotment. Therefore, the allotment in favor of Gulag Din shall stand intact, subject to the succeeding observations. 27. In light of Abdul Hamid's case the allotment in favor of Gulag Din shall only be to the extent of possession and would not form the basis of proprietary rights. Allah Dicta's successors-in- interest, Muhammad Abram and others, would continue to be the owners of WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the land in dispute as long as the present laws are operative. Therefore, the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued to MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar are cancelled from the date of issue. Consequently, the transfer made in favor of Muhammad Ashraf Khan shall become inoperative. He will however remain in possession on behalf of MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar as long as the present laws are in operation. H.B.T./84/SC(AJ&K) Order accordingly. LR’/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH, J.-The above-noted two appeals relate to the same property. There is a fundamental legal question which is common in these appeals, and a factual post is also interconnected. Therefore, these two appeals are being decided by this single judgment. 2. Facts common to both the appeals are that Allah Dicta was owner of the land in dispute situated in village Tram, Thesis Rawalakot, but it was in occupation of occupancy-tenants who were non-Muslims. Allah Dicta initially put up a case that the occupancy-tenants surrendered their tenancy in 1946 AD and handed over possession to him. The other view, which has so far prevailed, is that the occupancy tenants actually left Azad Jammu and Kashmir due to war of liberation, and thus they became evacuees and resultantly the land in dispute became evacuee property. Treating it as evacuee property the land in dispute was allotted separately to Muhammad Afar Khan, respondent in both the appeals, and to Gulag Din who has passed away meanwhile and is now represented by his heirs MST. Razia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar who are respondents in C.A. No. 148 of 1999. The original owner, Allah Dicta, is also no more and his legal representatives are Muhammad Abram and others. They are respondents in both the appeals. In due course of time MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar obtained proprietary rights and sold part of the land to Muhammad Ashraf Khan, a respondent in C.A. No. 148 of 1999. Muhammad Afar Khan has also obtained proprietary rights. 3. Facts of Civil Appeal No. 147 of 1999 are that appellant Muhammad Ibrahim filed an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property on 6th March, 1996 in which he prayed that allotment of evacuee land measuring 57 Canals 16 Marla's out of the land in dispute may be cancelled from the name of Muhammad Afar, respondent No.3, and it may be allotted to him (Muhammad Ibrahim) as a refugee. The application was moved under section 12 of the Rehabilitation Act, section 18-B read with section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim is a refugee from occupied Pooch and resides in Rawalakot. He stated that Muhammad At'Sal Khan is WW. LR/html_TXT/Y 2114 LR/html_TXT/Y a local and, according to the official record, a report by Tonsilar Custodian, he was owner of 77 Canals of private land. It was stated that land belonging to Muhammad Afar Khan was in the Army use for which rent was being paid to him, He further stated that Muhammad Afar also owned some more land. It was stated MN the application that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was illegal because only refugees, dependents of Shaheed's, local destitute and disabled persons were entitled to get allotment of evacuee land. It was stated that Muhammad Agar Khan did not fall in any of these categories. It was also averred that Muhammad Afar Khan was a senior teacher in the Education Department and retired from service

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): of Shaheed's, local destitute and disabled persons were entitled to get allotment of evacuee land. It was stated that Muhammad Agar Khan did not fall in any of these categories. It was also averred that Muhammad Afar Khan was a senior teacher in the Education Department and retired from service on IST December, 1980 from which TT was Clear that he had reasonable income. During arguments before the Custodian it was argued that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was violative of Council Order No. It was argued that the Custodian enjoyed wide powers which may be exercised for cancelling the allotment and the Provisional Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the said respondent. Cases reported as Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government and another v. Hakim Bashir Ahmad and others (1992 SCR 81) and Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another (1996 CLC 254) were cited before the Custodian. It was further prayed that the respondent may be ordered to pay rent for the period from 1965 to 1996 for use of the evacuee land. 4. The application was dismissed by the learned Custodian. It was held that Muhammad Ibrahim was neither in occupation of the disputed land nor was he its allottee, therefore, he could not be termed as an aggrieved person and thus could not file the petition. The Custodian also dealt with the question relating to Muhammad Afghan Khan's entitlement as local destitute and held that objection was previously raised and was rejected by the Custodian who had held that he was a destitute. The details of the order were however not mentioned. It was then observed that in another file, bearing No. 16, the learned Custodian had reaffirmed that Muhammad Afar Khan was a destitute. The learned Custodian therefore, held that this matter now could not be reconsidered once again. The learned Custodian also mentioned that Muhammad Abram and others had also taken the case to the High Court in which they had challenged the claim of Muhammad Afar Khan that he was a local destitute, but this objection had been rejected. It was observed that the matter could not re-examine due to the decision of the High Court in Muhammad Abram's case. It was observed by the learned Custodian that Muhammad Afar had been forcibly WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y dispossessed from his land so that it could be utilized for Army purposes. At the same time the learned Custodian observed that no person could be allotted land on the basis that his own land was in use of the Army and rehabilitation authorities should not continue with this practice and allotment must be made mm accordance with the Rehabilitation Act. It was further observed that there was no other manner in which evacuee land could be allotted to anyone. However the learned Custodian thought that it was not proper to cancel the allotment of Muhammad Afar Khan because in that case he would suffer irreparable loss. It was observed that upsetting status quo

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): observed that there was no other manner in which evacuee land could be allotted to anyone. However the learned Custodian thought that it was not proper to cancel the allotment of Muhammad Afar Khan because in that case he would suffer irreparable loss. It was observed that upsetting status quo after such a long time would not advance the ends for which rehabilitation laws were made. In the ultimate analysis the learned Custodian recorded a statement of Muhammad Afar Khan that he would deposit the money which he had received as rent/compensation from the Army authorities and in return allowed him to retain possession of the allotted land. Muhammad Afar Khan also stated in the statement that he preferred the allotted land. It will be useful to reproduce the operative portion: "Since evacuee land could not be legally allotted to the respondent and allotment was made in peculiar circumstances. Thus respondent is unable to utilize both the lands which fact had been admitted by the respondent in his statement. Therefore, all the amount which the respondent has received as compensation from the military shall be deposited by him in the Custodian fund within two months. Manager Custodian shall receive the rent/compensation under reference and shall deposit it i the Custodian fund and in future also the compensation to be received would be regularly deposited with the Manager Custodian. In case the respondent fails to do so Manager will have the right to move for cancellation of evacuee land measuring 57 Canals, 16 Marla's which stands allotted to the respondent. In these circumstances the review petition is dismissed. If any stay order has been issued TT shall stand cancelled." 5. Muhammad Ibrahim filed a writ petition to challenge the order passed by the Custodian which has been dismissed. We will advert to the contents of the High Court judgment a little later. He was granted leave to appeal by this Court. 6. The learned counsel for respondent Muhammad Afar Khan, Mr.M. Tabasco Aftab Alvin, has raised a preliminary objection that Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner, Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner and Rehabilitation Commissioner were necessary parties but were not arrayed as respondents in the writ petition. It was contended that these rehabilitation authorities had allotted the land to the respondent and orders passed by them LR/html_TXT/Y 4114 LR/html_TXT/Y could not be cancelled by the High Court unless they were arrayed as respondents in the writ petition. Mr.M. Tabassum Aftab Alvin cited Mira Lai Hussain v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others 1992 SCR 214 and Abdul Hamid Khan v. Muhammad Career Khan and others 1990 MLD 1617 in support of his contention. 7. We do not find any force in this objection. Section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 confers wide powers on the Custodian which are free from technicalities. Prior to the section of section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act the scheme OL rehabilitation laws was that normally the allotment of evacuee property was made by the Assistant

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 confers wide powers on the Custodian which are free from technicalities. Prior to the section of section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act the scheme OL rehabilitation laws was that normally the allotment of evacuee property was made by the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner and an appeal was maintainable before the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. A further remedy was also available before the Rehabilitation Commissioner. Finally Custodian of Evacuee Property could hear revisions against allotment and cancellation of allotment etc. In the scheme of things as it existed at that time, an order of allotment would become final if it was not challenged before the higher forum within the prescribed time. However when it was decided to grant proprietary rights to the allottees and provision for it was made by inserting section 18-A in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, section 18-B was also enacted to give powers to the Custodian of Evacuee Property to cancel any allotment of evacuee property for the reason, inter alia, that it had been made in violation of law and without jurisdiction. This power was exercisable without any limit of time. It was also not necessary that an application be moved for getting an allotment cancelled, and thus the Custodian was given so moth powers. Relevant portion of section 18-B is as follows: "1 8-B.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law, for the time being in force, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers which already vest in him, the Custodian may cancel any allotment of evacuee property in the following cases:- (a) Where an allottee has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of allotment within the meaning of section 18 of the Act; (b) where an allottee has, to the satisfaction of the Custodian, voluntarily surrendered or abandoned the allotment; (c) where the allotment has been made I'm violation of law or is without jurisdiction; (d) where the evacuee property stands allotted to more than one person, and it is necessary to determine the entitlement to allotment; (e) where an allotment is MN excess of the prescribed scale, and it is necessary to bring the allotment within scale in order to confer proprietary rights in accordance with law, LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y upon such allottee. The Custodian shall exercise the powers of Multiple Judge under the Multiple Allotment Act, 1961, MN cases processed or being processed for the grant of proprietary rights." 8. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim moved the application before the Custodian under the provision of law reproduced above. Since power was exercisable so moth no technicalities were involved. It was not necessary to plead the rehabilitation authorities who had made or confirmed the order of allotment in favor of the respondent. Muhammad Ibrahim through his application laid information before the learned Custodian, and it was for the Custodian to examine the legality of the allotment order in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. The only requirement was that notice had

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): or confirmed the order of allotment in favor of the respondent. Muhammad Ibrahim through his application laid information before the learned Custodian, and it was for the Custodian to examine the legality of the allotment order in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. The only requirement was that notice had to be issued to the allottees before passing any final order. The learned Custodian entertained the case, summoned respondent Muhammad Afar Khan and decided it in the manner which has been described above. When the appellant filed a writ petition he challenged the order of the Custodian and no other order. He duly imp leaded the Custodian as a respondent and there was no requirement beyond it because the order passed by the Custodian was in original jurisdiction and not in revisional jurisdiction, therefore, the rehabilitation authorities were not necessary parties in the writ petition. 9. Now we come to the merits of the case. From the portion of the judgment reproduced above it is clear that the learned Custodian himself was of the view that the allotment in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan was not legal, but he did not cancel the allotment on the ground that it was not proper to disturb status quo after such a long time. This is clearly unlawful. Section 18-B reproduced above reopened allotments which were made as far back as forty years, and it was clearly the intention of law that illegal allotments may be cancelled even though those had become final. Therefore, the learned Custodian had no authority to say that status quo may not be disturbed only because long time had elapsed. We fail to understand as to how m presence of section 18-B a purely illegal allotment could vest any right in the respondent so that the illegality may be perpetuated. The learned Custodian also failed to appreciate that the so-called status quo was entirely favorable to the respondent because he was enjoying the fruits of the evacuee land and also was getting compensation from the Army Authorities for his own land which means that he was getting double benefit. Admittedly the respondent was not covered by Government Order No. issued under section 7 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, as in force in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, which WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y lays down that locals who are dependents of "Shaheed's", disabled persons and destitute could be granted allotment of evacuee land MN addition to the refugees from Occupied Kashmir. The learned Custodian also observed that Muhammad Abram's case was still pending in the High Court and that it was not appropriate to decide whether Muhammad Assai’ Khan was a local destitute or not. We fail to appreciate as to how the case pending in the High Court was relevant. The question before the Custodian was whether the allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan had been made in violation of law or was without jurisdiction. Any other decision was not relevant because the finality attached to orders passed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): to how the case pending in the High Court was relevant. The question before the Custodian was whether the allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan had been made in violation of law or was without jurisdiction. Any other decision was not relevant because the finality attached to orders passed in appeal or revision by the Rehabilitation Authorities or the Custodian prior to enactment of section 18-B were taken away by the aforesaid section. It was an overriding provision and was meant to give special powers irrespective of limitation, res judicata etc. The learned Custodian then passed the order, reproduced above, that compensation paid by the Army Authorities will be deposited in the Custodian fund and the allotment shall continue. The learned Custodian failed to appreciate that the order which he passed was also not covered by any provision of law and, apart from being novel in nature, was void ab initio. 10. Thus the order passed by the learned Custodian should have been set aside by the High Court. The High Court brushed aside the matter by saying that there was no distinction between a refugee and a local and if a local was disturbed by the State or due to natural calamity he can be settled on evacuee property. The learned Judge m the High Court has not quoted the provision of law on which the view taken by him is based. We are not aware of any other legal instruments except Council Order No. which enables a Rehabilitation Authority to allot evacuee land to a local. We are only cognizant of Government Order No. which deals with locals so far as allotment of evacuee land is concerned, but it does not make any provision that evacuee property may be allotted to persons who may be disturbed by the State or by natural calamity. A 11. The High Court has mentioned that the case filed against allottee Muhammad Afar by Muhammad Abram, appellant herein, had already been dismissed by the Supreme Court. The High Court file contains certified copy of an order by which two writ petitions titled Muhammad Abram v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995 were dismissed in imine on 14th November 1995. In that order there is no verdict about the legality of allotment in favor of WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. Facts relating to that case need to be noticed. Allah Dicta, the original owner, moved review petitions before Custodian of Evacuee Property praying that the allotments in favor of Muhammad Afar and Gulag Dm and the subsequent Proprietary Rights Transfer Orders may be cancelled, but this application was rejected. Order passed by the Custodian was challenged before the High Court by filing writ petitions being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995. Both the writ petitions were dismissed in liming. In one wait petition Muhammad Afar was a respondent while in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): was rejected. Order passed by the Custodian was challenged before the High Court by filing writ petitions being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995. Both the writ petitions were dismissed in liming. In one wait petition Muhammad Afar was a respondent while in the other writ legal representatives of Gulag Din, Muhammad Abram and others, were amongst the respondents. The High Court took the view that MN light of section 22 of the Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 and sections 8 and 10 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, all rights, including occupancy rights, which vested in the non-Muslims had become vested in the Custodian. The High Court, therefore, took the view that allotment and proprietary rights were valid acts. This Court set aside the order of the High Court by holding that occupancy rights of evacuees vested in the Custodian, but law did not provide that where evacuees were occupancy-tenants the ownership rights of Muslim landowners would be extinguished. We noted that documents attached with the writ petition showed that heirs of Allah Dicta were still entered in ownership column, in light of this fact it was observed as follows: 'The question therefore arises whether the heirs of Allah Dicta have ceased to be owners of the land. If the answer is in negative then how property rights have been granted to the respondents. This controversy has not been resolved by the High Court." We, therefore, remanded the case to the High Court after setting aside the High Court order dated 14th November. 1995. The judgment of this Court was rendered on 7th July, 1996. 12. In the judgment under appeal the High Court has referred to the judgment of the High Court dated 14th November, 1995 but, as mentioned above, it was set aside on 7th July, 1996 by this Court and the case was remanded. On remand the High Court has decided the case afresh vide judgment of a Division Bench rendered on 31st May, 1999. The High Court has held that heirs of Allah Dicta continue to be the owners of the land but Muhammad Afar Khan will be treated as occupancy-tenant. This judgment was subject-matter of appeal NM Civil Appeal No. 148 of 1999 titled Muhammad Abram and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property which is being disposed of by this judgment. The judgment of the High Court is attached as Annexure "B" in the said file. Its perusal shows that, apart from points mentioned above, the High Court did not deal with the merits of the case as to WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y whether the allotments in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din were valid or not. Thus we reached the conclusion that the question of legality of allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar was not determined in the earlier round of litigation. Thus this reason recorded by the High Court is also not sustainable. 13. Even otherwise we do not think that the application moved

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): not. Thus we reached the conclusion that the question of legality of allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar was not determined in the earlier round of litigation. Thus this reason recorded by the High Court is also not sustainable. 13. Even otherwise we do not think that the application moved by Muhammad Ibrahim before the Custodian of Evacuee Property for cancellation of allotment was in any way barred because another application was pending or had been disposed of. As already seen the Custodian of Evacuee Property has wide so moth powers which are exercisable at any time to set aside an illegal order of allotment. The Custodian also enjoys wide powers under section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 under which he can review earlier decisions to grant proprietary rights if he reaches the conclusion that TT was based on an illegal allotment order. If any authority is needed we may refer to Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another 1996 CLC 254. Therefore, it is clear that the learned Custodian failed to give effect to the clear legal provisions by not cancelling Muhammad Afar Khan's allotment after having himself reaching the conclusion that it was illegal. Similarly the High Court also fell in error in' upholding the order passed by the learned Custodian. 14.° Therefore, we accept the appeal filed by Muhammad Ibrahim C.A. No. 147 of 1999 and set aside the judgment of the High Court. For the same reasons writ petition filed by the appellant herein is accepted, and the order passed by the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property on IST August, 1997 is declared to have been passed without lawful authority and of no legal effect. A direction is issued to the learned Custodian to pass an order of cancellation of allotment made in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and also to cancel the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in his favor. B 15. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim himself is not entitled to any relief in respect of allotment of disputed land in his favor because powers of allotment are vested in the Rehabilitation Authorities who will consider his application for allotment in light of the relevant laws. However the/ will treat the. case of Muhammad Ibrahim on priority basis in view of his long struggle which is evident from the record. 16. Now we take up Civil Appeal No. 148 of 1999 titled Muhammad Abram and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others. The present round of litigation was mitigated by WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Muhammad Abram, the original owner's son, on 22nd July, 1990 when he filed an application under section 18-B read with section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 praying for cancellation of allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in the name of Muhammad Afar Khan. It was stated in the application that initially Allah Dicta and after his death his heirs were owners for the land in dispute, and it could not be legally

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): Property Act, 1957 praying for cancellation of allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in the name of Muhammad Afar Khan. It was stated in the application that initially Allah Dicta and after his death his heirs were owners for the land in dispute, and it could not be legally allotted to respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. It was also stated that in any case the proprietary rights could not be granted to him. It was further stated that Muhammad Afar Khan was a local who owned more than 52 Canals of And which was under the use of Army and Muhammad Afar Khan was getting rent for it. It was stated that land could only be allotted to local if his case is covered by Council Order, but Muhammad Afar's case did not fall under the said Order. The report of Enforcement Staff against Muhammad Afar was attached with the petition. The petition was dismissed by the learned Custodian, but its date is not available from the present record, although an undated certified copy forms part of the paper books as Annexure J. The learned Custodian referred to the earlier decisions of the Additional Custodian and the Civil Court to repel the contention that non-Muslim occupancy-tenants had abandoned the land in their possession before the war of liberation. The learned Custodian also referred to some documents filed by Muhammad Abram and also give a separate finding that there was no proof in support of the allegation that the occupancy tenants had abandoned their tenancy by handing over the possession to the landowner. It was further held that the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued m favor of MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar, the legal representatives of allottee Gulag Din, conferred only those rights which vested in the non-Muslim occupancy-tenants and that the allottees would retain possession of the land in dispute as occupancy-tenants as was the case of the non-Muslim occupancy-tenants. The learned Custodian also rejected the plea that Muhammad Afar Khan was not entitled to allotment of evacuee land because he was not covered by Government Order. It was pointed out that the Custodian of Evacuee Property had held in his order passed on ATH April, 1979 that Muhammad Afar Khan was a local destitute. After dismissal of his petition, Muhammad Abram filed two writ petitions in the High Court on 3rd November, 1994 bearing No. 12 of 1994. Other heirs of Allah Dicta were subsequently added on 3 1st July, 1997. 17. Muhammad Abram also filed a similar application against the other allottee Gulag Din. It was moved on 22nd July, 1990 before the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y praying that the portion of the land in the ownership of Allah Dicta which had been allotted to Gulag Din may also be cancelled and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order may also be recalled. At that time Gulag Din had died and MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar, his legal representatives, as well as subsequent

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): the land in the ownership of Allah Dicta which had been allotted to Gulag Din may also be cancelled and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order may also be recalled. At that time Gulag Din had died and MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar, his legal representatives, as well as subsequent transferee, Muhammad Ashraf Khan, were imp leaded as respondents. This application was rejected on 29th March, 1995. The learned Custodian held that the land in dispute had been declared evacuee which matter could not be reopened. It was argued before the learned Custodian that when land was allotted to Gulag Din he was not in its possession, and it was also pleaded that the allotment in his favor did not in fact exist because it had been maneuvered through forgery. These pleas were rejected. The order of the learned Custodian was also challenged by filing a writ petition bearing No. 12 of 1995 on 4th June, 1995. 18. Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995 were dismissed in line by a single order on 14th November, 1995. Muhammad Abram and others brought appeal to this Court which was accepted on 7th July, 1996 and the case was remanded to the High Court. It will be useful to reproduce the relevant portion of the judgment:- "After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we have reached the conclusion that the High Court was not right in dismissing the writ petition in line. A perusal of the three provisions of law relied upon the High Court shows that occupancy rights of evacuees have been vested in the Custodian, but it is not provided in these provisions that evacuees were occupancy tenants (tie ownership rights of the Muslim landowners would be extinguished. The documents attached with the wrt show that name of Allah Dicta is still entered in ownership column. The question therefore, arises whether the heirs of Allah Dicta have ceased to be owners of the land. If the answer is in negative then how proprietary rights have been granted to the respondents. This controversy has not been resolved by the High Court it may be noticed that occupancy tenants were declared entitled to get ownership rights of property held by them after fulfilling certain requirements which were prescribed under the Land Reform Act. To resolve the controversy mentioned above provisions of Land Reform Act have also to be examined." 19. Both the writ petitions have been disposed of by a single judgment. There are two aspects of both the cases which have been decided. First it has been decided that land MN dispute is evacuee property and this question had already been decided in the previous round of litigation. However, it was clarified that the land was evacuee only to the extent of the interest which was held by the occupancy WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y tenants who had now become evacuees. Consequently, it was held that the allottees will be treated as occupancy tenants while heirs

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): previous round of litigation. However, it was clarified that the land was evacuee only to the extent of the interest which was held by the occupancy WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y tenants who had now become evacuees. Consequently, it was held that the allottees will be treated as occupancy tenants while heirs of Allah Dicta shall continue to be owners of the land. The petitions were accepted to that extent. The second aspect of the case related to the validity of the allotment orders MN favor of the allottees. The High Court has upheld the allotments of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din. 20. Muhammad Abram and others have filed the present appeal with leave of the-Court to challenge the consolidated judgment of the High Court. They have prayed that they are the owners of the land allotted to Gulag Din and Muhammad Afar Khan and are entitled to its possession in the capacity as rightful owners. They have prayed that direction may be given that they may be put in possession. They have also prayed that the loss occurred to the appellants due to dispossession as well as the cost of litigation may be compensated. They have also challenged the allotment orders in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din. About Gulag Din it is stated that "a gypsy was not entitled to allotment of land of which the status was yet to be determined". About Muhammad Afar Khan they have raised the same ports which have been mentioned above, 1e. that he is a local not covered by Council Order No. as he is owner of landed property and also because he had other source of income as a teacher. 21. We have heard Vardar Muhammad Kiddie Khan in support of this appeal. The respondents were represented by Raja Muhammad Han if Khan, Mr.M. Tabassum Aftab Alvin and Mr. Faroog Hussain Kas hmm Advocates. v- 22. We first advert to the status of the land in dispute. As has been repeatedly mentioned Allah Dicta Khan was owner of the land in dispute, and it was in occupation of non-Muslims as occupancy-tenants. On the factual side the appellants have been trying to prove during approximately for five decades that the occupancy tenants did not become evacuees, but they had already abandoned their tenancy by handing back the possession of Allah Dicta. This claim has been rejected a number of times by different Courts and Tribunals. This claim was reiterated before the learned Custodian in the present round, but this plea has been rejected once again. This question is purely factual in nature. The finding that the non-Muslims were in occupation as occupancy-tenants till the war of liberation is a finding of fact which, being recorded by a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, is sacrosanct. There 1s WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y nothing on the record to disprove this finding. In fact overwhelming evidence is available on the record which leads to the conclusion that the finding of fact recorded by the learned Custodian

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): of fact which, being recorded by a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, is sacrosanct. There 1s WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y nothing on the record to disprove this finding. In fact overwhelming evidence is available on the record which leads to the conclusion that the finding of fact recorded by the learned Custodian is unassailable. 23. Legal aspect of the stand concluded by judgment of this Court in Civil Appeal No. Ill of 1998 reported as Abdul Hamid Khan v. Ghulam Ahmad Khan 1999 YLR 2440 it was decided on 30th June, 1999 a few days after the judgment under appeal. It was a case in which the owners of the land were Muslims while occupancy tenants were evacuees. The following points have been decided in the said judgment:- (a) Since occupancy tenants had interest m the property falling under this category, it is evacuee property but to the extent of merest of the evacuees; (b) Muslim Owners continue as owners of the land falling in this category, and they shall continue to be so as long as the present laws are in operation; (c) Land falling in this category can be allotted under the Rehabilitation Law; and (d) Allottee of such land shall be entitled to keep possession of the land and would not be entitled to obtain proprietary rights. 24. The learned counsel for the parties have not been able to show that the view taken in the above-noted case needs to be reviewed. We, therefore, reiterate the views stated therein. The principles laid down therein would be applicable to the present case also. D 25. While dealing with Civil Appeal No. 147 of 1999 titled Muhammad Ibrahim v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others we have taken the view that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was illegal, and we have directed the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property to cancel the allotment as well as the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan. Therefore, we need not record separate findings about the legality of the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order MN favor of Muhammad Afar Khan. 26. So far as the allotment of Gulag Din is concerned nothing substantial has been shown to create any doubt in the validity of the aforesaid allotment. Therefore, the allotment in favor of Gulag Din shall stand intact, subject to the succeeding observations. 27. In light of Abdul Hamid's case the allotment in favor of Gulag Din shall only be to the extent of possession and would not form the basis of proprietary rights. Allah Dicta's successors-in- interest, Muhammad Abram and others, would continue to be the owners of WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the land in dispute as long as the present laws are operative. Therefore, the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued to MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar are cancelled from the date of issue. Consequently, the transfer made in favor of Muhammad Ashraf Khan shall become inoperative. He will however remain in possession on behalf of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2367?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2367 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): as the present laws are operative. Therefore, the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued to MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar are cancelled from the date of issue. Consequently, the transfer made in favor of Muhammad Ashraf Khan shall become inoperative. He will however remain in possession on behalf of MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar as long as the present laws are in operation. H.B.T./84/SC(AJ&K) Order accordingly. LR’/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2000 YLR 2433 about?
Answer: Case 2000 YLR 2433 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1999-10-11. The case involved GHULAM NABI AND 12 OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND 10 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR (REHABILITATION) ORDINANCE 1952 - S. PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 18-A, 18-B AND 43 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - SS. 42 &44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR (REHABILITATION) ORDINANCE, 1952 -S. PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 18-A, 18-B AND 43 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/Y LR’/html_txt/Y LR_2000_2433.html 1/6 28/10/2025, 01:58 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/Y LR/html_txt/Y LR_2000_2433.html. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 YLR 2433?
Answer: In case 2000 YLR 2433, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR (REHABILITATION) ORDINANCE 1952 - S. PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 18-A, 18-B AND 43 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - SS. 42 &44 AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR (REHABILITATION) ORDINANCE, 1952 -S. PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 18-A, 18-B AND 43 https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/Y LR’/html_txt/Y LR_2000_2433.html 1/6 28/10/2025, 01:58 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/Y LR/html_txt/Y LR_2000_2433.html. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1999-10-11.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 YLR 2433?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 YLR 2433 were: SH. ABDULAZIZ LOR APPELLANTS. SYED MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE SHAH BOKHARI AND FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 YLR 2433?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 YLR 2433 were: GHULAM NABI AND 12 OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND 10 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 YLR 2433.
Answer: MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.-This appeal, by way of leave, has been directed against the order passed by the High Court on 22-2-1999, whereby the wait petition filed by the appellants herein was dismissed. 2. The precise facts for the disposal of the present appeal are that an evacuee land comprising Survey No. 135 situate in Other Na jam Khan, Thesis and District Bag was allotted in the name of different persons. Total acreage of the number Kara was 29 Canals and 12 Marla's, 7 Canals and 10 Marla's of the land was allotted in the name of Shaman Din deceased. Canals and 7 Marla's was allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, predecessor-in-interest of the respondents Nos. to 9, 7 Canals and 8 Marla's was allotted in the name of Walk Muhammad and 7 Canals and 8 Marla's in the name of Jamal Din who are also dead and whose heirs are appellants in the case. The dispute relates to 7 Canals and 10 Marla's of land which stood allotted in the name of Shaman Din. After the death of Shaman Din this land was allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, predecessor-in- interest of respondents Nos.3 to 9, who obtained Proprietary Rights Transfer Order on 10- 9-1986. The predecessor-in-interest of appellants Jamal Din, on the plea that the land allotted in the name of Shaman Din was transferred in his favor by MST. Sharia Bibi, the daughter of Shaman Din, also obtained the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order. The respondents filed a review petition against the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the appellants by the Custodian for the land left by Shaman Din on 13-4- 1987 on the ground that the land stood already transferred in the name of respondents through Proprietary Rights Transfer Order. The Custodian accepting the review petition on 7-11- 1994 cancelled the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the appellants on 13-4-1987. The appellants thereafter filed a review petition before the Custodian against the order, dated 7-11-1994, but the same was also dismissed on 17-10-1996. The appellants again filed another review petition before the Custodian against Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued by him on 10-9-1996 for the land in dispute which was left by Shaman Din and was allotted in the name of respondent. The Custodian dismissed the subsequent review petition as well on 27-9-1997. The appellants through a writ petition assailed the orders passed by the Custodian on 7-11- 1994, 17-10-1996, 17-9-1997, 10-6- 1996 and 27-10-1997 and the entitlement WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y certificate issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner, dated 27-6-1987. The High Court as said earlier, dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellants. Hence, this appeal. 3. Sh. Abdul Aziz, the learned counsel for the appellants, has contended that the land in dispute measuring 7 Canals and 10 Marla's was allotted in the name of Shaman Din. On The death of Shaman Din, this land was transferred in the name of Jamal Din and Walk Muhammad through an agreement executed by MST. Shrift Bi, the daughter of Shaman Din. According to the learned-counsel the land was never allotted in the name of Ghulam Nadir who illegally obtained the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order. According to him, a valid allotment, unless cancelled in accordance with law by the Government or any other Rehabilitation Authority, it, cannot be transferred to any other person. The learned counsel submitted with vehemence that land was not cancelled from the name of Shaman Din hence its allotment in the name of Ghulam Nadir was without any lawful authority and its Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was of no legal effect. The learned counsel for the appellants pressed into service the submission that Shaman Din died in April, 1970 and during his lifetime the subsequent allotment could not have been made in the name of Ghulam Nadir. To substantiate his contention, the learned counsel relied upon the death certificate which is appended with the High Court's file at page 46 shown as Annexure 'F' wherein its serial number is shown as 6 and the person who informed about the death of Shaman Din is mentioned as Abdul Latin the son of Shaman Din. The date of report of death is entered as 10- 9-1997 in this death certificate. On the strength of the aforesaid argument the learned counsel for the appellants submitted that Shaman Din died in 1970, thus, how a subsequent allotment could have been made in the name of Ghulam Nadir during the lifetime of Shaman Din. Even if it is assumed that a valid allotment was made on 27-4-1956 in the name of Ghulam Nadir, the predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos. to 9, the allotment in favor of Shaman Din was made in the year 1954. So, the allotment existing in the name of Shaman Din prior to the allotment of Ghulam Nadir held the field as the subsequent allotment was a nullity during the subsistence of first allotment. Sh. Abdul Aziz in support of his contention relied upon Muhammad Shaft v. MST. Janna Bibi and others 1994 SCR 247 and Afar Iqbal v. Abdul Aziz and another 1998 CLC 286. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 4. Syed Muhammad Kiddie Shah Bukhara, the learned counsel for respondents Nos. to 9, while controverting the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants, contended that on the death of Shaman Din the land was available for allotment as he had no legal heirs to merit him. It was further contended that the land was validly allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, the father of respondents, as it was available for allotment and a valid Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was issued in his favor in presence of which no subsequent Proprietary Rights Transfer Order could have been issued. The learned counsel contended that the appellants filed review petition against the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the respondents on 10-9-1986 ten years thereafter Le. ' 18-11-1994 although they were in know of the fact of this allotment in the name of respondent's father. The learned counsel for the respondents strenuously argued that in this Court another death certificate of Shaman Din has been produced by the appellants which appears at page 32 of the paper book which shows its serial number as 62 and the name of person giving information of death is entered as Gurkha Bi, the sister-in-law of deceased Shaman Din. The date of report of death is entered as 20-3-1998. The respondents in their written statement have denied the fac tum of death of Shaman Din in 1970, and they have also appended a certificate from Secretary, Union Council, Bag with the High Court's file as Annexure 'D.A.' wherein it has been verified by Secretary, Union Council, Bag that from his office no certificate dated 10-9-1997 was issued nor any such information 1s available from any record of the Union Council. 5. On the basis of the above-stated arguments the learned counsel contended that both the certificates purportedly issued by the Secretary, Union Council, Bag hare not only self-destructive but are totally contradictory, whereas the third certificate which has been filed by the respondents negates the very issues of the certificate in accordance with the record available in the Union Council, Bag. The learned counsel for the respondents maintained that the High Court committed no error in dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellants The learned counsel further maintained that the appellants filed successive review petition before the Custodian on the same facts and circumstances which were available at the time of filing of first review petition. Therefore, the subsequent review petitions were not maintainable, and the same were rightly dismissed by the learned Custodian. 6. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kas hmm, the learned counsel for respondent No.], fully supported the arguments advanced by Syed Muhammad Kiddie Shah Bukhara and supported the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y impugned judgment of the High Court. 7. After harem the learned counsel for the parties, we have gone through the record of the case including the impugned judgment of the High Court and orders of the Custodian placed on record. The claim of appellants precisely is that after the death of Shaman Din the land in dispute was transferred through an agreement by MST. Sharia Bi, the daughter of Shaman Din. The Rehabilitation Authorities as well as the Custodian and the High Court have disbelieved the assertion of the appellants in this regard, and we cannot substitute our own view for the view expressed by the Rehabilitation Authorities, the Custodian and the High Court. Even otherwise no cogent evidence has been brought on record to show that the land allotted in the name of Shaman Din was ever transferred in the name of MST. Sharia Bi who subsequently transferred the same in the name of the appellants. Irrespective of that any such alleged transfer of allotment is neither entered in the Rehabilitation record nor in the allotment made in favor of the appellants nor TS the allotment transferred in the name of MST. Sharia Bi, the alleged daughter of Shaman Din. In the absence of valid allotment of land in the name of the appellants, no Proprietary Rights Transfer Order could have been issued in their favor. In our view the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order follows the entitlement certificate. In absence of valid allotment in the name of the appellants the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in the favor was rightly cancelled by the Custodian, as the same stood already issued in the name of predecessor of the respondents. The Custodian was not authorized to pass a subsequent order of issuing Proprietary Rights Transfer Order and his recalling the order is right exercise of jurisdiction by rejecting the review petitions. A 8. The contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that successive review petitions could not have been filed by the appellants on the same facts and circumstances on which the first review petition was filed, we think that the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is not without any substance. Although we have held in some of the cases that in the scheme of Rehabilitation Law the successive review petitions are not barred, but the same doesn't mean that the successive review petitions should be filed on the same facts and circumstances which were existing at the time of filing of first review petition. In order to elaborate it may be pointed out that in a judgment there is a glaring mistake appearing on the face of record or there appears some clerical mistake, LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the successive review petitions are not barred. Similarly, if the subsequent judgment under review suffers from such defect as pointed out above, the other review petition is not barred, but it is not a rule of universal application that successive review petitions are permissible under all the circumstances. 9. Having reached the conclusion that' the land in dispute was allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, the predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos. to 9 on 27-4- 1956 the same does not suffer from any legal infirmity as after the death of Shaman Din the land was available for allotment and the competent Rehabilitation Authorities allotted the same to Ghulam Nadir. This fact is sufficiently supported by the allotment chit existing MN the name of Ghulam Nadir which is part of the file and which distinctly relates to the land in dispute as its acreage is shown as 7 Canals and 10 Marla's and number Kara is entered as 135 man. In the light of aforesaid reason, finding no force in this appeal it is hereby dismissed with costs. H.B.T./80/SC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed. LR’/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2433?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2433 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-11): MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.-This appeal, by way of leave, has been directed against the order passed by the High Court on 22-2-1999, whereby the wait petition filed by the appellants herein was dismissed. 2. The precise facts for the disposal of the present appeal are that an evacuee land comprising Survey No. 135 situate in Other Na jam Khan, Thesis and District Bag was allotted in the name of different persons. Total acreage of the number Kara was 29 Canals and 12 Marla's, 7 Canals and 10 Marla's of the land was allotted in the name of Shaman Din deceased. Canals and 7 Marla's was allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, predecessor-in-interest of the respondents Nos. to 9, 7 Canals and 8 Marla's was allotted in the name of Walk Muhammad and 7 Canals and 8 Marla's in the name of Jamal Din who are also dead and whose heirs are appellants in the case. The dispute relates to 7 Canals and 10 Marla's of land which stood allotted in the name of Shaman Din. After the death of Shaman Din this land was allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, predecessor-in- interest of respondents Nos.3 to 9, who obtained Proprietary Rights Transfer Order on 10- 9-1986. The predecessor-in-interest of appellants Jamal Din, on the plea that the land allotted in the name of Shaman Din was transferred in his favor by MST. Sharia Bibi, the daughter of Shaman Din, also obtained the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order. The respondents filed a review petition against the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the appellants by the Custodian for the land left by Shaman Din on 13-4- 1987 on the ground that the land stood already transferred in the name of respondents through Proprietary Rights Transfer Order. The Custodian accepting the review petition on 7-11- 1994 cancelled the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the appellants on 13-4-1987. The appellants thereafter filed a review petition before the Custodian against the order, dated 7-11-1994, but the same was also dismissed on 17-10-1996. The appellants again filed another review petition before the Custodian against Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued by him on 10-9-1996 for the land in dispute which was left by Shaman Din and was allotted in the name of respondent. The Custodian dismissed the subsequent review petition as well on 27-9-1997. The appellants through a writ petition assailed the orders passed by the Custodian on 7-11- 1994, 17-10-1996, 17-9-1997, 10-6- 1996 and 27-10-1997 and the entitlement WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y certificate issued by the Rehabilitation Commissioner, dated 27-6-1987. The High Court as said earlier, dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellants. Hence, this appeal. 3. Sh. Abdul Aziz, the learned counsel for the appellants, has contended that the land in dispute measuring 7 Canals and 10 Marla's was allotted in the name of Shaman Din. On The death of Shaman Din, this land was transferred in the name of Jamal Din and Walk Muhammad through an agreement

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2433?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2433 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-11): Aziz, the learned counsel for the appellants, has contended that the land in dispute measuring 7 Canals and 10 Marla's was allotted in the name of Shaman Din. On The death of Shaman Din, this land was transferred in the name of Jamal Din and Walk Muhammad through an agreement executed by MST. Shrift Bi, the daughter of Shaman Din. According to the learned-counsel the land was never allotted in the name of Ghulam Nadir who illegally obtained the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order. According to him, a valid allotment, unless cancelled in accordance with law by the Government or any other Rehabilitation Authority, it, cannot be transferred to any other person. The learned counsel submitted with vehemence that land was not cancelled from the name of Shaman Din hence its allotment in the name of Ghulam Nadir was without any lawful authority and its Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was of no legal effect. The learned counsel for the appellants pressed into service the submission that Shaman Din died in April, 1970 and during his lifetime the subsequent allotment could not have been made in the name of Ghulam Nadir. To substantiate his contention, the learned counsel relied upon the death certificate which is appended with the High Court's file at page 46 shown as Annexure 'F' wherein its serial number is shown as 6 and the person who informed about the death of Shaman Din is mentioned as Abdul Latin the son of Shaman Din. The date of report of death is entered as 10- 9-1997 in this death certificate. On the strength of the aforesaid argument the learned counsel for the appellants submitted that Shaman Din died in 1970, thus, how a subsequent allotment could have been made in the name of Ghulam Nadir during the lifetime of Shaman Din. Even if it is assumed that a valid allotment was made on 27-4-1956 in the name of Ghulam Nadir, the predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos. to 9, the allotment in favor of Shaman Din was made in the year 1954. So, the allotment existing in the name of Shaman Din prior to the allotment of Ghulam Nadir held the field as the subsequent allotment was a nullity during the subsistence of first allotment. Sh. Abdul Aziz in support of his contention relied upon Muhammad Shaft v. MST. Janna Bibi and others 1994 SCR 247 and Afar Iqbal v. Abdul Aziz and another 1998 CLC 286. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 4. Syed Muhammad Kiddie Shah Bukhara, the learned counsel for respondents Nos. to 9, while controverting the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants, contended that on the death of Shaman Din the land was available for allotment as he had no legal heirs to merit him. It was further contended that the land was validly allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, the father of respondents, as it was available for allotment and a valid Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was issued in his favor in presence of which no

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2433?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2433 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-11): had no legal heirs to merit him. It was further contended that the land was validly allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, the father of respondents, as it was available for allotment and a valid Proprietary Rights Transfer Order was issued in his favor in presence of which no subsequent Proprietary Rights Transfer Order could have been issued. The learned counsel contended that the appellants filed review petition against the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the respondents on 10-9-1986 ten years thereafter Le. ' 18-11-1994 although they were in know of the fact of this allotment in the name of respondent's father. The learned counsel for the respondents strenuously argued that in this Court another death certificate of Shaman Din has been produced by the appellants which appears at page 32 of the paper book which shows its serial number as 62 and the name of person giving information of death is entered as Gurkha Bi, the sister-in-law of deceased Shaman Din. The date of report of death is entered as 20-3-1998. The respondents in their written statement have denied the fac tum of death of Shaman Din in 1970, and they have also appended a certificate from Secretary, Union Council, Bag with the High Court's file as Annexure 'D.A.' wherein it has been verified by Secretary, Union Council, Bag that from his office no certificate dated 10-9-1997 was issued nor any such information 1s available from any record of the Union Council. 5. On the basis of the above-stated arguments the learned counsel contended that both the certificates purportedly issued by the Secretary, Union Council, Bag hare not only self-destructive but are totally contradictory, whereas the third certificate which has been filed by the respondents negates the very issues of the certificate in accordance with the record available in the Union Council, Bag. The learned counsel for the respondents maintained that the High Court committed no error in dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellants The learned counsel further maintained that the appellants filed successive review petition before the Custodian on the same facts and circumstances which were available at the time of filing of first review petition. Therefore, the subsequent review petitions were not maintainable, and the same were rightly dismissed by the learned Custodian. 6. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kas hmm, the learned counsel for respondent No.], fully supported the arguments advanced by Syed Muhammad Kiddie Shah Bukhara and supported the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y impugned judgment of the High Court. 7. After harem the learned counsel for the parties, we have gone through the record of the case including the impugned judgment of the High Court and orders of the Custodian placed on record. The claim of appellants precisely is that after the death of Shaman Din the land in dispute was transferred through an agreement by MST. Sharia Bi, the daughter of Shaman Din. The Rehabilitation Authorities as well as the Custodian and the High Court have disbelieved the assertion of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2433?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2433 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-11): record. The claim of appellants precisely is that after the death of Shaman Din the land in dispute was transferred through an agreement by MST. Sharia Bi, the daughter of Shaman Din. The Rehabilitation Authorities as well as the Custodian and the High Court have disbelieved the assertion of the appellants in this regard, and we cannot substitute our own view for the view expressed by the Rehabilitation Authorities, the Custodian and the High Court. Even otherwise no cogent evidence has been brought on record to show that the land allotted in the name of Shaman Din was ever transferred in the name of MST. Sharia Bi who subsequently transferred the same in the name of the appellants. Irrespective of that any such alleged transfer of allotment is neither entered in the Rehabilitation record nor in the allotment made in favor of the appellants nor TS the allotment transferred in the name of MST. Sharia Bi, the alleged daughter of Shaman Din. In the absence of valid allotment of land in the name of the appellants, no Proprietary Rights Transfer Order could have been issued in their favor. In our view the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order follows the entitlement certificate. In absence of valid allotment in the name of the appellants the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in the favor was rightly cancelled by the Custodian, as the same stood already issued in the name of predecessor of the respondents. The Custodian was not authorized to pass a subsequent order of issuing Proprietary Rights Transfer Order and his recalling the order is right exercise of jurisdiction by rejecting the review petitions. A 8. The contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that successive review petitions could not have been filed by the appellants on the same facts and circumstances on which the first review petition was filed, we think that the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is not without any substance. Although we have held in some of the cases that in the scheme of Rehabilitation Law the successive review petitions are not barred, but the same doesn't mean that the successive review petitions should be filed on the same facts and circumstances which were existing at the time of filing of first review petition. In order to elaborate it may be pointed out that in a judgment there is a glaring mistake appearing on the face of record or there appears some clerical mistake, LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y the successive review petitions are not barred. Similarly, if the subsequent judgment under review suffers from such defect as pointed out above, the other review petition is not barred, but it is not a rule of universal application that successive review petitions are permissible under all the circumstances. 9. Having reached the conclusion that' the land in dispute was allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, the predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos. to 9 on 27-4- 1956 the same does not suffer from any legal infirmity as after the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2433?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2433 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-11): that successive review petitions are permissible under all the circumstances. 9. Having reached the conclusion that' the land in dispute was allotted in the name of Ghulam ADR, the predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos. to 9 on 27-4- 1956 the same does not suffer from any legal infirmity as after the death of Shaman Din the land was available for allotment and the competent Rehabilitation Authorities allotted the same to Ghulam Nadir. This fact is sufficiently supported by the allotment chit existing MN the name of Ghulam Nadir which is part of the file and which distinctly relates to the land in dispute as its acreage is shown as 7 Canals and 10 Marla's and number Kara is entered as 135 man. In the light of aforesaid reason, finding no force in this appeal it is hereby dismissed with costs. H.B.T./80/SC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed. LR’/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2000 YLR 1069 about?
Answer: Case 2000 YLR 1069 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1999-02-02. The case involved MUHAMMAD AZAD BAIG AND OTHERS—APPELLANTSVERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.43(6) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - SS.42 AND 44. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: In case 2000 YLR 1069, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S.43(6) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - SS.42 AND 44. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1999-02-02.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 YLR 1069 were: SYED NAZIR HUSSAIN SHAH KAZMI, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANTS. FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENT NO.L.SARDAR RAFIQUE MAHMOOD KHAN, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENTS NOS.2 AND 3.. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 YLR 1069 were: MUHAMMAD AZAD BAIG AND OTHERS—APPELLANTSVERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND OTHERS—RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 YLR 1069.
Answer: LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.—This appeal, by way of leave of the Court, has been directed against an order passed by the High Court on 5-11-1998, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants, herein, was dismissed. 2. The necessary facts, giving rise to the present appeal, are that according to the appellants land comprises survey Nos.205 and 571, measuring 7 Canals and 17 Marla's, situate in village Hull, Thesis and District Bag, was allotted in the name of their father on 15-3- 1952, and since then they are in possession of the same. However, subsequently land under dispute is alleged to have been allotted in favor of father of respondents Nos.2 and 3 by making fictitious entry m the allotment permit in 1953. It is the case of the appellants that the alleged allotment, if any, in the name of father of respondents Nos.2 and 3, without the cancellation of allotment made in the name of father of appellants, was illegal. The appellants, herein, filed a review petition before the Custodian, seeking the cancellation of allotment of respondents Nos.2 and 3 but the learned Custodian after making detailed ENI dry came to the conclusion that in fact the Apple lands have fictitiously got their names entered in the allotment register with the Connie /once of some revenue officials and the said entry was maneuvered by introducing additional papers in the register. Thus, the leader Custodian dismissed the review petition. Consequently, a writ petition was filed the High Court which was also dismissed and the findings of the Custodian were confirmed. The High Court has given detailed reasons for upholding the findings of the Custodian for dismissing the review petition vide the impugned judgment dated 5-11-1998, which is the subject of present appeal. 3. Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the fin lings of the High Court are not correct inter alia on the ground that MN fact no file of allot ENT was in existence in favor of father of respondents and that the claim of appellants Is supported by the fact that the land in dispute had been in possession of appellants since the year 1952. He has argued that no valid allotment was made in the name of father of respondents Nos.2 and 3. The entry of allotment in their names in 1953 is illegal. The based counsel has further contended that the learned Custodian observed in his judgment that the land comprising survey No.571 is not found to have been allotted to respondents but despite that the review and writ petition filed by the appellants was dismissed in toto. The learned counsel has maintained that when the appellants came to know about the allotment of respondents the review petition was filed and the limitation would start from the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML date of their knowledge. Even otherwise according to the learned counsel for the appellants there is no limitation prescribed for filing a review petition under section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel further argued that the report made by the D.R.C. Bag after detailed equity was not taken into consideration by the custodian or the High Court. The learned counsel pressed into service the submission that the allotment in favor of father of appellants was made as a local because of short of scale. The allotment of the disputed land having been made in favor of father of appellants in 1952 and the same stood protected under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, contended the learned counsel. The learned counsel for the appellants vehemently maintained that the mere fact that the allotment in the name of father of appellants was not entered in the Revenue Record per se does not nullify the allotment itself. 4. In reply Vardar Cacique Mahmood Khan and Mr. Farooq Hussain Kas hmm, the learned counsel appearing for opposite side, contended that the land in dispute was never allotted to the father of appellants rather the fake and fabricated documents were entered in the record with the connivance of revenue officials. The learned counsel submitted that the Custodian of Evacuee Property after thoroughly probing into the matter reached the conclusion that all the documents per taming to allotment of father of appellants were false and fabricated, thus, the review petition filed before the Custodian was also dismissed. The appellants, according to the learned counsel for respondents, were not entitled to any discretionary relief in exercise of writ jurisdiction. The Custodian being the Court of exclusive jurisdiction recorded his findings against the appellants and such findings of fact were not assailable before the High Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction. The learned counsel also maintained that in 1952 there was no such law for allotment of land in the name of locals. Thus, any such allotment, even if made in the name of father of appellants, was a nullity in the eye of law. 5. After hearing the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and perusal of documents attached with the file, it transpires that the Custodian of Evacuee Property after a detailed scrutiny of the record came to the conclusion that the appellants who claimed the allotment to be made MN favor of their father m the year 1952 have failed to challenge the allotment made in the name of respondents in the year 1953 before any Rehabilitation Authority and challenged the same before the Custodian of Evacuee Property WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML in the year 1993. It was also pointed out by the learned Custodian that the allotment of the appellants was not entered in the allotment register, but an effort was made to get it entered through additional papers on 2-12-1993. Therefore, the learned Custodian came to the conclusion that the allotment was fake and fabricated with the connivance of the revenue officials. The High Court also upheld the aforesaid view of the Custodian and observed that none of the documents placed on record by the appellants was found to have been secured by them before the year 1993 or 1997 which shows that the allotment was fabricated after 1993 when the same was entered in the allotment register through additional papers. The copies of various orders were secured by the appellants in 1993 and afterward which substantiates the fact that all proceedings took place after the year 1993. The High Court further observed that the Custodian of Evacuee Property being a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, after thorough probe into the facts came to the conclusion that the allotment was fake and fabricated. The findings of facts, thus, recorded by the tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, were not assailable through a writ petition. The High Court also opined that the appellants renamed silent for a period of 40 years when they firstly filed a review petition before the Custodian which casts a serious doubt on the correctness of the allotment apart from the fact that the same suffers from laches. 6. So far as the observation of the High Court is concerned that no law for allotment in favor of a local was in existence m the year 1952 when the same was claimed to be made, in our view, is not correct. Section 7 of the Azad Kashmir Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 may usefully be reproduced which reads as under:- The Azad Kashmir Government may buy order authorize a Rehabilitation Commissioner to pool such evacuee property as may be specified, and to allot the same to persons resident in Azad Kashmir (Jammu and Kashmir Nationals unless otherwise specially authorized by the Government) whether refugees or not and upon such order being made, the Commissioner shall have all such powers, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordnance as may be necessary to enable him to prepare a scheme for pooling such property and allotting it as aforesaid." Section 12 of the said Ordinance is to the following effect Any person aggrieved by an order under this Ordinance may prefer an appeal :- (a) to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner when the order had been passed by an Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner; (b) to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, where the order not beg an order passed in appeal under clause (a) has been passed by a Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML (2) The appeal shall be presented in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. (3) XXX XXK XXX XXK XXX XXX XXX XXX (4) XXX XXK XXK KXXK KKK XXX XXX XXK (5) XXX XXK XKK XKXK XXK XXX XXK XXX (6) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX Section 8 subsection (3) of the above Ordinance is coached in a following manner:- "A Rehabilitation Commissioner may, by general or special order, delegate all or any of his functions MDR this Ordinance to such officers or persons as he thinks fit." The ;love provisions of Azad Kashmir Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 make it clear that the forum for allotment was existing even in 1952 ;IND the allotment could have been made to a refugee or a local. 7. Section 18 subsection (2) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 may usefully be reproduced which reads as follows "Every allotment of evacuees property made between the first day of March, 1947, and the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under subsection 8. Section 23 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 is to the following effect "Any corresponding provision of any law in force in any area immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be a provision of this Act, and anything done, action taken, obligation, lability, penalty or punishment incurred, inquiry or proceedings commenced, officer appointed or person authorized, jurisdiction or power conferred, rule made and order issued under any of the provisions of such law, shall be continued, and, so far as may be, be deemed to have been respectively done, taken, occurred, commenced, apported, authorized, conferred, made, or issued under this Act, and any enactment or document referring to any such provision shall, as far as may be, be construed to refer to this Act or to the corresponding provision thereof. ” The above view is supported by a case reported as Muhammad Jamil v. Muhammad Kiddie and another (1999 YLR 1089) in which it has been held as under: "Now we have given our anxious thought to the provisions of section 18(2) and are of the view that validity granted in this provision of law would extend to allotments made by way of lease if they were existing when the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 came into existence, as is the present case. The main reason which leads us to this conclusion is that validation has been given to ‘every allotment of evacuee property made between IST day of March, 1947 and the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been made under subsection (1) an intention of the law-maker clearly was to include WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y every allotment made before coming into force of the said Act and that would also include an allotment by way of lease." 9. The perusal of the allotment order in favor of appellants shows that their allotment was temporary for a period of one year. As stated earlier, the allotment was not entered in the allotment register nor its period was extended. This precisely shows that after one year the allotment stood cancelled automatically from the name of appellants. Moreover, the alleged allotment was not entered in any of the Revenue Record till the same was attempted to have been entered in the Revenue Record in the year 1993 in a clandestine manner. 10. As regards the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants that Custodian could review by exercise his powers under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property Act) 1957 is concerned those powers of course are unlimited, and the Custodian is competent to go into the question of genuineness or otherwise of an allotment. Our aforesaid view is fortified by a case reported as Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another (1996 CLC 254). The observation in the above titled case are as follows: "The powers of review available to the Custodian under section 43(6) are exercisable at the instance of an aggrieved person or so moth at any time; and while exercising such powers he can go into the question of genuineness or the legality fan allotment, as he deems proper. It may be stated that the powers of review vested in the Custodian under subsection (6) of section 18-A (before amendment) held in the field against the provisions contained in subsection (6) of section 43 of the Act because those were special powers but when the said special powers of review have been taken away the general powers of review of the Custodian under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act stand revived." 11. Thus, the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents has a substance but at the same time in the instant case the Custodian of Evacuee Property, being a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, after conducting the thorough inquiry, reached the conclusion that the allotment in favor of appellants was fake and fictitious. The condition of genuineness of allotment being a condition precedent was a rightful exercise of jurisdiction by the Custodian by not believing the allotment in the name of appellants as genuine. Thus, the conclusions arrived at by a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction cannot be pre-empted by this Court. However, we have noticed that the learned Custodian has observed in his judgment dated 30-8- 1997 that land comprising survey No.571 was not food to have been included in the land allotted in LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML favor of respondents Nos.2 and 3, but despite that the review petition was dismissed in toto. The High Court also did not attend to this aspect of the case of the appellants. As Kara No.571 is not found to have been allotted to respondents, therefore, there BMG no material on record against the above said observation, the review petition filed by the appellants before the Custodian and later on the writ petition in the High Court should not have been dismissed to that ext( NT. 12. In the light of what has been stated above, we partly accept the appeal filed by the appellants so far as it relates to Kara No. 571, situate in village Hull, Thesis and District Bag, and the findings thus recorded by t JE learned Custodian and the High Court are modified in the terms indicated above. The appeal filed by the appellants with regard to Kara No. 205 stands dismissed. However, in view of the peculiar circumstances of the case, we pass no order as to costs. H.B. T./3/SCAJ&K) Order accordingly. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1069 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-02-02): LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.—This appeal, by way of leave of the Court, has been directed against an order passed by the High Court on 5-11-1998, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants, herein, was dismissed. 2. The necessary facts, giving rise to the present appeal, are that according to the appellants land comprises survey Nos.205 and 571, measuring 7 Canals and 17 Marla's, situate in village Hull, Thesis and District Bag, was allotted in the name of their father on 15-3- 1952, and since then they are in possession of the same. However, subsequently land under dispute is alleged to have been allotted in favor of father of respondents Nos.2 and 3 by making fictitious entry m the allotment permit in 1953. It is the case of the appellants that the alleged allotment, if any, in the name of father of respondents Nos.2 and 3, without the cancellation of allotment made in the name of father of appellants, was illegal. The appellants, herein, filed a review petition before the Custodian, seeking the cancellation of allotment of respondents Nos.2 and 3 but the learned Custodian after making detailed ENI dry came to the conclusion that in fact the Apple lands have fictitiously got their names entered in the allotment register with the Connie /once of some revenue officials and the said entry was maneuvered by introducing additional papers in the register. Thus, the leader Custodian dismissed the review petition. Consequently, a writ petition was filed the High Court which was also dismissed and the findings of the Custodian were confirmed. The High Court has given detailed reasons for upholding the findings of the Custodian for dismissing the review petition vide the impugned judgment dated 5-11-1998, which is the subject of present appeal. 3. Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the fin lings of the High Court are not correct inter alia on the ground that MN fact no file of allot ENT was in existence in favor of father of respondents and that the claim of appellants Is supported by the fact that the land in dispute had been in possession of appellants since the year 1952. He has argued that no valid allotment was made in the name of father of respondents Nos.2 and 3. The entry of allotment in their names in 1953 is illegal. The based counsel has further contended that the learned Custodian observed in his judgment that the land comprising survey No.571 is not found to have been allotted to respondents but despite that the review and writ petition filed by the appellants was dismissed in toto. The learned counsel has maintained that when the appellants came to know about the allotment of respondents the review petition was filed and the limitation would start from the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML date of their knowledge. Even otherwise according to the learned counsel for the appellants there is no limitation prescribed for filing a review

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1069 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-02-02): the appellants came to know about the allotment of respondents the review petition was filed and the limitation would start from the WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML date of their knowledge. Even otherwise according to the learned counsel for the appellants there is no limitation prescribed for filing a review petition under section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel further argued that the report made by the D.R.C. Bag after detailed equity was not taken into consideration by the custodian or the High Court. The learned counsel pressed into service the submission that the allotment in favor of father of appellants was made as a local because of short of scale. The allotment of the disputed land having been made in favor of father of appellants in 1952 and the same stood protected under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, contended the learned counsel. The learned counsel for the appellants vehemently maintained that the mere fact that the allotment in the name of father of appellants was not entered in the Revenue Record per se does not nullify the allotment itself. 4. In reply Vardar Cacique Mahmood Khan and Mr. Farooq Hussain Kas hmm, the learned counsel appearing for opposite side, contended that the land in dispute was never allotted to the father of appellants rather the fake and fabricated documents were entered in the record with the connivance of revenue officials. The learned counsel submitted that the Custodian of Evacuee Property after thoroughly probing into the matter reached the conclusion that all the documents per taming to allotment of father of appellants were false and fabricated, thus, the review petition filed before the Custodian was also dismissed. The appellants, according to the learned counsel for respondents, were not entitled to any discretionary relief in exercise of writ jurisdiction. The Custodian being the Court of exclusive jurisdiction recorded his findings against the appellants and such findings of fact were not assailable before the High Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction. The learned counsel also maintained that in 1952 there was no such law for allotment of land in the name of locals. Thus, any such allotment, even if made in the name of father of appellants, was a nullity in the eye of law. 5. After hearing the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and perusal of documents attached with the file, it transpires that the Custodian of Evacuee Property after a detailed scrutiny of the record came to the conclusion that the appellants who claimed the allotment to be made MN favor of their father m the year 1952 have failed to challenge the allotment made in the name of respondents in the year 1953 before any Rehabilitation Authority and challenged the same before the Custodian of Evacuee Property WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML in the year 1993. It was also pointed out by the learned Custodian that the allotment of the appellants was not entered in the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1069 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-02-02): name of respondents in the year 1953 before any Rehabilitation Authority and challenged the same before the Custodian of Evacuee Property WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML in the year 1993. It was also pointed out by the learned Custodian that the allotment of the appellants was not entered in the allotment register, but an effort was made to get it entered through additional papers on 2-12-1993. Therefore, the learned Custodian came to the conclusion that the allotment was fake and fabricated with the connivance of the revenue officials. The High Court also upheld the aforesaid view of the Custodian and observed that none of the documents placed on record by the appellants was found to have been secured by them before the year 1993 or 1997 which shows that the allotment was fabricated after 1993 when the same was entered in the allotment register through additional papers. The copies of various orders were secured by the appellants in 1993 and afterward which substantiates the fact that all proceedings took place after the year 1993. The High Court further observed that the Custodian of Evacuee Property being a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, after thorough probe into the facts came to the conclusion that the allotment was fake and fabricated. The findings of facts, thus, recorded by the tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, were not assailable through a writ petition. The High Court also opined that the appellants renamed silent for a period of 40 years when they firstly filed a review petition before the Custodian which casts a serious doubt on the correctness of the allotment apart from the fact that the same suffers from laches. 6. So far as the observation of the High Court is concerned that no law for allotment in favor of a local was in existence m the year 1952 when the same was claimed to be made, in our view, is not correct. Section 7 of the Azad Kashmir Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 may usefully be reproduced which reads as under:- The Azad Kashmir Government may buy order authorize a Rehabilitation Commissioner to pool such evacuee property as may be specified, and to allot the same to persons resident in Azad Kashmir (Jammu and Kashmir Nationals unless otherwise specially authorized by the Government) whether refugees or not and upon such order being made, the Commissioner shall have all such powers, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordnance as may be necessary to enable him to prepare a scheme for pooling such property and allotting it as aforesaid." Section 12 of the said Ordinance is to the following effect Any person aggrieved by an order under this Ordinance may prefer an appeal :- (a) to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner when the order had been passed by an Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner; (b) to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, where the order not beg an order passed in appeal under clause (a) has been passed by a Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML (2) The appeal shall be presented

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1069 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-02-02): Rehabilitation Commissioner when the order had been passed by an Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner; (b) to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, where the order not beg an order passed in appeal under clause (a) has been passed by a Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML (2) The appeal shall be presented in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. (3) XXX XXK XXX XXK XXX XXX XXX XXX (4) XXX XXK XXK KXXK KKK XXX XXX XXK (5) XXX XXK XKK XKXK XXK XXX XXK XXX (6) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX Section 8 subsection (3) of the above Ordinance is coached in a following manner:- "A Rehabilitation Commissioner may, by general or special order, delegate all or any of his functions MDR this Ordinance to such officers or persons as he thinks fit." The ;love provisions of Azad Kashmir Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 make it clear that the forum for allotment was existing even in 1952 ;IND the allotment could have been made to a refugee or a local. 7. Section 18 subsection (2) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 may usefully be reproduced which reads as follows "Every allotment of evacuees property made between the first day of March, 1947, and the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under subsection 8. Section 23 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 is to the following effect "Any corresponding provision of any law in force in any area immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be a provision of this Act, and anything done, action taken, obligation, lability, penalty or punishment incurred, inquiry or proceedings commenced, officer appointed or person authorized, jurisdiction or power conferred, rule made and order issued under any of the provisions of such law, shall be continued, and, so far as may be, be deemed to have been respectively done, taken, occurred, commenced, apported, authorized, conferred, made, or issued under this Act, and any enactment or document referring to any such provision shall, as far as may be, be construed to refer to this Act or to the corresponding provision thereof. ” The above view is supported by a case reported as Muhammad Jamil v. Muhammad Kiddie and another (1999 YLR 1089) in which it has been held as under: "Now we have given our anxious thought to the provisions of section 18(2) and are of the view that validity granted in this provision of law would extend to allotments made by way of lease if they were existing when the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 came into existence, as is the present case. The main reason which leads us to this conclusion is that validation has been given to ‘every allotment of evacuee property made between IST day of March, 1947 and the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been made under subsection (1) an intention of the law-maker clearly was to include WW. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1069 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-02-02): us to this conclusion is that validation has been given to ‘every allotment of evacuee property made between IST day of March, 1947 and the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been made under subsection (1) an intention of the law-maker clearly was to include WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y every allotment made before coming into force of the said Act and that would also include an allotment by way of lease." 9. The perusal of the allotment order in favor of appellants shows that their allotment was temporary for a period of one year. As stated earlier, the allotment was not entered in the allotment register nor its period was extended. This precisely shows that after one year the allotment stood cancelled automatically from the name of appellants. Moreover, the alleged allotment was not entered in any of the Revenue Record till the same was attempted to have been entered in the Revenue Record in the year 1993 in a clandestine manner. 10. As regards the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants that Custodian could review by exercise his powers under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property Act) 1957 is concerned those powers of course are unlimited, and the Custodian is competent to go into the question of genuineness or otherwise of an allotment. Our aforesaid view is fortified by a case reported as Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another (1996 CLC 254). The observation in the above titled case are as follows: "The powers of review available to the Custodian under section 43(6) are exercisable at the instance of an aggrieved person or so moth at any time; and while exercising such powers he can go into the question of genuineness or the legality fan allotment, as he deems proper. It may be stated that the powers of review vested in the Custodian under subsection (6) of section 18-A (before amendment) held in the field against the provisions contained in subsection (6) of section 43 of the Act because those were special powers but when the said special powers of review have been taken away the general powers of review of the Custodian under subsection (6) of section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act stand revived." 11. Thus, the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents has a substance but at the same time in the instant case the Custodian of Evacuee Property, being a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, after conducting the thorough inquiry, reached the conclusion that the allotment in favor of appellants was fake and fictitious. The condition of genuineness of allotment being a condition precedent was a rightful exercise of jurisdiction by the Custodian by not believing the allotment in the name of appellants as genuine. Thus, the conclusions arrived at by a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction cannot be pre-empted by this Court. However, we have noticed that the learned Custodian has observed in his judgment dated 30-8- 1997 that land

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1069?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1069 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-02-02): by the Custodian by not believing the allotment in the name of appellants as genuine. Thus, the conclusions arrived at by a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction cannot be pre-empted by this Court. However, we have noticed that the learned Custodian has observed in his judgment dated 30-8- 1997 that land comprising survey No.571 was not food to have been included in the land allotted in LR/html_TXT/Y LR/him|_TXT/Y LR_2000_1069. HTML favor of respondents Nos.2 and 3, but despite that the review petition was dismissed in toto. The High Court also did not attend to this aspect of the case of the appellants. As Kara No.571 is not found to have been allotted to respondents, therefore, there BMG no material on record against the above said observation, the review petition filed by the appellants before the Custodian and later on the writ petition in the High Court should not have been dismissed to that ext( NT. 12. In the light of what has been stated above, we partly accept the appeal filed by the appellants so far as it relates to Kara No. 571, situate in village Hull, Thesis and District Bag, and the findings thus recorded by t JE learned Custodian and the High Court are modified in the terms indicated above. The appeal filed by the appellants with regard to Kara No. 205 stands dismissed. However, in view of the peculiar circumstances of the case, we pass no order as to costs. H.B. T./3/SCAJ&K) Order accordingly. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2000 YLR 2452 about?
Answer: Case 2000 YLR 2452 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1998-12-03. The case involved MUHAMMAD RAMZAN AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTYACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 23) AND 3. The case was heard by SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J. AND BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 YLR 2452?
Answer: In case 2000 YLR 2452, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTYACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 23) AND 3. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1998-12-03.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 YLR 2452?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 YLR 2452 were: CH. MUHAMMAD ANWAR, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANTS. NEMO FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1,RESPONDENTS NOS. AND 6: EX PARTE.RAJA MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE KHAN, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 5.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J. AND BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 YLR 2452?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 YLR 2452 were: MUHAMMAD RAMZAN AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 YLR 2452.
Answer: LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_2452. HTML SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J.-This appeal has been directed against the order of the High Court, dated 19-2-1998, whereby the writ petition field by the appellants, harm, was dismissed. 2. The brief facts of the case are that the land comprising Survey Nos. 449 and 454, Khelat No. 4, measuring 16 Canals, 14 Marla's, situate in village Santana Iran, Thesis Radial, District Mirror, was allotted to pro forma respondent, Jan Muhammad, as a refugee on 16-11-1965. Thereafter, the entitlement certificate and proprietary nights of the said land were granted to him on 6-5-1981 and a mutation was also sanctioned m his favor. Jan Muhammad, pro forma respondent, sold the aforesaid piece of land to Muhammad, appellant No.3, through a registered sale-deed for a consideration of Rs.80,000. Respondent No.4 filed a preemption suit against the sale-deed but the same was dismissed; his appeals to the District Judge and the High Court also failed. On 17-7- 1998, appellant No.3 transferred the property through a gift-deed in favor of his sons appellants Nos. and 2. Thereafter, respondent No.4 filed a review petition before the Custodian alleging that only one-half of the land out of the aforesaid survey numbers was evacuee property while the other one-half was in the ownership of the locals. Thus, he challenged the proprietary rights which were granted to pro forma respondent and also the transfer made by him. The Custodian accepted the review petition hold mg that as only one-half of the land was evacuee property, the proprietary rights to the extent of remain one-half were against law and, thus, were set at naught. The appellants, herein, filed a writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed. 3. We have heard the arguments. Mr. Muhammad Anwar, Advocate, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the total area of the land comprising "Khelat" No.4 was 35 Canals, out of which one-half was under the occupancy tenancy of Molar Singh, evacuee, while the other half was under the occupancy tenancy of nonevacuees, Dicta and others, respondents. But as a result of private partition, Molar Singh, evacuee, was in exclusive possession of the aforesaid two survey numbers before migration, while the said non-evacuees were in the possession of the other survey numbers in lieu of their share which was in the possession of Molar Singh. After the enforcement of the Land Reforms Act, the non- WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y evacuees, occupancy tenants, were granted the rights of ownership out of all the survey numbers in the ' Khelat’ to the extent of one-half share including the aforesaid two survey numbers which were in the possession of Molar Singh before his migration and, thereafter, came into the possession of Jan Muhammad, allottee, who was subsequently granted the proprietary rights of the aforesaid two survey numbers by the Custodian including the one-half of the occupancy tenancy of Dicta and others, respondents. The learned counsel has argued that after the dismissal of the preemption suit filed by the respondent, Dicta, the respondents filed a belated review petition before the Custodian contending that one-half of the share m the aforesaid survey number which was initially under their occupancy tenancy and subsequently, became their ownership as a result of Land Reforms Act could not be allotted to Jan Muhammad, pro forma respondent. The learned Custodian accepted the review petition observing that the allotment of the whole of the land comprising aforesaid two survey numbers could not be made in favor of Jan Muhammad, allottee, because Molar Singh evacuee, was occupancy tenant only to the extent of one-half share. According to the learned counsel, the review petition before the Custodian was hopelessly time-barred; besides, the respondents filed the review petition only after the dismissal of preemption suit filed by Dicta, respondent. The learned counsel has maintained that as Dicta, respondent, accepted the right of Jan Muhammad allottee, to the extent of whole of the land comprising the said survey numbers, he could challenge his allotment by filing review petition before the Custodian. Thus, according to the learned counsel, the respondents were stopped from challenging the rights of Jan Muhammad, allottee, regarding the aforesaid two survey numbers even to the extent of one-half share. The learned counsel has further argued that a Vendée, who is in possession of a survey number, is entitled to transfer the same even in excess of his share, provided such transfer does not exceed his overall entitlement in the ‘Khelat’. Therefore, the learned counsel has submitted that on the same analogy, as Molar Singh was in possession of the aforesaid two survey numbers as a result of private partition while the non-evacuees-respondents were MN possession of the other survey numbers in the 'Khelat' in lieu of survey numbers which were in the possession of Mohr Singh, the allotment of whole of the land comprising aforesaid survey numbers in favor of Jan Muhammad, pro forma respondent, could not be set at naught by the Custodian; the shares of the co-sharers could be adjusted at the time of regular partition between them. The learned counsel has cited a number of authorities in support of his view that a vendor is competent to transfer land in excess of his share from certain survey numbers, provided the other co-sharers can be compensated out of other LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_2452. HTML survey numbers in the 'Khelat'. The learned counsel has contended that this point was not properly attended to by the Custodian and the High Court despite the fact that it was raised before them. The learned counsel has further argued that the review jurisdiction was not available to the Custodian to declare the property in dispute as non-evacuee because such a declaration could only buy made under section 22 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act after holding due inquiry and not in exercise of review jurisdiction. The learned counsel has maintained that even otherwise, the circumstances indicated above, it cannot be said that the order passed by the Custodian served the ends of justice as has been opined by the Custodian and that too after the expiry of period of limitation. 4. In reply, Raja Muhammad Kiddie Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel for the respondents, did not controvert that Molar Singh was an occupancy tenant in the 'K heat' or for that matter in the abovementioned two survey numbers to the extent of one-half, but he was in possession of the whole of land comprised of aforesaid two survey numbers as a result of private partition. The learned counsel has further submitted that the proprietary rights have been granted to the respondents even out of the aforesaid survey numbers which were in possession of Molar Singh and, thereafter, came into the possession of Jan Muhammad, allottee. The learned counsel has argued that if the transfer of the proprietary rights’ order granted to the allottee remains intact, the interest of the contesting respondents would be adversely affected, because they would be deprived of their one-half share in the said survey numbers which were in the possession of Molar Singh before migration and subsequently came into the possession of the allottee. Thus, the learned counsel has maintained that if it is ensured that the merest of the respondents-co-sharers would not be adversely affected in the future, they would have no grievance against the allotment of the aforesaid two survey numbers m favor of Jan Muhammad pro forma respondent, or the appellants-transferees. 5. We have given due consideration to the arguments raised at the Bar. It may be observed that while accepting the review petition filed by the respondents, the learned Custodian has set aside the transfer of proprietary rights order and observed that fresh allotment should be made in favor of Jan Muhammad, pro forma respondent, out of all the survey numbers in the 'Khelat' to the extent of one-half of share and the matter should be processed afresh for granting him provisional proprietary rights out of all the survey numbers instead of survey numbers which was exclusively in his possession as a result of private partition. It LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y may be observed that the definition of words evacuee property given in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act shows that any tangible interest of an evacuee m the property would bring it within the ambit of definition of words 'evacuee property’; it is not necessary, that an evacuee must have full right of ownership in the property. It would be expedient to reproduce below the definition of words 'evacuee property’ as given in section 2(3) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act: "evacuee property’ means any property in which an evacuee has any right of interest (whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or in any other capacity). and includes- (a) (b) (Underlining is ours). In view of the abovementioned definition, it is clear that even if an evacuee had only possessory title to the land before migration to India the property would be deemed to be an evacuee property. The learned Custodian appears to have entertained the belief that only the full ownership of the property of an evacuee would render his property as evacuee property and not any other lesser interest than that. As it is not disputed that Molar Singh was exclusively in the possession of the aforesaid two survey numbers before his migration, the property in dispute fell within the ambit of evacuee property and, thus, the Custodian has committed an error MN declaring the allotment in question as illegal, on the ground that one-half of the land comprising the aforesaid two survey numbers was not in the occupancy tenancy or the ownership of Molar Singh. 6. It may also be observed that irrespective of the arguments advanced by the learned counsel of the appellant that the Custodian was not competent to declare the property in dispute as non-evacuee in exercise of review jurisdiction at a belated review petition, the fact remains that in fact the property was evacuee and, thus, its allotment in pursuance of the provisions of Rehabilitation Act did not offend against law. Appeal accepted. 7. So far as the apprehension of the learned counsel for the respondents that the respondents would be adversely affected if the provisional proprietary rights order granted to the allottee remains intact is concerned, it may be observed that the said order could not transfer any interest in the property which an evacuee or for that matter the Custodian did not enjoy; as has already been pointed out Molar Singh, evacuee was an occupancy tenant in the aforesaid two survey numbers only to the extent of one-half and on the remaining other one-half his title was merely that of possessory nature under the private partition. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Thus, the transfer of proprietary rights order would transfer only possessory title to the extent of one-half of the disputed land in the said survey numbers to the allottee and nothing more. Thus, the apprehensions of the respondent-co-shares that their interest in the aforesaid survey numbers would be adversely affected, are misplaced and have no substance. In the light of what has been stated above, we accept the appeal, set aside the judgments of the Custodian and the High Court and restore the allotment as well as the transfer of proprietary rights order, dated 6-5-1981 issued in favor of Jan Muhammad pro forma respondent. In the circumstances of the case, we make no order AST "the legal gatabase.com LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2452?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2452 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1998-12-03): LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_2452. HTML SARDAR SAID MUHAMMAD KHAN, C.J.-This appeal has been directed against the order of the High Court, dated 19-2-1998, whereby the writ petition field by the appellants, harm, was dismissed. 2. The brief facts of the case are that the land comprising Survey Nos. 449 and 454, Khelat No. 4, measuring 16 Canals, 14 Marla's, situate in village Santana Iran, Thesis Radial, District Mirror, was allotted to pro forma respondent, Jan Muhammad, as a refugee on 16-11-1965. Thereafter, the entitlement certificate and proprietary nights of the said land were granted to him on 6-5-1981 and a mutation was also sanctioned m his favor. Jan Muhammad, pro forma respondent, sold the aforesaid piece of land to Muhammad, appellant No.3, through a registered sale-deed for a consideration of Rs.80,000. Respondent No.4 filed a preemption suit against the sale-deed but the same was dismissed; his appeals to the District Judge and the High Court also failed. On 17-7- 1998, appellant No.3 transferred the property through a gift-deed in favor of his sons appellants Nos. and 2. Thereafter, respondent No.4 filed a review petition before the Custodian alleging that only one-half of the land out of the aforesaid survey numbers was evacuee property while the other one-half was in the ownership of the locals. Thus, he challenged the proprietary rights which were granted to pro forma respondent and also the transfer made by him. The Custodian accepted the review petition hold mg that as only one-half of the land was evacuee property, the proprietary rights to the extent of remain one-half were against law and, thus, were set at naught. The appellants, herein, filed a writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed. 3. We have heard the arguments. Mr. Muhammad Anwar, Advocate, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the total area of the land comprising "Khelat" No.4 was 35 Canals, out of which one-half was under the occupancy tenancy of Molar Singh, evacuee, while the other half was under the occupancy tenancy of nonevacuees, Dicta and others, respondents. But as a result of private partition, Molar Singh, evacuee, was in exclusive possession of the aforesaid two survey numbers before migration, while the said non-evacuees were in the possession of the other survey numbers in lieu of their share which was in the possession of Molar Singh. After the enforcement of the Land Reforms Act, the non- WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y evacuees, occupancy tenants, were granted the rights of ownership out of all the survey numbers in the ' Khelat’ to the extent of one-half share including the aforesaid two survey numbers which were in the possession of Molar Singh before his migration and, thereafter, came into the possession of Jan Muhammad, allottee, who was subsequently granted the proprietary rights of the aforesaid two survey numbers by the Custodian including the one-half of the occupancy tenancy of Dicta and others, respondents. The learned counsel has argued that after the dismissal of the preemption suit filed by the respondent,

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2452?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2452 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1998-12-03): possession of Jan Muhammad, allottee, who was subsequently granted the proprietary rights of the aforesaid two survey numbers by the Custodian including the one-half of the occupancy tenancy of Dicta and others, respondents. The learned counsel has argued that after the dismissal of the preemption suit filed by the respondent, Dicta, the respondents filed a belated review petition before the Custodian contending that one-half of the share m the aforesaid survey number which was initially under their occupancy tenancy and subsequently, became their ownership as a result of Land Reforms Act could not be allotted to Jan Muhammad, pro forma respondent. The learned Custodian accepted the review petition observing that the allotment of the whole of the land comprising aforesaid two survey numbers could not be made in favor of Jan Muhammad, allottee, because Molar Singh evacuee, was occupancy tenant only to the extent of one-half share. According to the learned counsel, the review petition before the Custodian was hopelessly time-barred; besides, the respondents filed the review petition only after the dismissal of preemption suit filed by Dicta, respondent. The learned counsel has maintained that as Dicta, respondent, accepted the right of Jan Muhammad allottee, to the extent of whole of the land comprising the said survey numbers, he could challenge his allotment by filing review petition before the Custodian. Thus, according to the learned counsel, the respondents were stopped from challenging the rights of Jan Muhammad, allottee, regarding the aforesaid two survey numbers even to the extent of one-half share. The learned counsel has further argued that a Vendée, who is in possession of a survey number, is entitled to transfer the same even in excess of his share, provided such transfer does not exceed his overall entitlement in the ‘Khelat’. Therefore, the learned counsel has submitted that on the same analogy, as Molar Singh was in possession of the aforesaid two survey numbers as a result of private partition while the non-evacuees-respondents were MN possession of the other survey numbers in the 'Khelat' in lieu of survey numbers which were in the possession of Mohr Singh, the allotment of whole of the land comprising aforesaid survey numbers in favor of Jan Muhammad, pro forma respondent, could not be set at naught by the Custodian; the shares of the co-sharers could be adjusted at the time of regular partition between them. The learned counsel has cited a number of authorities in support of his view that a vendor is competent to transfer land in excess of his share from certain survey numbers, provided the other co-sharers can be compensated out of other LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_2452. HTML survey numbers in the 'Khelat'. The learned counsel has contended that this point was not properly attended to by the Custodian and the High Court despite the fact that it was raised before them. The learned counsel has further argued that the review jurisdiction was not available to the Custodian to declare the property in dispute as non-evacuee because such a declaration could

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2452?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2452 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1998-12-03): was not properly attended to by the Custodian and the High Court despite the fact that it was raised before them. The learned counsel has further argued that the review jurisdiction was not available to the Custodian to declare the property in dispute as non-evacuee because such a declaration could only buy made under section 22 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act after holding due inquiry and not in exercise of review jurisdiction. The learned counsel has maintained that even otherwise, the circumstances indicated above, it cannot be said that the order passed by the Custodian served the ends of justice as has been opined by the Custodian and that too after the expiry of period of limitation. 4. In reply, Raja Muhammad Kiddie Khan, Advocate, the learned counsel for the respondents, did not controvert that Molar Singh was an occupancy tenant in the 'K heat' or for that matter in the abovementioned two survey numbers to the extent of one-half, but he was in possession of the whole of land comprised of aforesaid two survey numbers as a result of private partition. The learned counsel has further submitted that the proprietary rights have been granted to the respondents even out of the aforesaid survey numbers which were in possession of Molar Singh and, thereafter, came into the possession of Jan Muhammad, allottee. The learned counsel has argued that if the transfer of the proprietary rights’ order granted to the allottee remains intact, the interest of the contesting respondents would be adversely affected, because they would be deprived of their one-half share in the said survey numbers which were in the possession of Molar Singh before migration and subsequently came into the possession of the allottee. Thus, the learned counsel has maintained that if it is ensured that the merest of the respondents-co-sharers would not be adversely affected in the future, they would have no grievance against the allotment of the aforesaid two survey numbers m favor of Jan Muhammad pro forma respondent, or the appellants-transferees. 5. We have given due consideration to the arguments raised at the Bar. It may be observed that while accepting the review petition filed by the respondents, the learned Custodian has set aside the transfer of proprietary rights order and observed that fresh allotment should be made in favor of Jan Muhammad, pro forma respondent, out of all the survey numbers in the 'Khelat' to the extent of one-half of share and the matter should be processed afresh for granting him provisional proprietary rights out of all the survey numbers instead of survey numbers which was exclusively in his possession as a result of private partition. It LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y may be observed that the definition of words evacuee property given in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act shows that any tangible interest of an evacuee m the property would bring it within the ambit of definition of words 'evacuee property’; it is not necessary, that an evacuee must have full right of ownership

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2452?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2452 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1998-12-03): the definition of words evacuee property given in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act shows that any tangible interest of an evacuee m the property would bring it within the ambit of definition of words 'evacuee property’; it is not necessary, that an evacuee must have full right of ownership in the property. It would be expedient to reproduce below the definition of words 'evacuee property’ as given in section 2(3) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act: "evacuee property’ means any property in which an evacuee has any right of interest (whether personally or as a trustee or a beneficiary or in any other capacity). and includes- (a) (b) (Underlining is ours). In view of the abovementioned definition, it is clear that even if an evacuee had only possessory title to the land before migration to India the property would be deemed to be an evacuee property. The learned Custodian appears to have entertained the belief that only the full ownership of the property of an evacuee would render his property as evacuee property and not any other lesser interest than that. As it is not disputed that Molar Singh was exclusively in the possession of the aforesaid two survey numbers before his migration, the property in dispute fell within the ambit of evacuee property and, thus, the Custodian has committed an error MN declaring the allotment in question as illegal, on the ground that one-half of the land comprising the aforesaid two survey numbers was not in the occupancy tenancy or the ownership of Molar Singh. 6. It may also be observed that irrespective of the arguments advanced by the learned counsel of the appellant that the Custodian was not competent to declare the property in dispute as non-evacuee in exercise of review jurisdiction at a belated review petition, the fact remains that in fact the property was evacuee and, thus, its allotment in pursuance of the provisions of Rehabilitation Act did not offend against law. Appeal accepted. 7. So far as the apprehension of the learned counsel for the respondents that the respondents would be adversely affected if the provisional proprietary rights order granted to the allottee remains intact is concerned, it may be observed that the said order could not transfer any interest in the property which an evacuee or for that matter the Custodian did not enjoy; as has already been pointed out Molar Singh, evacuee was an occupancy tenant in the aforesaid two survey numbers only to the extent of one-half and on the remaining other one-half his title was merely that of possessory nature under the private partition. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Thus, the transfer of proprietary rights order would transfer only possessory title to the extent of one-half of the disputed land in the said survey numbers to the allottee and nothing more. Thus, the apprehensions of the respondent-co-shares that their interest in the aforesaid survey numbers would be adversely affected, are misplaced and have no substance. In the light of what has

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 2452?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 2452 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1998-12-03): to the extent of one-half of the disputed land in the said survey numbers to the allottee and nothing more. Thus, the apprehensions of the respondent-co-shares that their interest in the aforesaid survey numbers would be adversely affected, are misplaced and have no substance. In the light of what has been stated above, we accept the appeal, set aside the judgments of the Custodian and the High Court and restore the allotment as well as the transfer of proprietary rights order, dated 6-5-1981 issued in favor of Jan Muhammad pro forma respondent. In the circumstances of the case, we make no order AST "the legal gatabase.com LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2000 YLR 1088 about?
Answer: Case 2000 YLR 1088 was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1999-10-14. The case involved SYED MISKEEN SHAH (APPELLANT) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR REHABILITATION) ACT 1974 - SS. 6-A AND 11 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - SS.42 AND 44. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2000 YLR 1088?
Answer: In case 2000 YLR 1088, the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR REHABILITATION) ACT 1974 - SS. 6-A AND 11 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (VIII OF 1974) - SS.42 AND 44. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1999-10-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2000 YLR 1088?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2000 YLR 1088 were: SYED NAZIR HUSSAIN SHAH KAZMI, ADVOCATE FOR APPELLANT. FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENT NO. 1.CH. MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM ZIA, ADVOCATE FOR RESPONDENT NO.3.. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2000 YLR 1088?
Answer: The parties in case 2000 YLR 1088 were: SYED MISKEEN SHAH (APPELLANT) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2000 YLR 1088.
Answer: LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_ 1088. HTML MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.—This appeal, with the leave of the Court, is directed against the judgment of the High Court dated 25-3-1998, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant, herein, was dismissed. 2. The precise facts forming the background of present appeal are that an evacuee land measuring 38 Canals and 7 Marla's comprising survey Nos. 137, 139, 102, 116 and 128 situate in village Channel Bang, Thesis and District Muzaffarabad was claimed to have been allotted to the appellant and his father Syed Rehman Shah on 6-7-1955. It is further claimed by them that they were in its possession since the date of allotment. According to the appellant the land was subsequently allotted to one Analyst Shah at the back of the appellant who surrendered his allotment in favor of one Lai Din. The appellant when acquired knowledge of this allotment challenged the legality of the same before the D.R.C. Muzaffarabad on 24-6-1972. Lai Din by conceding the allotment of appellant surrendered in his favor. However, his statement could not be recorded as he failed to appear before the D.R.C. The D.R.C vide his order dated 24-51982 remanded the case to A.R.C. for fresh order after a thorough probe. The A.R.C. contrary to the spirit of remand order allotted the land to Lai Din respondent No.4. The appellant assailed the order, in revision petition before their Rehabilitation Commissioner who by accepting the petition once again remanded the case to A.R.C. Muzaffarabad for fresh decision. Respondent No.3 Abdullah claiming himself to be a refugee challenged the legality of this order passed by the A.C.R. dated 20-10-1972 before the Rehabilitation Commissioner by concealing the fact that the said order was not holding the field as it stood cancelled while deciding the previous revision petition filed by the appellant. The Rehabilitation Commissioner again set aside the order dated 20-10-1972, and held Abdullah respondent No.3 entitled to allotment of land. According to the appellant this order was passed at his back. However, when he acquired the knowledge of the same he assailed this order before the Custodian who vide his judgment dated 22-9-1994, dismissed the same on the ground that the appellant had failed to satisfy him that the land in dispute was previously allotted to him. The writ petition filed by the appellant was also dismissed vide order impugned madly on the ground that the allotment made in favor of the appellant on 6-7-1955 was bad in law as the same was passed without cancelling the previous allotment of respondent No.3 made in his favor on 24-6-1953. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 3. Arguing the case on behalf of the appellant, Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi, has vehemently contended that allotment in favor of respondent No.3 on the face of it appears to be fake and forged as the same was claimed to be made on 24-6-1953 whereas the Ration Card in his favor appears to be issued on 21-9-1955 and in the allotment order of the said respondent the entry of Ration Card issued on 21-9-1955, is conspicuously apparent. The learned counsel for the appellant further elaborated that it is the case of respondent No.3 himself that the allotment in his favor was made on 6-7-1953, but how the entry of Ration Card issued on 21-9-1955 appears on his allotment chit. It was also contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the Rehabilitation Commissioner, while passing the order in favor of respondent No.3 did not afford the appellant an opportunity of being heard whereas the fact of the matter is that on the revision petition filed by the appellant before tie Rehabilitation Commissioner he set aside tie impugned allotment thereby declaring the loment of appellant as BMG genuine. 4. In reply, it was contended by Ch. Muhammad Ibrahim Via, the learned counsel for respondent No.3, that a new case has been set up by the appellant for the first tine MN the Supreme Court. During litigation before the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Custodian and the High Court it was not the case of the appellant that the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake and forged because in the allotment chit the entry of Ration Card issued on 21-9-1955, is apparent. Thus, according to the learned counsel for the respondent this new plea could not be taken at such a belated stage. The learned counsel POM.Ted out that before the Rehabilitation Authorities, Custodian and the High Court the appellant simply averred in vague terms that the allotment of respondent No.3 was Boris and fictitious without assigning any reason whatsoever. The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that in the name of respondent No.3 a valid allotment was made by the competent Rehabilitation Authorities on 2-6- 1953 and the copy of allotment chit has teen duly appended by the answering respondent. Before the Rehabilitation Authorities the appellant could not substantiate his claim that in fact the allotment of answering respondent was fake or bonus. The Rehabilitation authorities as well a the Custodian reached the conclusion that a valid allotment was made in favor of answering respondent and during its subsistence the subsequent allotment which is claimed by the appellant to have been made on 6-7- 1955 would be a nullity in the eye of law. The learned counsel for the respondent also strenuously argued that the allotment claimed to have been made on 6-7-1955, according to the allotment chit Annexure '' has been made in favor of Rehman Shah son of Muhammad WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_ 1088. HTML Shah '' Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shall jointly but none of them has filed the writ petition except Miskeen Shah whose share is negligible out of the disputed land. According to the learned counsel it is also neither explained nor averred in the writ petition that how his share of land is adversely affected particularly so when rest of the allottees have not filed the writ petition as such the writ petition before the High Court was not maintainable. 5. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmir, the learned counsel for respondent No.1 fully supported the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant No.3 and submitted that the appellant though averred before the Rehabilitation Authorities as well as before the Custodian and the High Court that the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake and fictitious but failed to prove the above fact by any cogent material. The learned counsel submitted that it was rightly observed by the Custodian and the High Court that the proper forum for the appellant to prove the fac tum of fake and fictitious allotment was to approach the Rehabilitation Authorities. 6. We have given our due consideration to the arguments advanced at the bar and perused the relevant record. It is conceded by the appellant that the land in dispute was allotted to him along with others on 6-7-1955 whereas the allotment in favor of respondent No.3 was made on 24-6-1953, but the precise contention of the appellant is that the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake and fictitious. Once it is conceded that the allotment of respondent No.3 was made prior in time a heavy burden was cast upon the appellant to prove the fraud and the fact that the allotment was bogus. Not to speak of a cogent material with regard to the fakeness of the allotment of respondent No.3 it was not even averred in clear terms as to how the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake or bogus. The contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondent appears to be substantial that at no stage either before the Rehabilitation Authorities, the-Custodian or the High Court the case of the appellant has been that the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake and fictitious because of the fact that there was an entry of Ration Card issued on 21-9-1955 on the allotment chit produced by the respondent which purports to have been issued on 24-6- 1953. It is for the first time that this plea has been raised in the Supreme Court. It is a settled law that a plea which has not been taken before the lower Tribunals or in the High Court cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time in the Supreme Court. Even otherwise the mere fact that the allotment chit produced by the respondent carries the entry WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y of Ration Card issued on 219-1955 does not render the allotment as being fake. It was rightly posted out by the learned Custodian as well as the High Court that they could not go deep into the question of fakeness of allotment and for this purpose the proper form was the Rehabilitation Authorities, but the appellant failed to prove there that the allotment in the name of respondent No.3 was fictitious. 7. We have carefully examined the allotment chit issued in favor of respondent No.3 by the competent Rehabilitation A Authority dated 24-6-1953. This allotment in the name of respondent No.3 was not cancelled by any competent Authority so far. The claim of the appellant that from the date of allotment he had been in continuous possession of the land in dispute as allottee is also negated by the Kara Girafarig produced by the appellant himself’ We have carefully perused the entries of the Kara Girafarig relied upon by the appellant. In none of Girafarig appellant is entered as an allottee of the land in dispute. On the other hand, his entry in the possession column is that of fall Bahai so the assertion of the appellant that in-lieu of allotment he entered into the possession of the disputed land stands negated by the documentary evidence brought on record. 7-A. As said earlier, it is also conceded by appellant that allotment in favor of respondent No.3 was made on 24-6-1953. This shows that the allotment in favor of respondent No.3 was made much earlier than g the allotment made in favor of the appellant. It is a cardinal principle of law that during the substitute of the first allotment the subsequent allotment is a nullity in the eye of law, and it shall be deemed as having not been made at all. 8. Even otherwise after examining the allotment chit issued in favor of the appellant which forms part of the record it is evident that a joint allotment has been made in the names of Rehman Shah! son of Muhammad Ahmad, ’' Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shah but none of them has filed the writ petition except Miskeen-Shah in whose name the allotment is ' Rehman Shah, his father and whose share out of the disputed land is negligible. It has also not been averred in the writ petition that his share of the land is adversely affected particularly so when the rest of the allottees have not filed writ petition. The other allottees being necessary parties were to be imp leaded in the writ petition either WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y as petitioners or pro form-respondents. Even on this score the writ petition was liable to be dismissed for non-implement of necessary parties. In the light of what has been stated above, fin LNG no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with costs. H. 3.T./445/SC (AJ&K) Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1088?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1088 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-14): LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_ 1088. HTML MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.—This appeal, with the leave of the Court, is directed against the judgment of the High Court dated 25-3-1998, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant, herein, was dismissed. 2. The precise facts forming the background of present appeal are that an evacuee land measuring 38 Canals and 7 Marla's comprising survey Nos. 137, 139, 102, 116 and 128 situate in village Channel Bang, Thesis and District Muzaffarabad was claimed to have been allotted to the appellant and his father Syed Rehman Shah on 6-7-1955. It is further claimed by them that they were in its possession since the date of allotment. According to the appellant the land was subsequently allotted to one Analyst Shah at the back of the appellant who surrendered his allotment in favor of one Lai Din. The appellant when acquired knowledge of this allotment challenged the legality of the same before the D.R.C. Muzaffarabad on 24-6-1972. Lai Din by conceding the allotment of appellant surrendered in his favor. However, his statement could not be recorded as he failed to appear before the D.R.C. The D.R.C vide his order dated 24-51982 remanded the case to A.R.C. for fresh order after a thorough probe. The A.R.C. contrary to the spirit of remand order allotted the land to Lai Din respondent No.4. The appellant assailed the order, in revision petition before their Rehabilitation Commissioner who by accepting the petition once again remanded the case to A.R.C. Muzaffarabad for fresh decision. Respondent No.3 Abdullah claiming himself to be a refugee challenged the legality of this order passed by the A.C.R. dated 20-10-1972 before the Rehabilitation Commissioner by concealing the fact that the said order was not holding the field as it stood cancelled while deciding the previous revision petition filed by the appellant. The Rehabilitation Commissioner again set aside the order dated 20-10-1972, and held Abdullah respondent No.3 entitled to allotment of land. According to the appellant this order was passed at his back. However, when he acquired the knowledge of the same he assailed this order before the Custodian who vide his judgment dated 22-9-1994, dismissed the same on the ground that the appellant had failed to satisfy him that the land in dispute was previously allotted to him. The writ petition filed by the appellant was also dismissed vide order impugned madly on the ground that the allotment made in favor of the appellant on 6-7-1955 was bad in law as the same was passed without cancelling the previous allotment of respondent No.3 made in his favor on 24-6-1953. WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 3. Arguing the case on behalf of the appellant, Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi, has vehemently contended that allotment in favor of respondent No.3 on the face of it appears to be fake and forged as the same was claimed to be made on 24-6-1953 whereas the Ration Card in his favor appears to be issued on 21-9-1955 and in the allotment order of the said respondent

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1088?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1088 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-14): that allotment in favor of respondent No.3 on the face of it appears to be fake and forged as the same was claimed to be made on 24-6-1953 whereas the Ration Card in his favor appears to be issued on 21-9-1955 and in the allotment order of the said respondent the entry of Ration Card issued on 21-9-1955, is conspicuously apparent. The learned counsel for the appellant further elaborated that it is the case of respondent No.3 himself that the allotment in his favor was made on 6-7-1953, but how the entry of Ration Card issued on 21-9-1955 appears on his allotment chit. It was also contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the Rehabilitation Commissioner, while passing the order in favor of respondent No.3 did not afford the appellant an opportunity of being heard whereas the fact of the matter is that on the revision petition filed by the appellant before tie Rehabilitation Commissioner he set aside tie impugned allotment thereby declaring the loment of appellant as BMG genuine. 4. In reply, it was contended by Ch. Muhammad Ibrahim Via, the learned counsel for respondent No.3, that a new case has been set up by the appellant for the first tine MN the Supreme Court. During litigation before the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Custodian and the High Court it was not the case of the appellant that the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake and forged because in the allotment chit the entry of Ration Card issued on 21-9-1955, is apparent. Thus, according to the learned counsel for the respondent this new plea could not be taken at such a belated stage. The learned counsel POM.Ted out that before the Rehabilitation Authorities, Custodian and the High Court the appellant simply averred in vague terms that the allotment of respondent No.3 was Boris and fictitious without assigning any reason whatsoever. The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that in the name of respondent No.3 a valid allotment was made by the competent Rehabilitation Authorities on 2-6- 1953 and the copy of allotment chit has teen duly appended by the answering respondent. Before the Rehabilitation Authorities the appellant could not substantiate his claim that in fact the allotment of answering respondent was fake or bonus. The Rehabilitation authorities as well a the Custodian reached the conclusion that a valid allotment was made in favor of answering respondent and during its subsistence the subsequent allotment which is claimed by the appellant to have been made on 6-7- 1955 would be a nullity in the eye of law. The learned counsel for the respondent also strenuously argued that the allotment claimed to have been made on 6-7-1955, according to the allotment chit Annexure '' has been made in favor of Rehman Shah son of Muhammad WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_ 1088. HTML Shah '' Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shall jointly but none of them has filed the writ petition except Miskeen Shah whose share is negligible out of the disputed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1088?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1088 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-14): '' has been made in favor of Rehman Shah son of Muhammad WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LR_2000_ 1088. HTML Shah '' Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shall jointly but none of them has filed the writ petition except Miskeen Shah whose share is negligible out of the disputed land. According to the learned counsel it is also neither explained nor averred in the writ petition that how his share of land is adversely affected particularly so when rest of the allottees have not filed the writ petition as such the writ petition before the High Court was not maintainable. 5. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmir, the learned counsel for respondent No.1 fully supported the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant No.3 and submitted that the appellant though averred before the Rehabilitation Authorities as well as before the Custodian and the High Court that the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake and fictitious but failed to prove the above fact by any cogent material. The learned counsel submitted that it was rightly observed by the Custodian and the High Court that the proper forum for the appellant to prove the fac tum of fake and fictitious allotment was to approach the Rehabilitation Authorities. 6. We have given our due consideration to the arguments advanced at the bar and perused the relevant record. It is conceded by the appellant that the land in dispute was allotted to him along with others on 6-7-1955 whereas the allotment in favor of respondent No.3 was made on 24-6-1953, but the precise contention of the appellant is that the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake and fictitious. Once it is conceded that the allotment of respondent No.3 was made prior in time a heavy burden was cast upon the appellant to prove the fraud and the fact that the allotment was bogus. Not to speak of a cogent material with regard to the fakeness of the allotment of respondent No.3 it was not even averred in clear terms as to how the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake or bogus. The contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondent appears to be substantial that at no stage either before the Rehabilitation Authorities, the-Custodian or the High Court the case of the appellant has been that the allotment of respondent No.3 was fake and fictitious because of the fact that there was an entry of Ration Card issued on 21-9-1955 on the allotment chit produced by the respondent which purports to have been issued on 24-6- 1953. It is for the first time that this plea has been raised in the Supreme Court. It is a settled law that a plea which has not been taken before the lower Tribunals or in the High Court cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time in the Supreme Court. Even otherwise the mere fact that the allotment chit produced by the respondent carries the entry WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y of Ration Card issued

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1088?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1088 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-14): has not been taken before the lower Tribunals or in the High Court cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time in the Supreme Court. Even otherwise the mere fact that the allotment chit produced by the respondent carries the entry WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y of Ration Card issued on 219-1955 does not render the allotment as being fake. It was rightly posted out by the learned Custodian as well as the High Court that they could not go deep into the question of fakeness of allotment and for this purpose the proper form was the Rehabilitation Authorities, but the appellant failed to prove there that the allotment in the name of respondent No.3 was fictitious. 7. We have carefully examined the allotment chit issued in favor of respondent No.3 by the competent Rehabilitation A Authority dated 24-6-1953. This allotment in the name of respondent No.3 was not cancelled by any competent Authority so far. The claim of the appellant that from the date of allotment he had been in continuous possession of the land in dispute as allottee is also negated by the Kara Girafarig produced by the appellant himself’ We have carefully perused the entries of the Kara Girafarig relied upon by the appellant. In none of Girafarig appellant is entered as an allottee of the land in dispute. On the other hand, his entry in the possession column is that of fall Bahai so the assertion of the appellant that in-lieu of allotment he entered into the possession of the disputed land stands negated by the documentary evidence brought on record. 7-A. As said earlier, it is also conceded by appellant that allotment in favor of respondent No.3 was made on 24-6-1953. This shows that the allotment in favor of respondent No.3 was made much earlier than g the allotment made in favor of the appellant. It is a cardinal principle of law that during the substitute of the first allotment the subsequent allotment is a nullity in the eye of law, and it shall be deemed as having not been made at all. 8. Even otherwise after examining the allotment chit issued in favor of the appellant which forms part of the record it is evident that a joint allotment has been made in the names of Rehman Shah! son of Muhammad Ahmad, ’' Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shah but none of them has filed the writ petition except Miskeen-Shah in whose name the allotment is ' Rehman Shah, his father and whose share out of the disputed land is negligible. It has also not been averred in the writ petition that his share of the land is adversely affected particularly so when the rest of the allottees have not filed writ petition. The other allottees being necessary parties were to be imp leaded in the writ petition either WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y as petitioners or pro form-respondents. Even on this score the writ petition was liable to be dismissed for non-implement

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2000 YLR 1088?
Answer: From case 2000 YLR 1088 (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-10-14): so when the rest of the allottees have not filed writ petition. The other allottees being necessary parties were to be imp leaded in the writ petition either WW. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y as petitioners or pro form-respondents. Even on this score the writ petition was liable to be dismissed for non-implement of necessary parties. In the light of what has been stated above, fin LNG no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with costs. H. 3.T./445/SC (AJ&K) Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1999-12-16. The case involved MUHAMMAD AZAD BAIG AND OTHERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND OTHERS. The relevant statutes include AZAD KASHMIR REHABILITATION) ORDINANCE 1952 - SS. 7, 12, PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT, 1957 - SS. 18 (2), 18-B, 43 (6) PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT, 1956 - S. 23. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: AZAD KASHMIR REHABILITATION) ORDINANCE 1952 - SS. 7, 12, PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT, 1957 - SS. 18 (2), 18-B, 43 (6) PAKISTAN REHABILITATION ACT, 1956 - S. 23. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1999-12-16.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANTS: SYED NAZIR HUSSAIN SHAH KAZMI, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. I: FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENTS NOS. AND.3: SARDAR RAFIQUE MAHMOOD KHAN, ADVOCATE.. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: MUHAMMAD AZAD BAIG AND OTHERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND OTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J. - This appeal by way of leave to the Court, has been directed against an order passed by the High Court on 5.11.1998, whereby the writ petition tiled by the appellants, herein, was dismissed. 2. The necessary facts, giving rise to the present appeal, are that according to the appellants land comprising survey Nos. 205 and 571, measuring 7 canals and 17 Marley, situate in village Hull, Thesis and District Bag, was allotted in the name of their father on 15.3.1952, and since then they are in possession of the same. However, subsequently land under dispute is alleged to have been allotted in favor of father of respondents Nos. and 3 by making fictitious entry m the allotment permit in 1953. It is the case of the appellants that the alleged allotment, if any, in the name of father of respondents Nos. and 3, without the cancellation of allotment made in the name of father of appellants, was illegal. The appellants, herein, filed a review petition before the Custodian, seeking the cancellation of allotment of respondents Nos. and 3 but the learned Custodian after making detailed inquiry came to the conclusion that in fact the appellants have fictitiously got their names entered in the allotment register with the connivance of some revenue officials and the said entry was maneuvered by introducing additional papers in the register. Thus, the learned Custodian dismissed the review petition. Consequently a writ petition was tiled in the High Court which was also dismissed and the findings of the Custodian were confirmed. The High Court has given detailed reasons for upholding the findings of the Custodian for dismissing the review petition vide the impugned judgment dated 5.11.1998, which is the subject of present appeal. 3.' Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the findings of the High Court are not correct inter alia on the ground that MN fact no file of allotment was in existence in favor of father of respondents and that the claim of appellants is supported by the fact that the land in dispute had been in possession of appellants since the year 1952. He has argued that no valid allotment was made in the name of father of respondents Nos. and 3. The entry of allotment in their names in 1953 is illegal. The learned counsel has further contended that the learned Custodian observed in his judgment that the land comprising survey No. 571 is not found to have been allotted to respondents but despite that the review and writ petition tiled by the appellants was dismissed in toto. The learned counsel has maintained that when the appellants came to know about the allotment of respondents the review petition was filed and the limitation would start from the date of their knowledge. Even otherwise according to the learned counsel for the appellants there is no limitation prescribed tor filing a review petition under Section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel further argued that the report made by the D.R.C. Bag after detailed inquiry was not taken MTO consideration by the custodian or the High Court. The learned counsel pressed into service the submission that the allotment in favor of father of appellants was made as a local because of short of scale. The allotment of the disputed land having been made in favor of father of appellants in 1952 and the same stood protected under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, contended the learned counsel. The learned counsel for the appellants vehemently maintained that the mere, fact that the allotment in the name of father of appellants was not entered in the revenue record per se does not nullify the allotment itself JSS 4. In reply Vardar Cacique Mahmood Khan and Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmir, the learned counsel appear mg tor opposite side, contended that the land in dispute was never allotted to the father of appellants rather the fake and fabricated documents were entered in the record with the connivance of revenue officials. The learned counsel submitted that the Custodian of Evacuee Property after thoroughly probing into the matter reached the conclusion that all the documents per taming to allotment of father of appellants were false and fabricated, thus the review petition filed before the Custodian was also dismissed. The appellants, according to the learned counsel for respondents, were not entitled to any discretionary relief in exercise of writ jurisdiction. The Custodian being the Court of e> elusive jurisdiction recorded his findings against the appellants and such findings of fact were not assailable before the High Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction. The learned counsel also maintained that in 1952 there was no such law for allotment of land in the name of locals. Thus any such allotment, even if made in the name of father of appellants, was a nullity in the eye of law. 5. After hearing the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and perusal of documents attached with the file, it transpires that the Custodian of Evacuee Property after a detailed scrutiny of the record came to the conclusion that the appellants who claimed the allotment to be made in favor of their father in the year 1952 have failed to challenge the allotment made in the name of respondents in the year 1953 before any Rehabilitation Authority, and challenged the same before the Custodian of Evacuee Property in the year 1993. It was also posted out by the learned Custodian that the allotment of the appellants was not entered in the allotment register, but an effort was made to get it entered through additional papers on 2.12.1993. Therefore, the learned Custodian came to the conclusion that the allotment was fake and fabricated with the connivance of the revenue officials. The High Court also upheld the aforesaid view of the Custodian and observed that none of the documents placed on record by the appellants was found to have been secured by them before the year 1993 or 1997 which shows that the allotment was fabricated alter 1993 when the same was entered in the allotment register through additional papers. The copies of various orders were secured by the appellants m 1993 and afterward which substantiates the tact that all proceedings took place after the year 1993. I'he High Court further observed that the Custodian of Evacuee Property being a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, after thorough probe MTO the facts came to the conclusion that the allotment was fake and fabricated. The findings of facts, thus, recorded by the tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction were not assailable through a writ petition. The High Court also opined that the appellants remained silent for a period of 40 years when they firstly tiled a review petition before the Custodian which casts a serious doubt on the correctness of the allotment apart from the fact that the same suffers from laches. 6. So far as the observation of the High Court is concerned that no law for allotment in favor of a local was in existence in the year 1952 when the suite was claimed to be made, in our view, is not correct. Section 7 of the Azad Kashmir Rehabilitation Ordinance. 1952 may usefully be reproduced which reads as under:- C The Azad Kashmir Government may buy order authorize a Rehabilitation Commissioner to pool such evacuee property as may be specified, and to allot the same to persons resident in Azad Kashmir (Jammu and Kashmir Nationals unless otherwise specially authorized by the Government) whether refugees or not and upon such order being made, the Commissioner shall have all such powers, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance as may be necessary to enable him to prepare a scheme for pooling such property and allotting it as aforesaid." Section 12 of the said Ordinance is to the following effect:- v'VJ 'j Any person aggrieved by an order under this Ordinance may prefer an appeal: (a) to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner when the order had been passed by an Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner; (b) to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, where the order not BMG an order passed in appeal under 'clause (a) has been passed by a Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. (2) The appeal shall be presented in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. (3) XXX XXK XXX XXX XXX XKK XXK XXX (4) XXX XKK XXX XXX XXK XKK XKK KKK (5). XXX XXX XXX XXX XKK KKK XKXK XKK (6) XXX XXK XXX XXX XXK XKK XKK XXX." Section 8. subsection (3) of the above Ordinance is coached in a following manner:- "A Rehabilitation Commissioner may, by general or special order, delegate all or any of his functions under this Ordinance to such officers or persons as he thinks fit." The above provisions of Azad Kashmir Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 make it clear that the forum for allotment was existing even in 1952 and the allotment could have been made to a refugee or a local. 7. Section 18, subsection (2) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 may usefully be reproduced which reads as follows: V "Every allotment of evacuee property made between the first day of March. 1947, and the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under subsection 8. Section 23 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 is to the following effect "Any corresponding provision of any law in force in any area immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be a provision of this Act, and anything done, action taken, obligation, lability, penalty or punishment incurred, enquiry or proceeding commenced, officer appointed or person authorized, jurisdiction or power conferred, rule made and order issued under any of the provisions of such law, shall be continued, and, so far as may be, be deemed to have been respectively done, taken, incurred, commenced, apported, authorized, conferred, made or issued under this Act, and any enactment or document referring to any such provision shall, as far as may be. be construed to refer to this Act or to the corresponding provision thereof " », The above view is supported by a case reported as Muhammad Jamil V.s. Muhammad Kiddie/UE and another (1991 SC R71) in which it has been held as under: "Now we have given our anxious thought to the provisions of Section 18 (2) and are of the view that validity granted in this provision of law would extend to allotments made by way of lease if they were existing when the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 came into existence, as is the present case. The main reason which leads us to this conclusion is that validation has been given to ‘every allotment of evacuee property made between IST day of March. 1947 and the commencement of this Act. shall be deemed to have been made under subsection and intention of the law-makers clearly was to include every allotment made before coming into force of the said Act and that would also include an allotment by way of lease." FC;?; 9. The perusal of the allotment order in favor of appellants shows that their allotment was temporary for a period of one year. As stated earlier, the allotment was not entered in the allotment register nor its period was extended. This precisely shows that after one year the allotment stood cancelled automatically from the name of appellants. Moreover the alleged allotment was not entered in any of the revenue record till the same was attempted to have been entered in the revenue record in the year 1993 Ina clandestine manner. 10. As regards the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants that Custodian could review by exercising his powers under subsection (6) of Section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act. 1957 is concerned those powers of course are unlimited, and the Custodian is competent to go into the question of gentleness or' otherwise of an allotment. Our aforesaid view is fortified by a case reported as Fazlullah and another kV. Ali Broader and another (1996 SCR 14). The observations in the above-titled case are as follows:- "The powers or review available to the Custodian under Section 43 (6) are exercisable at the instance of an aggrieved person or so won't at any time: and while exercising such powers he calls go into the question of genuineness or the legality of an allotment, as he deems proper. It may be stated that the powers of review vested in the Custodian under subsection (6) of Section 18-A (before amendment) held the field against the provisions contained in subsection (6) of Section 43 of the Act because those were special powers' hut when the said special powers of review have been taken away the general powers of.view of the Custodian under subsection (6) of Section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act stand revived." 11. Thus the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents has a substance but at the same time in the instant case the Custodian of Evacuee Property, BMG a Tribunal of exclusive’ jurisdiction, after conducting the thorough inquiry, reached the conclusion that the allotment in favor of appellants was fake and fictitious. The condition of genuineness of allotment being a condition precedent was a rightful exercise of jurisdiction by the Custodian by not believing the allotment in the name of appellants as genuine. Thus the conclusions arrived at HY a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction cannot he pre-empted HY this Court. However, we have noticed that the learned Custodian has observed in his judgment dated 30.8.1907 that land comprising survey No. 571 was not found to have been included in the land allotted in favor of respondents Nos. and 3. but despite that the review petition was dismissed in toto. The High Court also did not attend to this aspect of the case of the appellants. As Kara No. 571 is not found to have been allotted to respondents, therefore, there beg no material on record against the above said observation, the review petition filed by the appellants before the Custodian and later on the writ petition in the High Court should not have been dismissed to that extent. 12. In the light of what has been stated above, we partly accept the appeal tiled by the appellants so far as it relates to Kara No. 571, situate in village Hull. Thesis and District Bag. and the findings thus recorded by the learned Custodian and the High Court are modified in the terms indicated above. The appeal filed by the appellants with regard to Kara No. 205 stands dismissed. However, in view of the peculiar circumstances of the case, we pass no order as to costs.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-12-16): MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J. - This appeal by way of leave to the Court, has been directed against an order passed by the High Court on 5.11.1998, whereby the writ petition tiled by the appellants, herein, was dismissed. 2. The necessary facts, giving rise to the present appeal, are that according to the appellants land comprising survey Nos. 205 and 571, measuring 7 canals and 17 Marley, situate in village Hull, Thesis and District Bag, was allotted in the name of their father on 15.3.1952, and since then they are in possession of the same. However, subsequently land under dispute is alleged to have been allotted in favor of father of respondents Nos. and 3 by making fictitious entry m the allotment permit in 1953. It is the case of the appellants that the alleged allotment, if any, in the name of father of respondents Nos. and 3, without the cancellation of allotment made in the name of father of appellants, was illegal. The appellants, herein, filed a review petition before the Custodian, seeking the cancellation of allotment of respondents Nos. and 3 but the learned Custodian after making detailed inquiry came to the conclusion that in fact the appellants have fictitiously got their names entered in the allotment register with the connivance of some revenue officials and the said entry was maneuvered by introducing additional papers in the register. Thus, the learned Custodian dismissed the review petition. Consequently a writ petition was tiled in the High Court which was also dismissed and the findings of the Custodian were confirmed. The High Court has given detailed reasons for upholding the findings of the Custodian for dismissing the review petition vide the impugned judgment dated 5.11.1998, which is the subject of present appeal. 3.' Syed Nazi Hussain Shah Nazi, the learned counsel for the appellants, has argued that the findings of the High Court are not correct inter alia on the ground that MN fact no file of allotment was in existence in favor of father of respondents and that the claim of appellants is supported by the fact that the land in dispute had been in possession of appellants since the year 1952. He has argued that no valid allotment was made in the name of father of respondents Nos. and 3. The entry of allotment in their names in 1953 is illegal. The learned counsel has further contended that the learned Custodian observed in his judgment that the land comprising survey No. 571 is not found to have been allotted to respondents but despite that the review and writ petition tiled by the appellants was dismissed in toto. The learned counsel has maintained that when the appellants came to know about the allotment of respondents the review petition was filed and the limitation would start from the date of their knowledge. Even otherwise according to the learned counsel for the appellants there is no limitation prescribed tor filing a review petition under Section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-12-16): know about the allotment of respondents the review petition was filed and the limitation would start from the date of their knowledge. Even otherwise according to the learned counsel for the appellants there is no limitation prescribed tor filing a review petition under Section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel further argued that the report made by the D.R.C. Bag after detailed inquiry was not taken MTO consideration by the custodian or the High Court. The learned counsel pressed into service the submission that the allotment in favor of father of appellants was made as a local because of short of scale. The allotment of the disputed land having been made in favor of father of appellants in 1952 and the same stood protected under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, contended the learned counsel. The learned counsel for the appellants vehemently maintained that the mere, fact that the allotment in the name of father of appellants was not entered in the revenue record per se does not nullify the allotment itself JSS 4. In reply Vardar Cacique Mahmood Khan and Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmir, the learned counsel appear mg tor opposite side, contended that the land in dispute was never allotted to the father of appellants rather the fake and fabricated documents were entered in the record with the connivance of revenue officials. The learned counsel submitted that the Custodian of Evacuee Property after thoroughly probing into the matter reached the conclusion that all the documents per taming to allotment of father of appellants were false and fabricated, thus the review petition filed before the Custodian was also dismissed. The appellants, according to the learned counsel for respondents, were not entitled to any discretionary relief in exercise of writ jurisdiction. The Custodian being the Court of e> elusive jurisdiction recorded his findings against the appellants and such findings of fact were not assailable before the High Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction. The learned counsel also maintained that in 1952 there was no such law for allotment of land in the name of locals. Thus any such allotment, even if made in the name of father of appellants, was a nullity in the eye of law. 5. After hearing the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and perusal of documents attached with the file, it transpires that the Custodian of Evacuee Property after a detailed scrutiny of the record came to the conclusion that the appellants who claimed the allotment to be made in favor of their father in the year 1952 have failed to challenge the allotment made in the name of respondents in the year 1953 before any Rehabilitation Authority, and challenged the same before the Custodian of Evacuee Property in the year 1993. It was also posted out by the learned Custodian that the allotment of the appellants was not entered in the allotment register, but an effort was made to get it entered through

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-12-16): before any Rehabilitation Authority, and challenged the same before the Custodian of Evacuee Property in the year 1993. It was also posted out by the learned Custodian that the allotment of the appellants was not entered in the allotment register, but an effort was made to get it entered through additional papers on 2.12.1993. Therefore, the learned Custodian came to the conclusion that the allotment was fake and fabricated with the connivance of the revenue officials. The High Court also upheld the aforesaid view of the Custodian and observed that none of the documents placed on record by the appellants was found to have been secured by them before the year 1993 or 1997 which shows that the allotment was fabricated alter 1993 when the same was entered in the allotment register through additional papers. The copies of various orders were secured by the appellants m 1993 and afterward which substantiates the tact that all proceedings took place after the year 1993. I'he High Court further observed that the Custodian of Evacuee Property being a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, after thorough probe MTO the facts came to the conclusion that the allotment was fake and fabricated. The findings of facts, thus, recorded by the tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction were not assailable through a writ petition. The High Court also opined that the appellants remained silent for a period of 40 years when they firstly tiled a review petition before the Custodian which casts a serious doubt on the correctness of the allotment apart from the fact that the same suffers from laches. 6. So far as the observation of the High Court is concerned that no law for allotment in favor of a local was in existence in the year 1952 when the suite was claimed to be made, in our view, is not correct. Section 7 of the Azad Kashmir Rehabilitation Ordinance. 1952 may usefully be reproduced which reads as under:- C The Azad Kashmir Government may buy order authorize a Rehabilitation Commissioner to pool such evacuee property as may be specified, and to allot the same to persons resident in Azad Kashmir (Jammu and Kashmir Nationals unless otherwise specially authorized by the Government) whether refugees or not and upon such order being made, the Commissioner shall have all such powers, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance as may be necessary to enable him to prepare a scheme for pooling such property and allotting it as aforesaid." Section 12 of the said Ordinance is to the following effect:- v'VJ 'j Any person aggrieved by an order under this Ordinance may prefer an appeal: (a) to the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner when the order had been passed by an Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner; (b) to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, where the order not BMG an order passed in appeal under 'clause (a) has been passed by a Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. (2) The appeal shall be presented in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. (3) XXX XXK XXX

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-12-16): Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner; (b) to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, where the order not BMG an order passed in appeal under 'clause (a) has been passed by a Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. (2) The appeal shall be presented in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. (3) XXX XXK XXX XXX XXX XKK XXK XXX (4) XXX XKK XXX XXX XXK XKK XKK KKK (5). XXX XXX XXX XXX XKK KKK XKXK XKK (6) XXX XXK XXX XXX XXK XKK XKK XXX." Section 8. subsection (3) of the above Ordinance is coached in a following manner:- "A Rehabilitation Commissioner may, by general or special order, delegate all or any of his functions under this Ordinance to such officers or persons as he thinks fit." The above provisions of Azad Kashmir Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 make it clear that the forum for allotment was existing even in 1952 and the allotment could have been made to a refugee or a local. 7. Section 18, subsection (2) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 may usefully be reproduced which reads as follows: V "Every allotment of evacuee property made between the first day of March. 1947, and the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under subsection 8. Section 23 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, 1956 is to the following effect "Any corresponding provision of any law in force in any area immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be a provision of this Act, and anything done, action taken, obligation, lability, penalty or punishment incurred, enquiry or proceeding commenced, officer appointed or person authorized, jurisdiction or power conferred, rule made and order issued under any of the provisions of such law, shall be continued, and, so far as may be, be deemed to have been respectively done, taken, incurred, commenced, apported, authorized, conferred, made or issued under this Act, and any enactment or document referring to any such provision shall, as far as may be. be construed to refer to this Act or to the corresponding provision thereof " », The above view is supported by a case reported as Muhammad Jamil V.s. Muhammad Kiddie/UE and another (1991 SC R71) in which it has been held as under: "Now we have given our anxious thought to the provisions of Section 18 (2) and are of the view that validity granted in this provision of law would extend to allotments made by way of lease if they were existing when the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 came into existence, as is the present case. The main reason which leads us to this conclusion is that validation has been given to ‘every allotment of evacuee property made between IST day of March. 1947 and the commencement of this Act. shall be deemed to have been made under subsection and intention of the law-makers clearly was to include every allotment made before coming into force of the said Act and that would also

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-12-16): allotment of evacuee property made between IST day of March. 1947 and the commencement of this Act. shall be deemed to have been made under subsection and intention of the law-makers clearly was to include every allotment made before coming into force of the said Act and that would also include an allotment by way of lease." FC;?; 9. The perusal of the allotment order in favor of appellants shows that their allotment was temporary for a period of one year. As stated earlier, the allotment was not entered in the allotment register nor its period was extended. This precisely shows that after one year the allotment stood cancelled automatically from the name of appellants. Moreover the alleged allotment was not entered in any of the revenue record till the same was attempted to have been entered in the revenue record in the year 1993 Ina clandestine manner. 10. As regards the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants that Custodian could review by exercising his powers under subsection (6) of Section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act. 1957 is concerned those powers of course are unlimited, and the Custodian is competent to go into the question of gentleness or' otherwise of an allotment. Our aforesaid view is fortified by a case reported as Fazlullah and another kV. Ali Broader and another (1996 SCR 14). The observations in the above-titled case are as follows:- "The powers or review available to the Custodian under Section 43 (6) are exercisable at the instance of an aggrieved person or so won't at any time: and while exercising such powers he calls go into the question of genuineness or the legality of an allotment, as he deems proper. It may be stated that the powers of review vested in the Custodian under subsection (6) of Section 18-A (before amendment) held the field against the provisions contained in subsection (6) of Section 43 of the Act because those were special powers' hut when the said special powers of review have been taken away the general powers of.view of the Custodian under subsection (6) of Section 43 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act stand revived." 11. Thus the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents has a substance but at the same time in the instant case the Custodian of Evacuee Property, BMG a Tribunal of exclusive’ jurisdiction, after conducting the thorough inquiry, reached the conclusion that the allotment in favor of appellants was fake and fictitious. The condition of genuineness of allotment being a condition precedent was a rightful exercise of jurisdiction by the Custodian by not believing the allotment in the name of appellants as genuine. Thus the conclusions arrived at HY a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction cannot he pre-empted HY this Court. However, we have noticed that the learned Custodian has observed in his judgment dated 30.8.1907 that land comprising survey No. 571 was not found to have been included in the land allotted in favor of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-12-16): conclusions arrived at HY a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction cannot he pre-empted HY this Court. However, we have noticed that the learned Custodian has observed in his judgment dated 30.8.1907 that land comprising survey No. 571 was not found to have been included in the land allotted in favor of respondents Nos. and 3. but despite that the review petition was dismissed in toto. The High Court also did not attend to this aspect of the case of the appellants. As Kara No. 571 is not found to have been allotted to respondents, therefore, there beg no material on record against the above said observation, the review petition filed by the appellants before the Custodian and later on the writ petition in the High Court should not have been dismissed to that extent. 12. In the light of what has been stated above, we partly accept the appeal tiled by the appellants so far as it relates to Kara No. 571, situate in village Hull. Thesis and District Bag. and the findings thus recorded by the learned Custodian and the High Court are modified in the terms indicated above. The appeal filed by the appellants with regard to Kara No. 205 stands dismissed. However, in view of the peculiar circumstances of the case, we pass no order as to costs.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 1999-10-06. The case involved SYED MISKEEN SHAH VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH, MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 1999-10-06.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANT: SYED NAZIR HUSSAIN SHAH KAZNII, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. 1: FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. 3: CH. MUHAMMAD IHRAHIM ZIA, ADVOCATE.. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH, MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: SYED MISKEEN SHAH VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.~ This appeal, with the leave of the Court, TS directed against the judgment of the High Court dated 25.3.1998, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant, herein, was dismissed. 2. The precise facts forming the background of present appeal are that an evacuee land measuring 38 canals 7 Marley comprising Survey Nos. 137, 139, 102, 116 and 128 situate in village Channel Bang, Thesis and District Muzaffarabad was claimed to have been allotted to the appellant and his father Syed Rehman Shah on 6.7.1955. It is further clammed by them that they were in its possession since the date of allotment. According to the appellant the land was subsequently Allotted to one Analyst Shah at the back of the appellant who surrendered his allotment in favor of one Lai Din. The appellant when acquired knowledge of this allotment challenged the legality of the same before the D.R.C. Muzaffarabad on 24.6.1972. Lai Din by conceding the allotment of appellant surrendered in his favor. However, his statement could not be recorded as he failed to appear before the D.R.C. The D.R.C. vide his order dated 24.S. 1982. remanded the case to A.R.C. for fresh order after a thorough probe. The A.R.C. contrary to the spirit of remand order allotted the land to Lai Din respondent No. 4. The appellant assailed the order in revision petition before the Rehabilitation Commissioner who by accepting the petition once again remanded the case to A.R.C. Muzaffarabad tor fresh decision. Respondent No. Abdullah claiming himself to be a refugee challenged the legality of this order passed by the A.R.C. dated 20.10.1972 before the Rehabilitation Commissioner by concealing the tact, that the said order was not holding the field as it stood cancelled while deciding the previous revision petition tiled by the appellant. The Rehabilitation Commissioner again set aside the order dated 20.10.1972, and held Abdullah respondent No. entitled to allotment of land. Accord ING to the appellant this order was passed at his back. However, when he acquired the knowledge of the same he assailed this order before the Custodian who vide his judgment dated 22.9.1994, dismissed the same on the ground that the appellant had failed to satisfy him that the land in dispute was previously allotted to him. The writ petition filed by the appellant was also dismissed vide order impugned mainly on the ground that the allotment made in favor of the appellant on 6.7.1955 was bad in law as the some was passed without cancelling the previous allotment of respondent No. made in his favor on 24.6.1953. 3. Arguing the case on behalf of the appellant, Syed Nazi Hussein Shah Nazi, has vehemently contended that allotment in favor of respondent No. on the face of TT appears to be fake and forged as the same was claimed to be made on 24.6.1953 whereas the Ration Card in his favor appears to be issued on 21.9.1955 and in the allotment order of the said respondent the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, is conspicuously apparent. The learned counsel for the appellant further elaborated that it is the case of respondent No. himself that the allotment in his favor was made on 6.7.1953, but how the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955 appears on his allotment chit. It was also contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the Rehabilitation Commissioner, while passing the order in favor of respondent No. 3, did not afford the appellant an opportunity of BMG heard whereas the fact of the matter is that on the revision petition Filed by the appellant before the Rehabilitation Commissioner he set aside the impugned allotment thereby declaring the allotment of appellant as BMG genuine. 4. In reply TT was contended by Ch. Muhammad Ibrahim Via, the learned counsel for respondent No. 3, that a new case has been set up by the appellant for the first time in the Supreme Court. During litigation before the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Custodian and the High Court it was not the case of the appellant that the allotment of respondent No. was fake and forged because in the allotment chit the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, is apparent. Thus according, to the learned counsel for the respondent this new plea could not be taken at such a belated stage. The learned counsel posted out that before the Rehabilitation Authorities, Custodian and the High Court the appellant simply averred in vague terms that the allotment of respondent No. was bogus and fictitious without assigning any reason whatsoever. The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that in the name of respondent No. a valid allotment was made by the competent Rehabilitation Authorities on 24.6.1953 and the copy of allotment chit has been duly appended by the answering respondent. Before the Rehabilitation Authorities the appellant could not substantiate his claim that in fact the allotment of answering " respondent was fake or bogus. The Rehabilitation Authorities as well as the Custodian reached the conclusion that a valid allotment was made in favor of answering respondent and during its subsistence the subsequent allotment which is claimed by the appellant to have been made on 6.7.1955, would be a nullity in the eye of law. The learned counsel for the respondent also strenuously argued that the allotment claimed to have been made on 6.7.1955, according to the allotment chit annex ( ) has been made in favor of Rehman Shah son of Muhammad Shah _ (Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shah jointly but none of them have filed the writ petition except Miskeen Shah whose share is negligible out of the disputed land. According to the learned counsel it is also neither explained nor averred in the writ petition that how is share of land is adversely affected particularly so when rest of the allottees have not filed the writ petition as such the writ petition before the High Court was not main tamable. 5. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmiri, the learned counsel for respondent No. 1, fully supported the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant and submitted that the appellant though averred before the Rehabilitation Authorities as well as before the Custodian and the High Court that the allotment of respondent No. was fake and fictitious but failed to prove the above fact, by any cogent material. The learned counsel submitted that it was rightly observed by the Custodian and the High Court that the proper forum for the appellant to prove the fac tum of fake and fictitious allotment was to approach the Rehabilitation Authorities. 6. We have given our due consideration to the arguments advanced at the bar and perused the relevant record. I( is conceded by the appellant that the land in dispute was allotted to him along with others on 6.7.1955, whereas the allotment in favor of respondent No. was made on 24.6.1953, but the precise contention of the appellant is that the allotment of respondent No. was fake and fictitious. Once it is conceded that the allotment of respondent No. was made prior in time a heavy burden was cast upon the appellant to prove the fraud and the fact that the allotment was bogus. Not to speak of a cogent material with regard to the fakeness of the allotment of respondent No. it was not even averred TN clear terms as to how the allotment of respondent No. was fake or bogus. The contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondent appears to be substantial that at no stage either before the Rehabilitation Authorities, the Custodian or the High Court the case of the appellant has been that the allotment of respondent No. was fake and fictitious because of the fact that there was an entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, on the allotment chit produced by the respondent which purports to have been issued on 24.6.1953. It is for the first time that this plea has been raised in the Supreme Court. It is a settled law that a plea which has not been taken before the lower Tribunals or in the High Court cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time in the Supreme Court. Even otherwise the mere fact that the allotment chit produced by the respondent carries the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, does not render the allotment as being fake. It was rightly posted out by the learned Custodian as well as the High Court that they could not go deep into the question of fakeness of allotment and for this purpose the proper forum was the Rehabilitation Authorities, but the appellant failed to prove there that the allotment in the name of respondent No. was fictitious. 7. We have carefully examined the allotment chit issued in favor of respondent No. by the competent Rehabilitation Authority dated 24.6.1953. This allotment in the name of respondent No. was not cancelled by any competent authority so far. The claim of the appellant that from the date of allotment he had been in continuous possession of the land in dispute as allottee is also negated by the 'Kara Girafarig' produced by the appellant himself We have carefully perused the entries of the ' Kara-girdawaris' relied upon by the appellant. In none of 'gird aw'arms' the appellant is entered as an allottee of the land in dispute. On the other hand, his entry in the possession column is that of fall bat at so the assertion of the appellant that in led of allotment he entered into the possession of the disputed land stands negated by the documentary evidence brought on record. 8. As said earlier, it is also conceded by the appellant that allotment in favor of respondent No. was made on 24.6.1953. Thus shows that the allotment in favor of respondent No. was made much earlier than the allotment made in favor of the appellant. It is a cardinal principle of law that during the substance of the first allotment the subsequent allotment TS a nullity in the eye of law, and it shall be deemed as having not been made at all. 9. Even otherwise after examine the allotment chit issued in favor of the appellant which forms part of the record it is evident that a joint allotment has been made in the names or Rehman Shah son of Muhammad Ahmad, ( Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shah but none of them have tiled the W it petitions except Miskeen Shah in whose name the allotment is )’ Rehman Shah, his father and whose share out of the disputed land is negligible. It has also not been averred in the writ petition that his share of the land is adversely affected particularly so when the rest of the allottees have not filed writ petition. The other allottees being necessary parties were to be imp leaded in the writ petition either as petitioners or proforma-respondents. Even on this score the writ petition was liable to he dismissed for non-implement of necessary parties. 10. In the light of what has been stated above, finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with costs

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-06): MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI, J.~ This appeal, with the leave of the Court, TS directed against the judgment of the High Court dated 25.3.1998, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant, herein, was dismissed. 2. The precise facts forming the background of present appeal are that an evacuee land measuring 38 canals 7 Marley comprising Survey Nos. 137, 139, 102, 116 and 128 situate in village Channel Bang, Thesis and District Muzaffarabad was claimed to have been allotted to the appellant and his father Syed Rehman Shah on 6.7.1955. It is further clammed by them that they were in its possession since the date of allotment. According to the appellant the land was subsequently Allotted to one Analyst Shah at the back of the appellant who surrendered his allotment in favor of one Lai Din. The appellant when acquired knowledge of this allotment challenged the legality of the same before the D.R.C. Muzaffarabad on 24.6.1972. Lai Din by conceding the allotment of appellant surrendered in his favor. However, his statement could not be recorded as he failed to appear before the D.R.C. The D.R.C. vide his order dated 24.S. 1982. remanded the case to A.R.C. for fresh order after a thorough probe. The A.R.C. contrary to the spirit of remand order allotted the land to Lai Din respondent No. 4. The appellant assailed the order in revision petition before the Rehabilitation Commissioner who by accepting the petition once again remanded the case to A.R.C. Muzaffarabad tor fresh decision. Respondent No. Abdullah claiming himself to be a refugee challenged the legality of this order passed by the A.R.C. dated 20.10.1972 before the Rehabilitation Commissioner by concealing the tact, that the said order was not holding the field as it stood cancelled while deciding the previous revision petition tiled by the appellant. The Rehabilitation Commissioner again set aside the order dated 20.10.1972, and held Abdullah respondent No. entitled to allotment of land. Accord ING to the appellant this order was passed at his back. However, when he acquired the knowledge of the same he assailed this order before the Custodian who vide his judgment dated 22.9.1994, dismissed the same on the ground that the appellant had failed to satisfy him that the land in dispute was previously allotted to him. The writ petition filed by the appellant was also dismissed vide order impugned mainly on the ground that the allotment made in favor of the appellant on 6.7.1955 was bad in law as the some was passed without cancelling the previous allotment of respondent No. made in his favor on 24.6.1953. 3. Arguing the case on behalf of the appellant, Syed Nazi Hussein Shah Nazi, has vehemently contended that allotment in favor of respondent No. on the face of TT appears to be fake and forged as the same was claimed to be made on 24.6.1953 whereas the Ration Card in his favor appears to be issued on 21.9.1955 and in the allotment order of the said respondent the entry of Ration

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-06): of respondent No. on the face of TT appears to be fake and forged as the same was claimed to be made on 24.6.1953 whereas the Ration Card in his favor appears to be issued on 21.9.1955 and in the allotment order of the said respondent the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, is conspicuously apparent. The learned counsel for the appellant further elaborated that it is the case of respondent No. himself that the allotment in his favor was made on 6.7.1953, but how the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955 appears on his allotment chit. It was also contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the Rehabilitation Commissioner, while passing the order in favor of respondent No. 3, did not afford the appellant an opportunity of BMG heard whereas the fact of the matter is that on the revision petition Filed by the appellant before the Rehabilitation Commissioner he set aside the impugned allotment thereby declaring the allotment of appellant as BMG genuine. 4. In reply TT was contended by Ch. Muhammad Ibrahim Via, the learned counsel for respondent No. 3, that a new case has been set up by the appellant for the first time in the Supreme Court. During litigation before the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Custodian and the High Court it was not the case of the appellant that the allotment of respondent No. was fake and forged because in the allotment chit the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, is apparent. Thus according, to the learned counsel for the respondent this new plea could not be taken at such a belated stage. The learned counsel posted out that before the Rehabilitation Authorities, Custodian and the High Court the appellant simply averred in vague terms that the allotment of respondent No. was bogus and fictitious without assigning any reason whatsoever. The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that in the name of respondent No. a valid allotment was made by the competent Rehabilitation Authorities on 24.6.1953 and the copy of allotment chit has been duly appended by the answering respondent. Before the Rehabilitation Authorities the appellant could not substantiate his claim that in fact the allotment of answering " respondent was fake or bogus. The Rehabilitation Authorities as well as the Custodian reached the conclusion that a valid allotment was made in favor of answering respondent and during its subsistence the subsequent allotment which is claimed by the appellant to have been made on 6.7.1955, would be a nullity in the eye of law. The learned counsel for the respondent also strenuously argued that the allotment claimed to have been made on 6.7.1955, according to the allotment chit annex ( ) has been made in favor of Rehman Shah son of Muhammad Shah _ (Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shah jointly but none of them have filed the writ petition except Miskeen Shah whose share is negligible out of the disputed land. According to the learned counsel it is

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-06): been made in favor of Rehman Shah son of Muhammad Shah _ (Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shah jointly but none of them have filed the writ petition except Miskeen Shah whose share is negligible out of the disputed land. According to the learned counsel it is also neither explained nor averred in the writ petition that how is share of land is adversely affected particularly so when rest of the allottees have not filed the writ petition as such the writ petition before the High Court was not main tamable. 5. Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmiri, the learned counsel for respondent No. 1, fully supported the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant and submitted that the appellant though averred before the Rehabilitation Authorities as well as before the Custodian and the High Court that the allotment of respondent No. was fake and fictitious but failed to prove the above fact, by any cogent material. The learned counsel submitted that it was rightly observed by the Custodian and the High Court that the proper forum for the appellant to prove the fac tum of fake and fictitious allotment was to approach the Rehabilitation Authorities. 6. We have given our due consideration to the arguments advanced at the bar and perused the relevant record. I( is conceded by the appellant that the land in dispute was allotted to him along with others on 6.7.1955, whereas the allotment in favor of respondent No. was made on 24.6.1953, but the precise contention of the appellant is that the allotment of respondent No. was fake and fictitious. Once it is conceded that the allotment of respondent No. was made prior in time a heavy burden was cast upon the appellant to prove the fraud and the fact that the allotment was bogus. Not to speak of a cogent material with regard to the fakeness of the allotment of respondent No. it was not even averred TN clear terms as to how the allotment of respondent No. was fake or bogus. The contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondent appears to be substantial that at no stage either before the Rehabilitation Authorities, the Custodian or the High Court the case of the appellant has been that the allotment of respondent No. was fake and fictitious because of the fact that there was an entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, on the allotment chit produced by the respondent which purports to have been issued on 24.6.1953. It is for the first time that this plea has been raised in the Supreme Court. It is a settled law that a plea which has not been taken before the lower Tribunals or in the High Court cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time in the Supreme Court. Even otherwise the mere fact that the allotment chit produced by the respondent carries the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, does not render the allotment as being fake.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-06): Tribunals or in the High Court cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time in the Supreme Court. Even otherwise the mere fact that the allotment chit produced by the respondent carries the entry of Ration Card issued on 21.9.1955, does not render the allotment as being fake. It was rightly posted out by the learned Custodian as well as the High Court that they could not go deep into the question of fakeness of allotment and for this purpose the proper forum was the Rehabilitation Authorities, but the appellant failed to prove there that the allotment in the name of respondent No. was fictitious. 7. We have carefully examined the allotment chit issued in favor of respondent No. by the competent Rehabilitation Authority dated 24.6.1953. This allotment in the name of respondent No. was not cancelled by any competent authority so far. The claim of the appellant that from the date of allotment he had been in continuous possession of the land in dispute as allottee is also negated by the 'Kara Girafarig' produced by the appellant himself We have carefully perused the entries of the ' Kara-girdawaris' relied upon by the appellant. In none of 'gird aw'arms' the appellant is entered as an allottee of the land in dispute. On the other hand, his entry in the possession column is that of fall bat at so the assertion of the appellant that in led of allotment he entered into the possession of the disputed land stands negated by the documentary evidence brought on record. 8. As said earlier, it is also conceded by the appellant that allotment in favor of respondent No. was made on 24.6.1953. Thus shows that the allotment in favor of respondent No. was made much earlier than the allotment made in favor of the appellant. It is a cardinal principle of law that during the substance of the first allotment the subsequent allotment TS a nullity in the eye of law, and it shall be deemed as having not been made at all. 9. Even otherwise after examine the allotment chit issued in favor of the appellant which forms part of the record it is evident that a joint allotment has been made in the names or Rehman Shah son of Muhammad Ahmad, ( Miskeen Shah, Kala Shah, Akbar Shah and Newman Shah but none of them have tiled the W it petitions except Miskeen Shah in whose name the allotment is )’ Rehman Shah, his father and whose share out of the disputed land is negligible. It has also not been averred in the writ petition that his share of the land is adversely affected particularly so when the rest of the allottees have not filed writ petition. The other allottees being necessary parties were to be imp leaded in the writ petition either as petitioners or proforma-respondents. Even on this score the writ petition was liable to he dismissed for non-implement of necessary parties. 10. In the light of what

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 1999-10-06): the allottees have not filed writ petition. The other allottees being necessary parties were to be imp leaded in the writ petition either as petitioners or proforma-respondents. Even on this score the writ petition was liable to he dismissed for non-implement of necessary parties. 10. In the light of what has been stated above, finding no force in this appeal, it is hereby dismissed with costs

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 1999-07-08. The case involved GUL MUHAMMAD KHAN VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS. The relevant statutes include AJ&K GOVERNMENT ACT 1970 - S. 25-D AJ&K COURTS AND LAWS CODE ACT -S. 35 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE, 1908 - S. 115 HIGH COURT PROCEDURE RULES, 1984 - R. 16 BAIT-UL-MAL PROPERTY ACT, 1950 -S. 11. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: AJ&K GOVERNMENT ACT 1970 - S. 25-D AJ&K COURTS AND LAWS CODE ACT -S. 35 CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE, 1908 - S. 115 HIGH COURT PROCEDURE RULES, 1984 - R. 16 BAIT-UL-MAL PROPERTY ACT, 1950 -S. 11. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 1999-07-08.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANT: SARDAR MUHAMMAD SAYAB KHALID, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. 1: FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI, ADVOCATE.. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: GUL MUHAMMAD KHAN VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD AND OTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH, J. Arguments were heard in this case on 5th November, 1998. The judgment of the HIH Court which has been challenged in this appeal is based on a Judgment of the Full Bench of the High Court in Civil Revision No. of 1968 titled Muhammad Yousuf. GUL Muhammad which was pronounced on 16th March, 1969. It was thought necessary that, if available, the original file may be summoned. About this file, it had been stated at the bar by both the parties that the file had been destroyed due to fire which engulfed the Court premises at Rawalakot. We directed that efforts may be made to find out whether the file was available or not. It was ultimately reported by the High Court that the file had in fact been destroyed as mentioned above. 2. It is claimed by the appellant that land under survey No. 216 measuring 41 canals, 16 Marley situated in village Gillan in Thesis Samundri belonged to Milieu son of Mast Ram, an evacuee. It is claimed that on 4th Satan 2004 Bk. (1947) Milieu sold the aforesaid land for Rs. 675/- to the appellant. As claimed, a sale-deed was executed and registered but the original sale-deed was sent for counter signatures of Air Pooch, but it was not received back because War of Liberation had meanwhile started. Thereupon the appellant obtained a certified copy from the Sub-Registrar's office and filed a declaratory suit in respect of the land mentioned above in the Court of Sub-Judge, Rawalakot. A decree was passed in his favor on 30th October, 1951 that the appellant had become full owner of the land under reference. A mutation was also sanctioned to y the same effect on 22nd September, 1955. The original suit file has also been destroyed along with the High Court file as mentioned above. However there is sufficient proof that a decree was in fact passed as mentioned above. 3. One Muhammad Yousuf, not before the Court, filed a revision petition in the High Court in the year 1968, being Civil Revision No. of 1968, in which he prayed for setting aside of the decree passed in favor of the appellant on the ground that it had been passed in respect of evacuee property over which the jurisdiction of the Sub-Judge was specifically barred and as such the decree, BMG without jurisdiction, be set aside. The prayer was accepted by the High Court on 16th March, 1972. 4. On 17th July, 1997, twenty-five years later, Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property in the office of the Custodian at Muzaffarabad sent a letter/order to the Manager Custodian at Rawalakot in which he stated that land under survey No. 216 measuring 41 canals, 16 Marley situated in village Gillan Thesis Gallantry was declared as evacuee property by the High Court in its judgment of 16th March, 1972 in case titled Muhammad Yousuf Khan v. GUL Muhammad Khan, etc. but GUL Muhammad Khan was still in occupation of the land as illegal occupant. The Manager was directed to recover lease money from the appellant for all the period. Alternatively the Manager was directed, in case of default, to dispossess the appellant and to lease out the land in dispute to some other person. The appellant challenged this order by filing writ petition in the High Court which has been dismissed on the ground that the order passed by the Additional Custodian is in light of the Full Bench judgment of the High Court dated 16th March, 1972. Appeal has been filed against the judgment of the High Court with leave of the Court. 5. Vardar Muhammad Say ah Khan, the learned counsel for the appellant,'submitted that the High Court misconstrued the previous Full Bench judgment of the High Court. He explained that the revision petition filed by Muhammad Yousuf, Civil Revision No. of 1968, came up before Single Bench of the High Court who, as is clear from the Full Bench judgment itself, referred the following two questions for determination to the Full Bach- Whether the words "No appeal lies thereto" occurring in Section 115, CPC include second appeal and what is the effect of not filing the appeal before the District Judge?, (2) Whether the High Court can interfere so moth mm revision info appeal has been filed before the District Judge?" It was contended by Vardar Sarah Khalid that the Full Bench was only competent to answer the two points referred to it and after recording the answers to the questions the case was to go back to the Single Bench who was to decide the case on its merits. He explained that the Full Bench DK,’ answer the two questions, but the members of the Full Bench also recorded the finding that the decree of the learned Sub-Judge, Rawalakot challenged in the revision petition was without jurisdiction and thus illegal and void. It was vehemently contended by the learned counsel that the order passed by the Full Bench was without jurisdiction because the Bench had the jurisdiction only to answer the questions referred to it and had no authority to decide the revision petition which could only be decided by the learned Single Judge. On this post he referred to Rule 16 of the High Court Procedure Rules, 1984. The phraseology of Rule 16 tends to support the contention of the learned counsel, but it may be pointed out that the said Rules were enforced in 1984 while the judgment of the Full Bench was pronounced on 16th March, 1972. Vardar Muhammad SAAB Khalid also stated that the view of the Full Bench was incorrect that the Sub-Judge had no jurisdiction to pass a decree in respect of evacuee property. 6. We have perused the judgment of the Full Bench and have anxiously adverted to the arguments of Mr. Muhammad SAAB Khalid. On the face of it his arguments about the Full Bench judgment appeared to have weight but a closer examination has revealed that the situation is different from what has been stated by the learned counsel. 7. The facts are that the decree passed in favor of the appellant had not been challenged before the first Appellate Court or the High Court and Muhammad Yousuf filed a revision petition directly before the High Court. The decree passed in favor of the appellant was appealable before the learned District Judge and also subsequently before the High Court. Therefore, a question arose whether the revision petition was main tamable. The question also was whether a revision at all is maintainable where second appeal lies to the High Court against a decree. These are the questions which were referred by the learned Single Judge to the Full Bench. The judgment of the Full Bench shows that the learned Judge reached the following conclusion on the question referred to it: "For the forego mg reasons our answer to the questions referred for determination of this bench is that the words "no appeal lies thereto" are not confined to first appeal but include a second appeal as well. The revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 115, CPC is limited to those cases only where under the Code of Civil Procedure appeal either in the first instance or eventually would lie to the High Court and if no appeal has been filed before a District Judge in such a case. High Court would be incompetent to exercise its jurisdiction under that section, either on an application or so moth." Having formed the view that revision petition tiled by Muhammad -, Yousuf was not maintainable and the High Court was not even otherwise authorized by law to pass a so moth order under revisional jurisdiction the learned Judges examined whether the High Court had power under any other provisions of law to decide the points raised in the revision petition. The learned Judges brought under consideration Section 25-D of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government Act, 1970 and Section 35 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Courts and Laws Code Act which vested in the High Court the authority of superintendence and control over the Courts subordinate to it and, after discussing case-law on the post, reached the following conclusion:- "But a High Court, in exercise of general powers of superintendence and control, conferred on it under Government Act, and Courts and Laws Code Act, which powers are much wider and larger and more comprehensive as compared to the powers of a High Court under Section 115, CPC, can revise so moth or otherwise, such order where there is a gross error on the face of record or an erroneous order amounting to injustice or usurpation of jurisdiction that is specifically barred by an enactment, and set aside such order or direct further proceedings to be taken as ends of justice may require." 8. Then the learned Judges noticed at length to different legislations about administration of evacuee property with particular reference to "Faithful- Mal Property Act" of 1948 and "Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1950". After noting the facts of the case, it was held that when the appellant GUL Muhammad's suit was instituted and dispose of, the jurisdiction of the Sub-Judge was specifically barred by Section 11 of the Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1950. Thereafter, the following conclusion was recorded about the judgment and decree passed by the Sub-Judge:- "As such we are of the opinion that the determination of the question by the Court whose jurisdiction, barred by the law over the subject or matter of the litigation, its judgment and order accurately express and technically correct (which in present case are not so) are mere nullities. They are valid documents not only voidable but void and are not binding on anyone. They have effect either as estoppel or otherwise and do not create any right. They are operative and may not only be set aside at any time by the Court in which they are rendered but may be declared void by any Court in which they are presented. The order passed and all proceedings taken by the Sub-Judge deserve to be quashed for the simple reason that there was a legal bar OT> jurisdiction. The High Court as a supervising authority is under an obligation to annul such orders as and when they are brought to its notice. Legislature has conferred upon the Custodian exclusive jurisdiction and imposed upon him the duty to decide whether a certain property is or is not evacuee property. The proprietary rights vested in the person who has fled to India fall within the ambit of the expression "evacuee property" and the power to decide the question as to the nature of the property vest exclusively in the Custodian. The Sub-Judge had no jurisdiction to adjudicate to pass a decree of title in favor of non-petitioner plaintiff and thereby to extinguish the vested rights of evacuee in the property. Thus it would appear that the decree of the learned Sub- Judge, Rawalakot, being without jurisdiction is illegal and void.” 9. From the foregoing it is clear that the contention of Vardar Muhammad SAAB Khalid mentioned above is not correct. In fact the learned Judges composing the Full Bench reached the conclusion that the revision petition filed by Muhammad Yousuf was not maintainable, but they proceeded to act under Section 25-D of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government Act, 1970 and Azad Jammu and Kashmir Courts and Laws Code Act to declare that the decree of the learned Sub- Judge was illegal and void because, in the words of the learned Judges, "the High Court as a supervising authority is under an obligation to annul such orders as and when they were brought to its notice". It may be pointed out that the TT~ declaration mentioned above in respect of the decree passed in favor of the appellant GUL Muhammad was a so moth action of the High Court. The declaration was given by the Full Bench of the High Court consisting of the learned Chief Justice and two learned Judges of the High Court. This was the total strength of the High Court on 16th March, 1972 when the judgment was delivered. The whole High Court thus took so moth notice and exercised supervisory jurisdiction to make the declaration mentioned above. In these circumstances, the view taken by the learned Judge in the High Court in the judgment under appeal that the High Court is bound by the finding of the Full Bench is unexceptionable. We may also add to TT that appellant GUL Muhammad was duly imp leaded as a respondent in the Full Bench judgment and before giving the judgment his learned counsel was duly heard. If GUL Muhammad was aggrieved, he could have filed a review petition before the High Court, but he did not, according to the record, do so. The result is that the said judgment attained finality and is biding on all executive and judicial authorities in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. In S*'.S 10. Therefore we find no force in this appeal and order TS UGH IBE! ot4base-com

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-07-08): BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH, J. Arguments were heard in this case on 5th November, 1998. The judgment of the HIH Court which has been challenged in this appeal is based on a Judgment of the Full Bench of the High Court in Civil Revision No. of 1968 titled Muhammad Yousuf. GUL Muhammad which was pronounced on 16th March, 1969. It was thought necessary that, if available, the original file may be summoned. About this file, it had been stated at the bar by both the parties that the file had been destroyed due to fire which engulfed the Court premises at Rawalakot. We directed that efforts may be made to find out whether the file was available or not. It was ultimately reported by the High Court that the file had in fact been destroyed as mentioned above. 2. It is claimed by the appellant that land under survey No. 216 measuring 41 canals, 16 Marley situated in village Gillan in Thesis Samundri belonged to Milieu son of Mast Ram, an evacuee. It is claimed that on 4th Satan 2004 Bk. (1947) Milieu sold the aforesaid land for Rs. 675/- to the appellant. As claimed, a sale-deed was executed and registered but the original sale-deed was sent for counter signatures of Air Pooch, but it was not received back because War of Liberation had meanwhile started. Thereupon the appellant obtained a certified copy from the Sub-Registrar's office and filed a declaratory suit in respect of the land mentioned above in the Court of Sub-Judge, Rawalakot. A decree was passed in his favor on 30th October, 1951 that the appellant had become full owner of the land under reference. A mutation was also sanctioned to y the same effect on 22nd September, 1955. The original suit file has also been destroyed along with the High Court file as mentioned above. However there is sufficient proof that a decree was in fact passed as mentioned above. 3. One Muhammad Yousuf, not before the Court, filed a revision petition in the High Court in the year 1968, being Civil Revision No. of 1968, in which he prayed for setting aside of the decree passed in favor of the appellant on the ground that it had been passed in respect of evacuee property over which the jurisdiction of the Sub-Judge was specifically barred and as such the decree, BMG without jurisdiction, be set aside. The prayer was accepted by the High Court on 16th March, 1972. 4. On 17th July, 1997, twenty-five years later, Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property in the office of the Custodian at Muzaffarabad sent a letter/order to the Manager Custodian at Rawalakot in which he stated that land under survey No. 216 measuring 41 canals, 16 Marley situated in village Gillan Thesis Gallantry was declared as evacuee property by the High Court in its judgment of 16th March, 1972 in case titled Muhammad Yousuf Khan v. GUL Muhammad Khan, etc. but GUL Muhammad Khan was still in occupation of the land

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-07-08): 216 measuring 41 canals, 16 Marley situated in village Gillan Thesis Gallantry was declared as evacuee property by the High Court in its judgment of 16th March, 1972 in case titled Muhammad Yousuf Khan v. GUL Muhammad Khan, etc. but GUL Muhammad Khan was still in occupation of the land as illegal occupant. The Manager was directed to recover lease money from the appellant for all the period. Alternatively the Manager was directed, in case of default, to dispossess the appellant and to lease out the land in dispute to some other person. The appellant challenged this order by filing writ petition in the High Court which has been dismissed on the ground that the order passed by the Additional Custodian is in light of the Full Bench judgment of the High Court dated 16th March, 1972. Appeal has been filed against the judgment of the High Court with leave of the Court. 5. Vardar Muhammad Say ah Khan, the learned counsel for the appellant,'submitted that the High Court misconstrued the previous Full Bench judgment of the High Court. He explained that the revision petition filed by Muhammad Yousuf, Civil Revision No. of 1968, came up before Single Bench of the High Court who, as is clear from the Full Bench judgment itself, referred the following two questions for determination to the Full Bach- Whether the words "No appeal lies thereto" occurring in Section 115, CPC include second appeal and what is the effect of not filing the appeal before the District Judge?, (2) Whether the High Court can interfere so moth mm revision info appeal has been filed before the District Judge?" It was contended by Vardar Sarah Khalid that the Full Bench was only competent to answer the two points referred to it and after recording the answers to the questions the case was to go back to the Single Bench who was to decide the case on its merits. He explained that the Full Bench DK,’ answer the two questions, but the members of the Full Bench also recorded the finding that the decree of the learned Sub-Judge, Rawalakot challenged in the revision petition was without jurisdiction and thus illegal and void. It was vehemently contended by the learned counsel that the order passed by the Full Bench was without jurisdiction because the Bench had the jurisdiction only to answer the questions referred to it and had no authority to decide the revision petition which could only be decided by the learned Single Judge. On this post he referred to Rule 16 of the High Court Procedure Rules, 1984. The phraseology of Rule 16 tends to support the contention of the learned counsel, but it may be pointed out that the said Rules were enforced in 1984 while the judgment of the Full Bench was pronounced on 16th March, 1972. Vardar Muhammad SAAB Khalid also stated that the view of the Full Bench was incorrect that the Sub-Judge had no jurisdiction to pass a decree in respect

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-07-08): pointed out that the said Rules were enforced in 1984 while the judgment of the Full Bench was pronounced on 16th March, 1972. Vardar Muhammad SAAB Khalid also stated that the view of the Full Bench was incorrect that the Sub-Judge had no jurisdiction to pass a decree in respect of evacuee property. 6. We have perused the judgment of the Full Bench and have anxiously adverted to the arguments of Mr. Muhammad SAAB Khalid. On the face of it his arguments about the Full Bench judgment appeared to have weight but a closer examination has revealed that the situation is different from what has been stated by the learned counsel. 7. The facts are that the decree passed in favor of the appellant had not been challenged before the first Appellate Court or the High Court and Muhammad Yousuf filed a revision petition directly before the High Court. The decree passed in favor of the appellant was appealable before the learned District Judge and also subsequently before the High Court. Therefore, a question arose whether the revision petition was main tamable. The question also was whether a revision at all is maintainable where second appeal lies to the High Court against a decree. These are the questions which were referred by the learned Single Judge to the Full Bench. The judgment of the Full Bench shows that the learned Judge reached the following conclusion on the question referred to it: "For the forego mg reasons our answer to the questions referred for determination of this bench is that the words "no appeal lies thereto" are not confined to first appeal but include a second appeal as well. The revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 115, CPC is limited to those cases only where under the Code of Civil Procedure appeal either in the first instance or eventually would lie to the High Court and if no appeal has been filed before a District Judge in such a case. High Court would be incompetent to exercise its jurisdiction under that section, either on an application or so moth." Having formed the view that revision petition tiled by Muhammad -, Yousuf was not maintainable and the High Court was not even otherwise authorized by law to pass a so moth order under revisional jurisdiction the learned Judges examined whether the High Court had power under any other provisions of law to decide the points raised in the revision petition. The learned Judges brought under consideration Section 25-D of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government Act, 1970 and Section 35 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Courts and Laws Code Act which vested in the High Court the authority of superintendence and control over the Courts subordinate to it and, after discussing case-law on the post, reached the following conclusion:- "But a High Court, in exercise of general powers of superintendence and control, conferred on it under Government Act, and Courts and Laws Code Act, which powers are much wider and larger

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-07-08): control over the Courts subordinate to it and, after discussing case-law on the post, reached the following conclusion:- "But a High Court, in exercise of general powers of superintendence and control, conferred on it under Government Act, and Courts and Laws Code Act, which powers are much wider and larger and more comprehensive as compared to the powers of a High Court under Section 115, CPC, can revise so moth or otherwise, such order where there is a gross error on the face of record or an erroneous order amounting to injustice or usurpation of jurisdiction that is specifically barred by an enactment, and set aside such order or direct further proceedings to be taken as ends of justice may require." 8. Then the learned Judges noticed at length to different legislations about administration of evacuee property with particular reference to "Faithful- Mal Property Act" of 1948 and "Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1950". After noting the facts of the case, it was held that when the appellant GUL Muhammad's suit was instituted and dispose of, the jurisdiction of the Sub-Judge was specifically barred by Section 11 of the Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1950. Thereafter, the following conclusion was recorded about the judgment and decree passed by the Sub-Judge:- "As such we are of the opinion that the determination of the question by the Court whose jurisdiction, barred by the law over the subject or matter of the litigation, its judgment and order accurately express and technically correct (which in present case are not so) are mere nullities. They are valid documents not only voidable but void and are not binding on anyone. They have effect either as estoppel or otherwise and do not create any right. They are operative and may not only be set aside at any time by the Court in which they are rendered but may be declared void by any Court in which they are presented. The order passed and all proceedings taken by the Sub-Judge deserve to be quashed for the simple reason that there was a legal bar OT> jurisdiction. The High Court as a supervising authority is under an obligation to annul such orders as and when they are brought to its notice. Legislature has conferred upon the Custodian exclusive jurisdiction and imposed upon him the duty to decide whether a certain property is or is not evacuee property. The proprietary rights vested in the person who has fled to India fall within the ambit of the expression "evacuee property" and the power to decide the question as to the nature of the property vest exclusively in the Custodian. The Sub-Judge had no jurisdiction to adjudicate to pass a decree of title in favor of non-petitioner plaintiff and thereby to extinguish the vested rights of evacuee in the property. Thus it would appear that the decree of the learned Sub- Judge, Rawalakot, being without jurisdiction is illegal and void.” 9. From the foregoing it is clear that the contention of Vardar

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 1999-07-08): title in favor of non-petitioner plaintiff and thereby to extinguish the vested rights of evacuee in the property. Thus it would appear that the decree of the learned Sub- Judge, Rawalakot, being without jurisdiction is illegal and void.” 9. From the foregoing it is clear that the contention of Vardar Muhammad SAAB Khalid mentioned above is not correct. In fact the learned Judges composing the Full Bench reached the conclusion that the revision petition filed by Muhammad Yousuf was not maintainable, but they proceeded to act under Section 25-D of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government Act, 1970 and Azad Jammu and Kashmir Courts and Laws Code Act to declare that the decree of the learned Sub- Judge was illegal and void because, in the words of the learned Judges, "the High Court as a supervising authority is under an obligation to annul such orders as and when they were brought to its notice". It may be pointed out that the TT~ declaration mentioned above in respect of the decree passed in favor of the appellant GUL Muhammad was a so moth action of the High Court. The declaration was given by the Full Bench of the High Court consisting of the learned Chief Justice and two learned Judges of the High Court. This was the total strength of the High Court on 16th March, 1972 when the judgment was delivered. The whole High Court thus took so moth notice and exercised supervisory jurisdiction to make the declaration mentioned above. In these circumstances, the view taken by the learned Judge in the High Court in the judgment under appeal that the High Court is bound by the finding of the Full Bench is unexceptionable. We may also add to TT that appellant GUL Muhammad was duly imp leaded as a respondent in the Full Bench judgment and before giving the judgment his learned counsel was duly heard. If GUL Muhammad was aggrieved, he could have filed a review petition before the High Court, but he did not, according to the record, do so. The result is that the said judgment attained finality and is biding on all executive and judicial authorities in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. In S*'.S 10. Therefore we find no force in this appeal and order TS UGH IBE! ot4base-com

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2000-06-15. The case involved MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM AND OTHERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AJ&K MUZAFFARABADAND OTHERS. The relevant statutes include ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT 1957 - S. 18-B R/W. 5. 43(6) REHABILITATION ACT, 1956 - SS. 12, https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/PSC/html_txt/PSC_2000_1681.html 1/14 28/10/2025, 02:00 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/PSC/html_txt/PSC_2000_1681.htmi. The case was heard by BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT 1957 - S. 18-B R/W. 5. 43(6) REHABILITATION ACT, 1956 - SS. 12, https://w w w.paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/PSC/html_txt/PSC_2000_1681.html 1/14 28/10/2025, 02:00 paklegaldatabase.com/w p-content/uploads/ELFILES/2000/PSC/html_txt/PSC_2000_1681.htmi. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2000-06-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANT IN CA 147/99: SHAIKH ABDULAZIZ ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENTS IN CA 147/99: FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI AND M. TABASSUM AFTAB ALVI, ADVOCATES.FOR THE APPELLANTS IN CA 148/99: SARDAR MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE KHAN, ADVOCATE.FOR THE RESPONDENTS IN CA 148/99: FAROOQ HUSSAIN KASHMIRI, M. TABASSUM AFTAB ALVI AND RAJA MUHAMMAD HANIF KHAN, ADVOCATES.. The judges presiding were: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH AND MUHAMMAD YUNUS SURAKHVI.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM AND OTHERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AJ&K MUZAFFARABADAND OTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH, J.- The above-noted two appeals relate to the same property. There is a funfepiental legal question which is common in these appeals, and a tactual post is also interconnected. Therefore these two appeals are being decided by this single judgment. 2. Facts common to both the appeals are that Allah Dicta was owner of the land in dispute situated in village Tram, Thesis Rawalakot, but it was in occupation of occupancy-tenants who were non-Muslims. Allah Dicta initially put up a case that the occupancy-tenants surrendered their tenancy in 1946 AD and handed over possession to him. The other view, which has so far prevailed, is that the occupancy tenants actually left Azad Jammu and Kashmir due to war of liberation, and thus they became evacuees and resultantly the land in dispute became evacuee property. Treating it as evacuee property the land in dispute was allotted separately to Muhammad Afar Khan, respondent in both the appeals, and to Gulag Din who has passed away meanwhile and is now represented by his" heirs MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar who are respondents in C.A. No. 148 of 1999. The original owner, Allah Dicta, is also no more and his. legal representatives are Muhammad Abram and others. They are respondents in both the appeals. In due course of time MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar obtained proprietary rights and sold part of the land to Muhammad Ashraf Khan, a respondent in C.A. No. 148 of 1999. Muhammad Afar Khan has also obtained proprietary rights. 3. Facts of Civil Appeal No. 147 of 1999 are that appellant Muhammad Ibrahim filed an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property on 6th March. 1996 in which he prayed that allotment of evacuee land measuring 57 canals, 16 Marley out of the land in dispute may be cancelled from the name of Muhammad Agar, respondent No. 3, and it may be allotted to him (Muhammad Ibrahim) as a refugee. The application was moved under section 12 of the Rehabilitation Act, section 18-B read with section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim is a refugee from occupied Pooch and resides in Rawalakot. He stated that Muhammad Afar Khan is a local and. according to the official record, a report by Templar Custodian, he was owner of 77 canals of private land. It was stated that land belonging to Muhammad Afar Khan was in the Army use for which rent was being paid to him, He further stated that Muhammad Tsar also owned some more land. It was stated MN the application that allotment in favor of Muhammad Tsar Khan was illegal because only refugees, defendants of Shaheed's, local destitute and disabled persons were entitled to get allotment of evacuee land. It was stated that Muhammad Tsar Khan did not fall in any of these categories. It was also averred that Muhammad Afar Khan was a senior teacher in the Education Department and retired from service on IST December, 1980 from which it was clear that he had reasonable income. During arguments before the Custodian it was argued that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was violative of Council Order No. It was argued that the Custodian enjoyed wide powers which may be exercised for cancelling the allotment and the Provisional Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the said respondent. Cases reported as Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government and another v. Hakim Bashir Ahmad and others (1992 SCR 81) and Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another (1996 SCR 14) were cited before the Custodian. It was further prayed that the respondent may be ordered to pay rent for the period from 1965 to 1996 for use of the evacuee land. 4. The application was dismissed by the learned Custodian.'it was held that Muhammad Ibrahim was neither in occupation of the disputed land nor was he TTS allottee, therefore, he could not be termed as an aggrieved person and thus could not file the petition. The Custodian also dealt with the question relating to Muhammad Afar Khan's entitlement as local destitute and held that objection was previously raised and was rejected by the Custodian who had held that he was a destitute. The details of the order were however not mentioned. It was then observed that in another file, bearing No. 16, the learned Custodian had reaffirmed that Muhammad Afar Khan was a destitute. The learned Custodian therefore, held that this matter now could not be reconsidered once again. The learned Custodian also mentioned that Muhammad Abram and others had also taken the case to the High Court in which they had challenged the claim of Muhammad Afar Khan that he was a local destitute, but this objection had been rejected. It was observed that the matter could not re-examined due to the decision of the High Court NM Muhammad Abram's case. It was observed by the learned Custodian that Muhammad Afar had been forcibly dispossessed from his land so that it could be utilized for Army purposes. At the same time the learned Custodian observed that no person could be allotted land on the basis that his own land was in use of the Army and rehabilitation authorities should not continue with this practice and allotment must be made mm accordance with the Rehabilitation Act. It was further observed that there was no other manner in which evacuee land could be allotted to anyone. However the learned Custodian thought that it was not proper to cancel the allotment of Muhammad Afar Khan because in that case he would suffer irreparable loss. It was observed that upsetting status quo after such a long time would not advance the ends for which rehabilitation laws were made. In the ultimate analysis the learned Custodian recorded a statement of Muhammad Afar Khan that he would deposit the money which he had received as rent/compensation from the Army authorities and in return allowed him to retain possession of the allotted land. Muhammad Afar Khan also stated in the statement that he preferred the allotted land. It will be useful to reproduce the operative portion: "Since evacuee land could not be legally allotted to the respondent and allotment was made in peculiar circumstances. Thus respondent is unable to utilize both the land which fact had been admitted by the respondent in his statement. Therefore, all the amount which the respondent has received as compensation from the military shall be deposited by him in the Custodian fund within two months. Manager Custodian shall receive the rent/compensation under reference and shall deposit it m the Custodian fund and I'm future ‘also the compensation to be received would be regularly deposited with the Manager Custodian. In case the respondent fails to do so Manager will have the night to move for cancellation of evacuee land measuring 57 canals 16 Marley which stands allotted to the respondent. In these circumstances the review petition is dismissed. If any stay order has been issued TT shall stand cancelled." 5. Muhammad Ibrahim filed a writ petition to challenge the order passed by the Custodian which has been dismissed. We will advert to the contents of the High Court judgment a little later. He was granted leave to appeal by this Court. 6. The learned counsel for respondent Muhammad Afar Khan, Mr. M. Tabasco Aftab Alvin, has raised a preliminary objection that Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner, Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner and Rehabilitation Commissioner were necessary parties but were not arrayed as respondents in the writ petition. It was contended that these Rehabilitation authorities had allotted the land to the respondent and. Faders passed by them could not be cancelled by the High Court unless they are arrived as'respondents in the writ petition. Mr. M. Tabasco Aftab Alvin cited Mira Lai Hussain v. Custodian of Evacuee property and others (1992 SCR 214) and Abdul Hamid Khan v. Muhammad Career Khan and others (1990 PSC 1014) in support of his contention. 7. We do not find any force in this objection. Section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 confers wide powers on the Custodian which are free from technicalities. Prior to the section of section 180-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act the scheme of Rehabilitation laws was that normally the allotment of evacuee property was made by the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner and an appeal was tamable before the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. A further remedy was also available before the Rehabilitation Commissioner.Finally, Custodian of Evacuee Property could hear revisions against allotment and cancellation of allotment etc. In the scheme of things as it existed at that time, an order of allotment would become final if it was not challenged before the higher forum within the prescribed time. However when it was decided to grant proprietary rights to the allottees and provision IOR it was made by inserting section 18-A MN the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, section 18-B was also enacted to give powers to the Custodian of Evacuee Property to cancel any allotment of evacuee property for the reason, inter alia, that it had been made in violation of law and without jurisdiction. This power was exercisable without any limit of time. It was also not necessary that an application be moved for getting an allotment cancelled, and thus the Custodian was given so moth powers. Relevant portion of section 18-B is as follows:- I8- B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law, for the time BMG in force, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers which already vest in him, the Custodian may cancel any allotment of evacuee property in the following.cases:- (a) where an allottee has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of allotment within the meaning of section 18 of the Act; (b) where an allottee has, to the satisfaction of the Custodian, voluntarily surrendered or abandoned the allotment; (c) where the allotment has been made in violation of law or is without jurisdiction; (d) where the evacuee property stands allotted to more than one person, and it is necessary to determine the entitlement to allotment; (e) where an allotment is in excess of the prescribed scale, and it is necessary to bring the allotment within scale in order to confer proprietary rights in accordance with law, upon such allottee. The Custodian shall exercise the powers of Multiple Judge under the Multiple Allotment Act, 1961, in cases processed or being processed for the grant of proprietary rights. 8. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim moved the application before the Custodian under the provision of law reproduced above. Since power was exercisable so moth no technicalities were involved. It was not necessary to imp lead the rehabilitation authorities who had made or confirmed the order of allotment in favor of the respondent. Muhammad Ibrahim through his application laid information before the learned Custodian, and it was for the Custodian to examine the legality of the allotment order in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. The only requirement was that notice had to be issued to the allottees before passing any final order. The learned Custodian entertained the case, summoned respondent Muhammad Afar Khan and decided it in the manner, which has been described above. When the appellant filed a writ petition he challenged the order of the Custodian and no other order. He duly imp leaded the Custodian as a respondent and there was no requirement beyond it because the order passed by the Custodian was in original jurisdiction and not in revisional jurisdiction, therefore, they rehabilitation authorities were not necessary parties in the writ petition. 9. Now we come to the merits of the case. From the portion of the judgment reproduced above it is clear that the learned Custodian himself was of the view that the allotment in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan was not legal, but he did not cancel the allotment on the ground that it was not proper to disturb status quo after such a long time. This is clearly unlawful. Section 18-B reproduced above reopened allotments which were made as far back as forty years, and it was clearly the intention of law that illegal allotments may be cancelled even though those had become final. Therefore, the learned Custodian had no authority to say that status quo may not be disturbed only because long time had elapsed. We fail to understand as to how in presence of section 18-B a purely illegal allotment could vest any right in the respondent*so that the illegality may be perpetuated. The learned Custodian also failed to appreciate that the so-called status quo was entirely favorable to the respondent because he was enjoying the fruits of the evacuee land and also, was getting compensation from the Army authorities for his own land which means that he was getting double benefit. Admittedly the respondent was not covered by Government Order No. issued under section 7 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, as in force in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, which lays down that locals who are defendants of "Shaheed’s”’, disabled persons and destitute could be granted allotment of evacuee land in addition to the refugees from occupied Kashmir. The learned Custodian also observed that Muhammad Abram's case was still pending in the High Court and that it was not appropriate to decide whether Muhammad Afar Khan was a local destitute or not. We fail to appreciate as to how the case pending in the High Court was relevant. The question before the Custodian was whether the allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan had been made in violation of law or was without jurisdiction. Any other decision was not relevant because the finality attached to orders passed in appeal or revision by the rehabilitation authorities or the Custodian prior to enactment of section 180-B were taken away by the aforesaid section. It was an overriding provision and was meant to give special powers irrespective of limitation, res-judicata etc. The learned Custodian then passed the order, reproduced above, that compensation paid by the Army authorities will be deposited in the Custodian fund and the allotment shall continue. The learned Custodian failed to appreciate that the order which he passed was also not covered by any provision of law and, apart from being novel in nature, was void ab initio. 10. Thus the order passed by the learned Custodian should have been set aside by the High Court. The High Court brushed aside the matter by saying that there was no distinction between a refugee and a local and if a local was disturbed by the State or due to natural clarity he can be settled on evacuee property. The learned Judge IP the High Court has not quoted the provision of law on which the view taken by him is based. We are not aware of any other legal instruments except Council Order No. which enables a rehabilitation authority to allot evacuee land to a local. We are only cognizant of Government Order No. which deals with locals so far as allotment of evacuee land is concerned, but it does not make any provision that evacuee property may be allotted to persons who may be disturbed by the State or by natural clarity. 11. The High Court has mentioned that the case filed against allottee Muhammad Afar by Muhammad Abram, appellant herein, had already been dismissed by the Supreme Court. The High Court file contains certified copy of an order by which two writ petitions titled Muhammad Abram v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995 were dismissed in lime on 14th November, 1995. In that order there is no verdict about the legality of allotment in favor of respondent Muhammad Afghan Khan. Facts relating to that case need to be noticed. Allah Dicta, the original owner, moved review petitions before Custodian of Evacuee Property praying that the allotments in favor of Muhammad Afar and Gulag Din and the subsequent Proprietary Rights Transfer Orders may be cancelled, but this application was rejected. Order passed by the Custodian was challenged before the High Court by film writ petitions being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995. Both the writ petitions were dismissed in line. In one writ petition Muhammad Afar was a respondent while in the other writ legal representatives of Gulag Din, ‘Muhammad Abram and others, were amongst the respondents. The High Court took the view that in light of section 22 of the Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 and sections 8 and 10 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, all rights, including occupancy rights, which vested in the non-Muslims had become vested in the Custodian. The High Court therefore took the view that allotment and proprietary rights were valid acts. This Court set aside the order of the High Court by holding that occupancy rights of evacuees vested in the Custodian, but law did not provide that where evacuees were occupancy-tenants the ownership rights of Muslim land-owners would be extinguished. We noted that documents attached with the writ petition showed that heirs, of Allah Dicta were still entered in ownership column, in light of this fact it was observed as follows:- 'The question therefore, arises whether the heirs of Allah Dicta have ceased to be owners of the land. If the answer is in negative then how property rights have been granted to the respondents. This controversy has not been resolved by the High Court." We therefore remanded the case to the High Court, after setting aside the High Court order dated 14th November, 1995. The judgment of this Court was rendered on 7th July, 1996. 12. In the judgment under appeal the High Court has referred to the judgment of the High Court dated 14th November, 1995 but, as mentioned above, it was set aside on 7th July, 1996 by this Court and the case was remanded. On remand the High Court has decided the case afresh vide judgment of a Division Bench rendered on 31st May, 1999. The High Court has held that heirs of Allah Dicta continue to be the owners of the land but Muhammad Afar Khan will be treated as occupancy-tenant. This judgment was subject-matter of appeal in Civil Appeal No. 148 of 1999 titled Muhammad Abram arid others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property which is being disposed of by this judgment. The judgment of the High Court is attached as Annexure "B" in the said file. Its perusal shows that, apart from points mentioned above, the High Court did not deal with the merits of the case whether the allotments in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din were valid or not. Thus we reached the conclusion that the question of legality of allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar was not determined in the. earlier round of litigation. Thus this reason recorded by the High Court is also not sustainable. 13. Even otherwise we do not think that the application moved by Muhammad Ibrahim before the Custodian of Evacuee Property for cancellation of allotment was in any way barred because another application was pending or had been disposed of: As already seen the Custodian of Evacuee Property has wide so moth powers which are exercisable at any time to set aside an illegal order of allotment. The Custodian also enjoys wide powers under section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 under which he can review earlier decisions to grant proprietary rights if he reaches the conclusion that TT was based on an illegal allotment order. If any authority is needed we may refer to Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another (1996 SCR 14). Therefore it is clear that the learned Custodian failed to give effect to the clear legal provisions by not cancelling Muhammad Afar Khan's allotment after having himself reaching the conclusion that it was illegal. Similarly the High Court also fell in error m upholding the order passed by the learned Custodian. 14. Therefore we accept the appeal filed by Muhammad Ibrahim C.A. No. 147 of 1999 and set aside the judgment of the High Court. For the same reasons writ petition tiled by the appellant herein TS accepted, and the order passed by the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property on IST August, 1997 is declared to have been passed without lawful authority and of no legal effect. A direction is issued to the learned Custodian to pass an order of cancellation of allotment made in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and also to cancel the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in his favor. 15. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim himself is not entitled to any relief in respect of allotment of disputed land in his favor because powers of allotment are vested in the rehabilitation authorities who will consider his application tor allotment in light of the relevant laws. However they will treat the case of Muhammad Ibrahim on priority basis in view of his long struggle which is evident from the record. 16. Now we take up Civil Appeal No. 148 of 1999 titled Muhammad Abram and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others. The present round of litigation was mitigated by Muhammad Abram, the original owners' son, on 22nd July, 1990 when he filed an application under section 18-B read with section 43 (6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 praying for cancellation of allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in the name of Muhammad Afar Khan. It was stated MN the application that initially Allah Dicta and after his death his heirs were owners of the land in dispute, and it could not m. if be legally allotted to respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. It was also stated that in any ease the proprietary rights could not be granted to him. It was further stated the Muhammad Afar Khan was a local who owned more than 52 canals of land which was under the use of Army and Muhammad Afar Khan was getting rent for it. It was stated that land could only be allotted to local if his case is covered by Council Order, but Muhammad Afar’s case did not fall under the said order. The report of Enforcement Staff against Muhammad Afar was attached with the petition. The petition was dismissed by the learned Custodian, but its date is not available from the*present record, although an undated certified copy forms part of the paper book as appendix J. The learned Custodian referred to the earlier decisions of the Additional Custodian and the Civil Court to repel the contention that non-Muslim occupancy-tenants had abandoned the land mm their possession before the war of liberation. The learned Custodian also referred to some documents filed by Muhammad Abram and also give a separate finding that there was no proof in support of the allegation that the occupancy tenants had abandoned their tenancy by handing over the possession to the land-owner. It was further held that the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar, the legal representatives of allottee Gulag Din, conferred only those rights which vested in the non-Muslim occupancy-tenants and that the allottees would retain possession of the land in dispute as occupancy-tenants as was the case of the non-Muslim occupancy-tenants. The learned Custodian also rejected the plea that Muhammad Afar Khan was not entitled to allotment of evacuee land because he was not covered by Government Order. It was posted out that the Custodian of Evacuee Property had held in his order passed on 4th April, 1979 that Muhammad Afar Khan was a local destitute. After dismissal of his petition, Muhammad Abram filed two writ petitions in the High Court on 3rd November. 1994 bearing No. 12 of 1994. Other heirs of Allah Dicta were subsequently added on 31st July. 1997. 17. Muhammad Abram also tiled a similar application against the other allottee Gulag Din. It was moved on 22nd July, 1990 before the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property praying that the portion of the land in the ownership of Allah Dicta which had been allotted to Gulag Din may also be cancelled and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order may also be recalled. At the time Gulag Din had died and MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar, his legal representatives, as well as subsequent transferee, Muhammad Ashraf Khan, were imp leaded as respondents. This application was rejected on 29th March, 1995. The learned Custodian held that the land in dispute had been declared evacuee which matter could not be reopened. It was argued before the learned Custodian that when land was allotted to Gulag Din he was not in its possession, and it was also pleaded that the allotment in his favor did not in fact exist because it had been maneuvered through forgery. These pleas were rejected. The order of the learned Custodian was also challenged by filing a writ petition bearing No. 12 of 1995 on 4th June, 1995. 18. Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995 were dismissed in line by a single order on 14th November, 1995. Muhammad Abram and others brought appeal to this Court which was accepted on 7th July, 1996 and the case was remanded to the High Court. It will be useful to reproduce the relevant portion of the judgment:- " After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we have reached the conclusion that the High Court was not right in dismissing the writ petition in liming. A perusal of the three provisions of law relied upon the High Court shows that occupancy nights of evacuees have been vested in the Custodian, but it is not provided in these provisions that evacuees were occupancy tenants the ownership rights of the Muslim land-owners would be extinguished. The documents attached with the writ show that name of Allah Dicta is still entered in ownership column. The question therefore arises whether the heirs of Allah Dicta have ceased to be owners of the land. If the answer is in negative than how proprietary rights have been granted to the respondents. This controversy has not been resolved by the High Court it may be noticed that occupancy tenants were declared entitled to get ownership rights of property held by them after fulfilling certain requirements which were prescribed under the Land Reform Act. To resolve the controversy mentioned above provisions of Land Reform Act have also to be examined." 19. Both the writ petitions have, been disposed of by a single judgment. There are two aspects of both the cases which have been decided. First it has been decided that land in dispute is evacuee property and this question had already been decided in the previous round of litigation. However it was clarified that the land was evacuee only to that extent of the merest which was held by the occupancy tenants who had now become evacuees. Consequently it was held that the allottees will be treated as occupancy tenants while heirs of Allah Dicta shall continue to the owners of the land. The petitions were accepted to the extent. The second aspect of the case related to the validity of the allotment orders in favor of the allottees. The High Court has upheld the allotments of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Dm. 20. Muhammad Abram and others have filed the present appeal with leave of the Court to challenge the consolidated judgment of the High Court. They have prayed that they are the owners of the land allotted to Gulag Din and Muhammad Afar Khan and are entitled to its possession in the capacity as rightful owners. They have prayed that direction may be given that they may be put in possession. They have also prayed that the loss occurred to the appellants due to dispossession as well as the cost of litigation may be compensated. They have also challenged the allotment orders in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din. About Gulag Din TT is stated that "a gypsy was not entitled to allotment of land of which the status was yet to be determined." About Muhammad Afar Khan they have raised the same ports which have been mentioned above, 1e. that he is a local not covered by Council Order No. as he is owner of landed property and also because he had other source of income as a teacher. 21. We have heard Vardar Muhammad Kiddie Khan in support of this appeal. The respondents were represented by Raja Muhammad Han if Khan, Mr. M. Tabasco Aftab Alvin and Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmiri, Advocates. 22. We first advert to the status of the land in dispute. As has been repeatedly mentioned Allah Dicta Khan was owner of the land in dispute, and it was in occupation of non-Muslims as occupancy-tenants. On the factual side the appellants have been trying to prove during approximately for five decades that the occupancy tenants did not become evacuees, but they had already abandoned their tenancy by handing back the possession to Allah Dicta. This claim has been rejected a number of times by different Courts and Tribunals. This claim was reiterated before the learned Custodian in the present round, but this plea has been rejected once Adam. This question is purely factual in nature. The finding that the non-Muslims were in occupation as occupancy-tenants till the war of liberation is a finding of fact which, being recorded by a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, is sacrosanct. There is nothing on the record to disprove this finding. In fact overwhelming evidence TS. available on the record which leads to the conclusion that the finding of fact recorded by the learned Custodian is unassailable. 23. Legal aspect of the stand concluded by judgment of this Court in Civil Appeal No. 11! of 1998 reported as Abdul Hamid Khan v. Ghulam Ahmad Khan (1999 SCR 444) (PSC 1999 SC (AJ&K) 1775) it was decided on 30th June. 1999 a few days after the judgment under appeal. It was a case in which the owners of the land were Muslims while occupancy tenants were evacuees. The following points have been decided in the said judgment:- (a) Since occupancy tenants had interest in the property falling under this category, it is evacuee property but to the extent of merest of the evacuees; (b) Muslim owners continue as owners of the land falling in this category, and they shall continue to be so as long as the present laws are in operation; (c) Land falling in this category can be allotted under the rehabilitation law; and (d) Allottee of such land shall be entitled to keep possession of the land and would not be entitled to obtain proprietary rights. 24. The learned counsel for the parties have not been able to show that the view taken in the above-noted case needs to be reviewed. We therefore, reiterate the views stated their. The principles laid down therein would be applicable to the present case also. 25. While dealing with Civil Appeal No. 147 of 1999 titled Muhammad Ibrahim v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others we have taken the view that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was illegal, and we have directed the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property to cancel the allotment as well as the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan. Therefore, we need not record separate findings about the legality of the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan. 26. So far as the allotment of Gulag Din TS concerned nothing substantial has been shown to create any doubt in the validity of the aforesaid allotment. Therefore, the allotment in favor of Gulag Din shall stand intact, subject to the succeeding observations. 27. In light of Abdul Hamid's case the allotment in favor of Gulag Dm shall only be to the extent of possession and would not form the basis of proprietary rights. Allah Dicta's successors-in-i merest, Muhammad Abram and others, would continue to be the owners of the land in dispute as long as the present laws are operative. Therefore the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued to MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar are cancelled from the date of issue. Consequently the transfer made in favor ° f Muhammad Ashraf Khan shall become inoperative. He will however remain MN possession on behalf of MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar as long as the preset WRT! 482 Open.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): BASHARAT AHMAD SHAIKH, J.- The above-noted two appeals relate to the same property. There is a funfepiental legal question which is common in these appeals, and a tactual post is also interconnected. Therefore these two appeals are being decided by this single judgment. 2. Facts common to both the appeals are that Allah Dicta was owner of the land in dispute situated in village Tram, Thesis Rawalakot, but it was in occupation of occupancy-tenants who were non-Muslims. Allah Dicta initially put up a case that the occupancy-tenants surrendered their tenancy in 1946 AD and handed over possession to him. The other view, which has so far prevailed, is that the occupancy tenants actually left Azad Jammu and Kashmir due to war of liberation, and thus they became evacuees and resultantly the land in dispute became evacuee property. Treating it as evacuee property the land in dispute was allotted separately to Muhammad Afar Khan, respondent in both the appeals, and to Gulag Din who has passed away meanwhile and is now represented by his" heirs MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar who are respondents in C.A. No. 148 of 1999. The original owner, Allah Dicta, is also no more and his. legal representatives are Muhammad Abram and others. They are respondents in both the appeals. In due course of time MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar obtained proprietary rights and sold part of the land to Muhammad Ashraf Khan, a respondent in C.A. No. 148 of 1999. Muhammad Afar Khan has also obtained proprietary rights. 3. Facts of Civil Appeal No. 147 of 1999 are that appellant Muhammad Ibrahim filed an application before the Custodian of Evacuee Property on 6th March. 1996 in which he prayed that allotment of evacuee land measuring 57 canals, 16 Marley out of the land in dispute may be cancelled from the name of Muhammad Agar, respondent No. 3, and it may be allotted to him (Muhammad Ibrahim) as a refugee. The application was moved under section 12 of the Rehabilitation Act, section 18-B read with section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim is a refugee from occupied Pooch and resides in Rawalakot. He stated that Muhammad Afar Khan is a local and. according to the official record, a report by Templar Custodian, he was owner of 77 canals of private land. It was stated that land belonging to Muhammad Afar Khan was in the Army use for which rent was being paid to him, He further stated that Muhammad Tsar also owned some more land. It was stated MN the application that allotment in favor of Muhammad Tsar Khan was illegal because only refugees, defendants of Shaheed's, local destitute and disabled persons were entitled to get allotment of evacuee land. It was stated that Muhammad Tsar Khan did not fall in any of these categories. It was also averred that Muhammad Afar Khan was a senior teacher in the Education Department and retired from service on IST

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): local destitute and disabled persons were entitled to get allotment of evacuee land. It was stated that Muhammad Tsar Khan did not fall in any of these categories. It was also averred that Muhammad Afar Khan was a senior teacher in the Education Department and retired from service on IST December, 1980 from which it was clear that he had reasonable income. During arguments before the Custodian it was argued that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was violative of Council Order No. It was argued that the Custodian enjoyed wide powers which may be exercised for cancelling the allotment and the Provisional Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of the said respondent. Cases reported as Azad Jammu and Kashmir Government and another v. Hakim Bashir Ahmad and others (1992 SCR 81) and Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another (1996 SCR 14) were cited before the Custodian. It was further prayed that the respondent may be ordered to pay rent for the period from 1965 to 1996 for use of the evacuee land. 4. The application was dismissed by the learned Custodian.'it was held that Muhammad Ibrahim was neither in occupation of the disputed land nor was he TTS allottee, therefore, he could not be termed as an aggrieved person and thus could not file the petition. The Custodian also dealt with the question relating to Muhammad Afar Khan's entitlement as local destitute and held that objection was previously raised and was rejected by the Custodian who had held that he was a destitute. The details of the order were however not mentioned. It was then observed that in another file, bearing No. 16, the learned Custodian had reaffirmed that Muhammad Afar Khan was a destitute. The learned Custodian therefore, held that this matter now could not be reconsidered once again. The learned Custodian also mentioned that Muhammad Abram and others had also taken the case to the High Court in which they had challenged the claim of Muhammad Afar Khan that he was a local destitute, but this objection had been rejected. It was observed that the matter could not re-examined due to the decision of the High Court NM Muhammad Abram's case. It was observed by the learned Custodian that Muhammad Afar had been forcibly dispossessed from his land so that it could be utilized for Army purposes. At the same time the learned Custodian observed that no person could be allotted land on the basis that his own land was in use of the Army and rehabilitation authorities should not continue with this practice and allotment must be made mm accordance with the Rehabilitation Act. It was further observed that there was no other manner in which evacuee land could be allotted to anyone. However the learned Custodian thought that it was not proper to cancel the allotment of Muhammad Afar Khan because in that case he would suffer irreparable loss. It was observed that upsetting status quo after such a long time would

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): manner in which evacuee land could be allotted to anyone. However the learned Custodian thought that it was not proper to cancel the allotment of Muhammad Afar Khan because in that case he would suffer irreparable loss. It was observed that upsetting status quo after such a long time would not advance the ends for which rehabilitation laws were made. In the ultimate analysis the learned Custodian recorded a statement of Muhammad Afar Khan that he would deposit the money which he had received as rent/compensation from the Army authorities and in return allowed him to retain possession of the allotted land. Muhammad Afar Khan also stated in the statement that he preferred the allotted land. It will be useful to reproduce the operative portion: "Since evacuee land could not be legally allotted to the respondent and allotment was made in peculiar circumstances. Thus respondent is unable to utilize both the land which fact had been admitted by the respondent in his statement. Therefore, all the amount which the respondent has received as compensation from the military shall be deposited by him in the Custodian fund within two months. Manager Custodian shall receive the rent/compensation under reference and shall deposit it m the Custodian fund and I'm future ‘also the compensation to be received would be regularly deposited with the Manager Custodian. In case the respondent fails to do so Manager will have the night to move for cancellation of evacuee land measuring 57 canals 16 Marley which stands allotted to the respondent. In these circumstances the review petition is dismissed. If any stay order has been issued TT shall stand cancelled." 5. Muhammad Ibrahim filed a writ petition to challenge the order passed by the Custodian which has been dismissed. We will advert to the contents of the High Court judgment a little later. He was granted leave to appeal by this Court. 6. The learned counsel for respondent Muhammad Afar Khan, Mr. M. Tabasco Aftab Alvin, has raised a preliminary objection that Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner, Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner and Rehabilitation Commissioner were necessary parties but were not arrayed as respondents in the writ petition. It was contended that these Rehabilitation authorities had allotted the land to the respondent and. Faders passed by them could not be cancelled by the High Court unless they are arrived as'respondents in the writ petition. Mr. M. Tabasco Aftab Alvin cited Mira Lai Hussain v. Custodian of Evacuee property and others (1992 SCR 214) and Abdul Hamid Khan v. Muhammad Career Khan and others (1990 PSC 1014) in support of his contention. 7. We do not find any force in this objection. Section 18-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 confers wide powers on the Custodian which are free from technicalities. Prior to the section of section 180-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act the scheme of Rehabilitation laws was that normally the allotment of evacuee property was made by the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner and an appeal was tamable before

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): wide powers on the Custodian which are free from technicalities. Prior to the section of section 180-B of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act the scheme of Rehabilitation laws was that normally the allotment of evacuee property was made by the Assistant Rehabilitation Commissioner and an appeal was tamable before the Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner. A further remedy was also available before the Rehabilitation Commissioner.Finally, Custodian of Evacuee Property could hear revisions against allotment and cancellation of allotment etc. In the scheme of things as it existed at that time, an order of allotment would become final if it was not challenged before the higher forum within the prescribed time. However when it was decided to grant proprietary rights to the allottees and provision IOR it was made by inserting section 18-A MN the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, section 18-B was also enacted to give powers to the Custodian of Evacuee Property to cancel any allotment of evacuee property for the reason, inter alia, that it had been made in violation of law and without jurisdiction. This power was exercisable without any limit of time. It was also not necessary that an application be moved for getting an allotment cancelled, and thus the Custodian was given so moth powers. Relevant portion of section 18-B is as follows:- I8- B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law, for the time BMG in force, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers which already vest in him, the Custodian may cancel any allotment of evacuee property in the following.cases:- (a) where an allottee has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of allotment within the meaning of section 18 of the Act; (b) where an allottee has, to the satisfaction of the Custodian, voluntarily surrendered or abandoned the allotment; (c) where the allotment has been made in violation of law or is without jurisdiction; (d) where the evacuee property stands allotted to more than one person, and it is necessary to determine the entitlement to allotment; (e) where an allotment is in excess of the prescribed scale, and it is necessary to bring the allotment within scale in order to confer proprietary rights in accordance with law, upon such allottee. The Custodian shall exercise the powers of Multiple Judge under the Multiple Allotment Act, 1961, in cases processed or being processed for the grant of proprietary rights. 8. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim moved the application before the Custodian under the provision of law reproduced above. Since power was exercisable so moth no technicalities were involved. It was not necessary to imp lead the rehabilitation authorities who had made or confirmed the order of allotment in favor of the respondent. Muhammad Ibrahim through his application laid information before the learned Custodian, and it was for the Custodian to examine the legality of the allotment order in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. The only requirement was that notice had to be issued to the allottees before passing any final

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): respondent. Muhammad Ibrahim through his application laid information before the learned Custodian, and it was for the Custodian to examine the legality of the allotment order in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. The only requirement was that notice had to be issued to the allottees before passing any final order. The learned Custodian entertained the case, summoned respondent Muhammad Afar Khan and decided it in the manner, which has been described above. When the appellant filed a writ petition he challenged the order of the Custodian and no other order. He duly imp leaded the Custodian as a respondent and there was no requirement beyond it because the order passed by the Custodian was in original jurisdiction and not in revisional jurisdiction, therefore, they rehabilitation authorities were not necessary parties in the writ petition. 9. Now we come to the merits of the case. From the portion of the judgment reproduced above it is clear that the learned Custodian himself was of the view that the allotment in favor of respondent Muhammad Afar Khan was not legal, but he did not cancel the allotment on the ground that it was not proper to disturb status quo after such a long time. This is clearly unlawful. Section 18-B reproduced above reopened allotments which were made as far back as forty years, and it was clearly the intention of law that illegal allotments may be cancelled even though those had become final. Therefore, the learned Custodian had no authority to say that status quo may not be disturbed only because long time had elapsed. We fail to understand as to how in presence of section 18-B a purely illegal allotment could vest any right in the respondent*so that the illegality may be perpetuated. The learned Custodian also failed to appreciate that the so-called status quo was entirely favorable to the respondent because he was enjoying the fruits of the evacuee land and also, was getting compensation from the Army authorities for his own land which means that he was getting double benefit. Admittedly the respondent was not covered by Government Order No. issued under section 7 of the Pakistan Rehabilitation Act, as in force in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, which lays down that locals who are defendants of "Shaheed’s”’, disabled persons and destitute could be granted allotment of evacuee land in addition to the refugees from occupied Kashmir. The learned Custodian also observed that Muhammad Abram's case was still pending in the High Court and that it was not appropriate to decide whether Muhammad Afar Khan was a local destitute or not. We fail to appreciate as to how the case pending in the High Court was relevant. The question before the Custodian was whether the allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan had been made in violation of law or was without jurisdiction. Any other decision was not relevant because the finality attached to orders passed in appeal or revision by the rehabilitation authorities or the Custodian prior to enactment

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): the Custodian was whether the allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan had been made in violation of law or was without jurisdiction. Any other decision was not relevant because the finality attached to orders passed in appeal or revision by the rehabilitation authorities or the Custodian prior to enactment of section 180-B were taken away by the aforesaid section. It was an overriding provision and was meant to give special powers irrespective of limitation, res-judicata etc. The learned Custodian then passed the order, reproduced above, that compensation paid by the Army authorities will be deposited in the Custodian fund and the allotment shall continue. The learned Custodian failed to appreciate that the order which he passed was also not covered by any provision of law and, apart from being novel in nature, was void ab initio. 10. Thus the order passed by the learned Custodian should have been set aside by the High Court. The High Court brushed aside the matter by saying that there was no distinction between a refugee and a local and if a local was disturbed by the State or due to natural clarity he can be settled on evacuee property. The learned Judge IP the High Court has not quoted the provision of law on which the view taken by him is based. We are not aware of any other legal instruments except Council Order No. which enables a rehabilitation authority to allot evacuee land to a local. We are only cognizant of Government Order No. which deals with locals so far as allotment of evacuee land is concerned, but it does not make any provision that evacuee property may be allotted to persons who may be disturbed by the State or by natural clarity. 11. The High Court has mentioned that the case filed against allottee Muhammad Afar by Muhammad Abram, appellant herein, had already been dismissed by the Supreme Court. The High Court file contains certified copy of an order by which two writ petitions titled Muhammad Abram v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995 were dismissed in lime on 14th November, 1995. In that order there is no verdict about the legality of allotment in favor of respondent Muhammad Afghan Khan. Facts relating to that case need to be noticed. Allah Dicta, the original owner, moved review petitions before Custodian of Evacuee Property praying that the allotments in favor of Muhammad Afar and Gulag Din and the subsequent Proprietary Rights Transfer Orders may be cancelled, but this application was rejected. Order passed by the Custodian was challenged before the High Court by film writ petitions being Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995. Both the writ petitions were dismissed in line. In one writ petition Muhammad Afar was a respondent while in the other writ legal representatives of Gulag Din, ‘Muhammad Abram and others, were amongst the respondents. The High Court

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995. Both the writ petitions were dismissed in line. In one writ petition Muhammad Afar was a respondent while in the other writ legal representatives of Gulag Din, ‘Muhammad Abram and others, were amongst the respondents. The High Court took the view that in light of section 22 of the Rehabilitation Ordinance, 1952 and sections 8 and 10 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, all rights, including occupancy rights, which vested in the non-Muslims had become vested in the Custodian. The High Court therefore took the view that allotment and proprietary rights were valid acts. This Court set aside the order of the High Court by holding that occupancy rights of evacuees vested in the Custodian, but law did not provide that where evacuees were occupancy-tenants the ownership rights of Muslim land-owners would be extinguished. We noted that documents attached with the writ petition showed that heirs, of Allah Dicta were still entered in ownership column, in light of this fact it was observed as follows:- 'The question therefore, arises whether the heirs of Allah Dicta have ceased to be owners of the land. If the answer is in negative then how property rights have been granted to the respondents. This controversy has not been resolved by the High Court." We therefore remanded the case to the High Court, after setting aside the High Court order dated 14th November, 1995. The judgment of this Court was rendered on 7th July, 1996. 12. In the judgment under appeal the High Court has referred to the judgment of the High Court dated 14th November, 1995 but, as mentioned above, it was set aside on 7th July, 1996 by this Court and the case was remanded. On remand the High Court has decided the case afresh vide judgment of a Division Bench rendered on 31st May, 1999. The High Court has held that heirs of Allah Dicta continue to be the owners of the land but Muhammad Afar Khan will be treated as occupancy-tenant. This judgment was subject-matter of appeal in Civil Appeal No. 148 of 1999 titled Muhammad Abram arid others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property which is being disposed of by this judgment. The judgment of the High Court is attached as Annexure "B" in the said file. Its perusal shows that, apart from points mentioned above, the High Court did not deal with the merits of the case whether the allotments in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din were valid or not. Thus we reached the conclusion that the question of legality of allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar was not determined in the. earlier round of litigation. Thus this reason recorded by the High Court is also not sustainable. 13. Even otherwise we do not think that the application moved by Muhammad Ibrahim before the Custodian of Evacuee Property for cancellation of allotment was in any way barred because another application was pending or

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): round of litigation. Thus this reason recorded by the High Court is also not sustainable. 13. Even otherwise we do not think that the application moved by Muhammad Ibrahim before the Custodian of Evacuee Property for cancellation of allotment was in any way barred because another application was pending or had been disposed of: As already seen the Custodian of Evacuee Property has wide so moth powers which are exercisable at any time to set aside an illegal order of allotment. The Custodian also enjoys wide powers under section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 under which he can review earlier decisions to grant proprietary rights if he reaches the conclusion that TT was based on an illegal allotment order. If any authority is needed we may refer to Ayatollah and another v. Ali Broader and another (1996 SCR 14). Therefore it is clear that the learned Custodian failed to give effect to the clear legal provisions by not cancelling Muhammad Afar Khan's allotment after having himself reaching the conclusion that it was illegal. Similarly the High Court also fell in error m upholding the order passed by the learned Custodian. 14. Therefore we accept the appeal filed by Muhammad Ibrahim C.A. No. 147 of 1999 and set aside the judgment of the High Court. For the same reasons writ petition tiled by the appellant herein TS accepted, and the order passed by the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property on IST August, 1997 is declared to have been passed without lawful authority and of no legal effect. A direction is issued to the learned Custodian to pass an order of cancellation of allotment made in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and also to cancel the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in his favor. 15. Appellant Muhammad Ibrahim himself is not entitled to any relief in respect of allotment of disputed land in his favor because powers of allotment are vested in the rehabilitation authorities who will consider his application tor allotment in light of the relevant laws. However they will treat the case of Muhammad Ibrahim on priority basis in view of his long struggle which is evident from the record. 16. Now we take up Civil Appeal No. 148 of 1999 titled Muhammad Abram and others v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others. The present round of litigation was mitigated by Muhammad Abram, the original owners' son, on 22nd July, 1990 when he filed an application under section 18-B read with section 43 (6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 praying for cancellation of allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in the name of Muhammad Afar Khan. It was stated MN the application that initially Allah Dicta and after his death his heirs were owners of the land in dispute, and it could not m. if be legally allotted to respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. It was also stated that in any ease the proprietary rights could not be granted to him. It was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): that initially Allah Dicta and after his death his heirs were owners of the land in dispute, and it could not m. if be legally allotted to respondent Muhammad Afar Khan. It was also stated that in any ease the proprietary rights could not be granted to him. It was further stated the Muhammad Afar Khan was a local who owned more than 52 canals of land which was under the use of Army and Muhammad Afar Khan was getting rent for it. It was stated that land could only be allotted to local if his case is covered by Council Order, but Muhammad Afar’s case did not fall under the said order. The report of Enforcement Staff against Muhammad Afar was attached with the petition. The petition was dismissed by the learned Custodian, but its date is not available from the*present record, although an undated certified copy forms part of the paper book as appendix J. The learned Custodian referred to the earlier decisions of the Additional Custodian and the Civil Court to repel the contention that non-Muslim occupancy-tenants had abandoned the land mm their possession before the war of liberation. The learned Custodian also referred to some documents filed by Muhammad Abram and also give a separate finding that there was no proof in support of the allegation that the occupancy tenants had abandoned their tenancy by handing over the possession to the land-owner. It was further held that the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued in favor of MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Share Akhtar, the legal representatives of allottee Gulag Din, conferred only those rights which vested in the non-Muslim occupancy-tenants and that the allottees would retain possession of the land in dispute as occupancy-tenants as was the case of the non-Muslim occupancy-tenants. The learned Custodian also rejected the plea that Muhammad Afar Khan was not entitled to allotment of evacuee land because he was not covered by Government Order. It was posted out that the Custodian of Evacuee Property had held in his order passed on 4th April, 1979 that Muhammad Afar Khan was a local destitute. After dismissal of his petition, Muhammad Abram filed two writ petitions in the High Court on 3rd November. 1994 bearing No. 12 of 1994. Other heirs of Allah Dicta were subsequently added on 31st July. 1997. 17. Muhammad Abram also tiled a similar application against the other allottee Gulag Din. It was moved on 22nd July, 1990 before the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property praying that the portion of the land in the ownership of Allah Dicta which had been allotted to Gulag Din may also be cancelled and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order may also be recalled. At the time Gulag Din had died and MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar, his legal representatives, as well as subsequent transferee, Muhammad Ashraf Khan, were imp leaded as respondents. This application was rejected on 29th March, 1995. The learned Custodian held that the land in dispute had been declared evacuee

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): time Gulag Din had died and MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar, his legal representatives, as well as subsequent transferee, Muhammad Ashraf Khan, were imp leaded as respondents. This application was rejected on 29th March, 1995. The learned Custodian held that the land in dispute had been declared evacuee which matter could not be reopened. It was argued before the learned Custodian that when land was allotted to Gulag Din he was not in its possession, and it was also pleaded that the allotment in his favor did not in fact exist because it had been maneuvered through forgery. These pleas were rejected. The order of the learned Custodian was also challenged by filing a writ petition bearing No. 12 of 1995 on 4th June, 1995. 18. Writ Petition No. 12 of 1994 and Writ Petition No. 12 of 1995 were dismissed in line by a single order on 14th November, 1995. Muhammad Abram and others brought appeal to this Court which was accepted on 7th July, 1996 and the case was remanded to the High Court. It will be useful to reproduce the relevant portion of the judgment:- " After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we have reached the conclusion that the High Court was not right in dismissing the writ petition in liming. A perusal of the three provisions of law relied upon the High Court shows that occupancy nights of evacuees have been vested in the Custodian, but it is not provided in these provisions that evacuees were occupancy tenants the ownership rights of the Muslim land-owners would be extinguished. The documents attached with the writ show that name of Allah Dicta is still entered in ownership column. The question therefore arises whether the heirs of Allah Dicta have ceased to be owners of the land. If the answer is in negative than how proprietary rights have been granted to the respondents. This controversy has not been resolved by the High Court it may be noticed that occupancy tenants were declared entitled to get ownership rights of property held by them after fulfilling certain requirements which were prescribed under the Land Reform Act. To resolve the controversy mentioned above provisions of Land Reform Act have also to be examined." 19. Both the writ petitions have, been disposed of by a single judgment. There are two aspects of both the cases which have been decided. First it has been decided that land in dispute is evacuee property and this question had already been decided in the previous round of litigation. However it was clarified that the land was evacuee only to that extent of the merest which was held by the occupancy tenants who had now become evacuees. Consequently it was held that the allottees will be treated as occupancy tenants while heirs of Allah Dicta shall continue to the owners of the land. The petitions were accepted to the extent. The second aspect of the case related to the validity of the allotment orders

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): now become evacuees. Consequently it was held that the allottees will be treated as occupancy tenants while heirs of Allah Dicta shall continue to the owners of the land. The petitions were accepted to the extent. The second aspect of the case related to the validity of the allotment orders in favor of the allottees. The High Court has upheld the allotments of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Dm. 20. Muhammad Abram and others have filed the present appeal with leave of the Court to challenge the consolidated judgment of the High Court. They have prayed that they are the owners of the land allotted to Gulag Din and Muhammad Afar Khan and are entitled to its possession in the capacity as rightful owners. They have prayed that direction may be given that they may be put in possession. They have also prayed that the loss occurred to the appellants due to dispossession as well as the cost of litigation may be compensated. They have also challenged the allotment orders in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan and Gulag Din. About Gulag Din TT is stated that "a gypsy was not entitled to allotment of land of which the status was yet to be determined." About Muhammad Afar Khan they have raised the same ports which have been mentioned above, 1e. that he is a local not covered by Council Order No. as he is owner of landed property and also because he had other source of income as a teacher. 21. We have heard Vardar Muhammad Kiddie Khan in support of this appeal. The respondents were represented by Raja Muhammad Han if Khan, Mr. M. Tabasco Aftab Alvin and Mr. Farooq Hussain Kashmiri, Advocates. 22. We first advert to the status of the land in dispute. As has been repeatedly mentioned Allah Dicta Khan was owner of the land in dispute, and it was in occupation of non-Muslims as occupancy-tenants. On the factual side the appellants have been trying to prove during approximately for five decades that the occupancy tenants did not become evacuees, but they had already abandoned their tenancy by handing back the possession to Allah Dicta. This claim has been rejected a number of times by different Courts and Tribunals. This claim was reiterated before the learned Custodian in the present round, but this plea has been rejected once Adam. This question is purely factual in nature. The finding that the non-Muslims were in occupation as occupancy-tenants till the war of liberation is a finding of fact which, being recorded by a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction, is sacrosanct. There is nothing on the record to disprove this finding. In fact overwhelming evidence TS. available on the record which leads to the conclusion that the finding of fact recorded by the learned Custodian is unassailable. 23. Legal aspect of the stand concluded by judgment of this Court in Civil Appeal No. 11! of 1998 reported as Abdul Hamid Khan v. Ghulam Ahmad Khan (1999 SCR 444) (PSC 1999

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2000-06-15): which leads to the conclusion that the finding of fact recorded by the learned Custodian is unassailable. 23. Legal aspect of the stand concluded by judgment of this Court in Civil Appeal No. 11! of 1998 reported as Abdul Hamid Khan v. Ghulam Ahmad Khan (1999 SCR 444) (PSC 1999 SC (AJ&K) 1775) it was decided on 30th June. 1999 a few days after the judgment under appeal. It was a case in which the owners of the land were Muslims while occupancy tenants were evacuees. The following points have been decided in the said judgment:- (a) Since occupancy tenants had interest in the property falling under this category, it is evacuee property but to the extent of merest of the evacuees; (b) Muslim owners continue as owners of the land falling in this category, and they shall continue to be so as long as the present laws are in operation; (c) Land falling in this category can be allotted under the rehabilitation law; and (d) Allottee of such land shall be entitled to keep possession of the land and would not be entitled to obtain proprietary rights. 24. The learned counsel for the parties have not been able to show that the view taken in the above-noted case needs to be reviewed. We therefore, reiterate the views stated their. The principles laid down therein would be applicable to the present case also. 25. While dealing with Civil Appeal No. 147 of 1999 titled Muhammad Ibrahim v. Custodian of Evacuee Property and others we have taken the view that allotment in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan was illegal, and we have directed the learned Custodian of Evacuee Property to cancel the allotment as well as the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order standing in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan. Therefore, we need not record separate findings about the legality of the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order in favor of Muhammad Afar Khan. 26. So far as the allotment of Gulag Din TS concerned nothing substantial has been shown to create any doubt in the validity of the aforesaid allotment. Therefore, the allotment in favor of Gulag Din shall stand intact, subject to the succeeding observations. 27. In light of Abdul Hamid's case the allotment in favor of Gulag Dm shall only be to the extent of possession and would not form the basis of proprietary rights. Allah Dicta's successors-in-i merest, Muhammad Abram and others, would continue to be the owners of the land in dispute as long as the present laws are operative. Therefore the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued to MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar are cancelled from the date of issue. Consequently the transfer made in favor ° f Muhammad Ashraf Khan shall become inoperative. He will however remain MN possession on behalf of MST. Rabia Begum and MST. Shireen Akhtar as long as the preset WRT! 482 Open.

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 2006-02-27. The case involved CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS VERSUS KHAWAJA SHAHID NAZIR. The relevant statutes include SERVICE MATTER CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 212(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT, 1975 - S. 11(1). The case was heard by KHALIL-UR-REHMAN RAMDAYAND SATYED SAEED ASHHAD.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: SERVICE MATTER CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 212(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT, 1975 - S. 11(1). This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 2006-02-27.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE PETITIONERS: MUHAMMAD QAMAR-UZ-ZAMAN, ASC WITH RAJA ABDUL GHAFOOR, AOR.FOR THE RESPONDENT: SYED ASGHAR HUSSAIN SABZWARI, ASC AND CH. AKHTAR ALI, AOR.. The judges presiding were: KHALIL-UR-REHMAN RAMDAYAND SATYED SAEED ASHHAD.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS VERSUS KHAWAJA SHAHID NAZIR. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: SATYED SAEED ASHHAD, J.~ This petition for leave to appeal has been filed against the judgment dated 18.4.2005 of Federal Service Tribunal, Islamabad (hereinafter referred to as the “Tribunal’) in Appeal No 602(R) C.E./2002. 2. Brief facts DF the case appearing in detail in paragraph of the judgment of the Tribunal are reproduced as under:- “Appellant Khadija Shahid was. a Zonal Administrator (BPS. 18) in Evacuee Trust Property Board (ETPB), Rawalpindi Vide Notification dated 29.6.2001 issued. by the Minorities Affairs Wing of the Ministry of Minorities, Culture, Sport, Tourism and Youth Affairs. He was apported as Secretary in BPS. 19 and was posted at Lahore w.e.f. 9th July, 2000. In para 2 of the Notification it was clearly stated that his appointment as Secretary in BPS. 19 shall be on the same terms and conditions as were applicable in the case of an official promoted to BPS. 19 on regular basis. In pursuance of Secretary, ETPB on 10.7.2002 a fresh notification was issued by the same Ministry by which Mr. Muhammad Jazz a BPS. 19 Officer of the District Management Group was appointed as Secretary, ETP Board Lahore on deputation. The appellant was directed to continue to serve the Board m his substantive pay scale 1e. BPS. 18. It is against this order that the appellant has filed the present appeal under section of the Service Tribunal Act, 1973. Earlier his departmental appeal filed on 8.4.2002 was not responded. It is prayed by the appellant that the impugned order by which he was downgraded from BPS. 19 to 18 be set aside, and he is restored as Secretary to the Board in BPS. 19.” 3. The Tribunal by its impugned order allowed the appeal of the petitioners impugned order/notification dated 14.2.2002 was set aside, and the petitioner was restored to the position of Secretary in BPS-19. The Tribunal did not make any order with regard to his back benefits and further directed the department to take proceedings against the petitioner if so desired in accordance with the Rules. Hence this petition for leave to appeal. 4. We have heard the arguments of Mr. Muhammad Qatar-uz-Zaman, ASC on behalf of the petitioners and Syed Affair Hussain Safari, ASC on behalf of respondent. 5. Mr. Muhammad Qatar-uz-Zaman, ASC assailed the order of the Tribunal on the following grounds:-- (i) that the Tribunal erred MN holding that vide notification dated 29.6.2000 the respondent was promoted to the post of Secretary (BPS-19) of the Evacuee Trust Property Board; (i) that by virtue of section 11(1) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 (hereafter referred to as the “Act’) Secretary to the ETP Board is to be appointed by the Federal Government, and it was not a promotional post; (i) that the Tribunal wrongly interpreted the provisions of notification dated 29.6.2000 in holding that he was promoted to BPS-19 post on regular basis and in doing so completely ignored the stipulations contamed I'm the said notification that respondent was appointed as Secretary (BPS-19) until further orders; and (iv) that the Tribunal completely ignored the objection raised by the petitioners relative to the incompetency of the appeal on the ground that his appeal/representation to the departmental appellate authority was barred by time. 6. Syed Affair Hussain Safari, ASC appearing on behalf of the respondent while supporting the impugned judgment submitted as under:--- (1) that vide notification dated 29.6.2002 respondent was promoted to the post of Secretary in BPS-19 on regular basis, and he could not have been reverted or downgraded in BPS-18 without giving him an opportunity of hearing; and (i) that the petitioners could not agitate the question of limitation as it would be deemed to have been decided by the Tribunal in favor of the respondent. 7. After taking into consideration the arguments of learned counsel for the parties and perusal of record it may be observed that the impugned judgment suffers from grave and serious illegalities and infirmities. The Tribunal had failed to interpret the notification dated 29.6.2000 in its true perspective by ignoring the clear stipulation contained therein that respondent was appointed as Secretary BPS-19 and such appointment was till further orders. From such stipulation it can be inferred without any doubt that it was not a regular appointment in accordance with section 11 (1) of the Act and was by way of stop gap arrangement. This Court in the case of Abdul Majid Sheikh Vs. Mustache Ahmed and another (PLD 1965 S.C. 208) while examine the effect of the phrase “a person holds an appointment till further orders” pronounced that it only means that he holds it till orders are passed terminating his services. The mere fact that the notification also contained another stipulation that the appointment was on the same terms and conditions as are applicable to an officer promoted to BS-19 post on regular basis would not confer any vested right on respondent to claim appointment to the post of Secretary, Evacuee Trust Property Board. 8. The Tribunal also failed to take MTO consideration that the Evacuee Trust Property Board with the approval of the Federal Government framed Regulations namely Evacuee Trust Property Board Employees (Service) Regulations, 1984 according to which promotion of the employees of ETP Board has been confined up to BS-18 and the post of the Secretary of the Board being in BPS-19 is not a promotion post for such employees. As the appointment of the respondent as Secretary to the Board was by way of stop gap arrangement until further orders, he could be reverted without issue him a show-cause notice or providing him an opportunity of hearing as no vested right has been created in his favor to hold the post of the Secretary of the Board. In the circumstances notification dated 14.2.2002 issued by the Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Minorities, Culture, Sports, Tourism and Youth Affairs, apporting one Muhammad Jazz an officer of District Management Group on deputation as Secretary of the Board and reverting the respondents in his own substantive pay scale of BS-18 was not in violation of any law, rules or regulation. 9. Petitioners in objections/parawise comments had objected to the competency of the appeal before the Tribunal on the ground that his appeal was barred by time. having been filed after 52 days of the impugned notification. The reason advanced by Syed Affair Ali Safari for delay in filing the appeal was that the notification/order dated 14.2.2002 was not brought to his notice by the Board which fact came to his knowledge through a newspaper, he filed the departmental appeal on 8.4.2002. Even if admitting for the sake of arguments the above explanation, it has not been stated as to when he came to know about the notification dated 14.2.2002 through newspaper to determine whether appeal filed on. 8.4.2002 was filed within 30 days of his acquiring knowledge of his reversion. However, the contention that respondent had no knowledge of the notification dated 14.2.2002 as it was not brought to his notice is absolutely a false plea as from the material on record TT is established that notification dated 14.2.2002 had been brought to his notice on very that day as he relinquished the charge of post of Secretary on 14.2.2002 in the fore noon. On 15,2.2002 he applied for 120 days earned leave, and such application was signed by him as Ex-Secretary. Respondent should have filed his departmental appeal/representation/review within 15 days from 14.2.2002 but the same was filed on 8.4.2002 in accordance with section 9 of Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000, which was in force at the relevant time, which on that face of it was barred by time. This Court has laid down the principle that when the departmental appeal/representation is time-barred then the Service Appeal would not be competent. Reference is made to the case of State Bank of Pakistan v. Khmer Haman and others (2004 SCMR 1426). '10. The contention of Syed Affair Hussain Safari that the delay in filing the appeal would be deemed to have been condoned by the Tribunal, is without any substance as there is no provision in the Ordinance of 2000 for condonation of delay I'm filing a departmental appeal/representation/review. 11. For the above facts, discussion and reasons reversion of the respondent from the post of Secretary (BS- 19) to his original position/status as an officer in BS-18 did not suffer from any illegality, regularity or infirmity. The notification appointing Muhammad Jazz as Secretary and reverting the respondent to BS-18 did not violate any right of the respondent as according to the Service Regulations of the Board an officer of the Board was not legally entitled to hold the post of the Secretary which is to be filled in by way of appointment and not by way of promotion. 12. Accordingly this petition is converted MTO appeal and is allowed. The impugned judgment of the Federal Service Tribunal is set aside with no order as to costs. Petition allowed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2006-02-27): SATYED SAEED ASHHAD, J.~ This petition for leave to appeal has been filed against the judgment dated 18.4.2005 of Federal Service Tribunal, Islamabad (hereinafter referred to as the “Tribunal’) in Appeal No 602(R) C.E./2002. 2. Brief facts DF the case appearing in detail in paragraph of the judgment of the Tribunal are reproduced as under:- “Appellant Khadija Shahid was. a Zonal Administrator (BPS. 18) in Evacuee Trust Property Board (ETPB), Rawalpindi Vide Notification dated 29.6.2001 issued. by the Minorities Affairs Wing of the Ministry of Minorities, Culture, Sport, Tourism and Youth Affairs. He was apported as Secretary in BPS. 19 and was posted at Lahore w.e.f. 9th July, 2000. In para 2 of the Notification it was clearly stated that his appointment as Secretary in BPS. 19 shall be on the same terms and conditions as were applicable in the case of an official promoted to BPS. 19 on regular basis. In pursuance of Secretary, ETPB on 10.7.2002 a fresh notification was issued by the same Ministry by which Mr. Muhammad Jazz a BPS. 19 Officer of the District Management Group was appointed as Secretary, ETP Board Lahore on deputation. The appellant was directed to continue to serve the Board m his substantive pay scale 1e. BPS. 18. It is against this order that the appellant has filed the present appeal under section of the Service Tribunal Act, 1973. Earlier his departmental appeal filed on 8.4.2002 was not responded. It is prayed by the appellant that the impugned order by which he was downgraded from BPS. 19 to 18 be set aside, and he is restored as Secretary to the Board in BPS. 19.” 3. The Tribunal by its impugned order allowed the appeal of the petitioners impugned order/notification dated 14.2.2002 was set aside, and the petitioner was restored to the position of Secretary in BPS-19. The Tribunal did not make any order with regard to his back benefits and further directed the department to take proceedings against the petitioner if so desired in accordance with the Rules. Hence this petition for leave to appeal. 4. We have heard the arguments of Mr. Muhammad Qatar-uz-Zaman, ASC on behalf of the petitioners and Syed Affair Hussain Safari, ASC on behalf of respondent. 5. Mr. Muhammad Qatar-uz-Zaman, ASC assailed the order of the Tribunal on the following grounds:-- (i) that the Tribunal erred MN holding that vide notification dated 29.6.2000 the respondent was promoted to the post of Secretary (BPS-19) of the Evacuee Trust Property Board; (i) that by virtue of section 11(1) of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 (hereafter referred to as the “Act’) Secretary to the ETP Board is to be appointed by the Federal Government, and it was not a promotional post; (i) that the Tribunal wrongly interpreted the provisions of notification dated 29.6.2000 in holding that he was promoted to BPS-19 post on regular basis and in doing so completely ignored the stipulations contamed I'm the said notification that respondent was appointed as Secretary

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2006-02-27): and it was not a promotional post; (i) that the Tribunal wrongly interpreted the provisions of notification dated 29.6.2000 in holding that he was promoted to BPS-19 post on regular basis and in doing so completely ignored the stipulations contamed I'm the said notification that respondent was appointed as Secretary (BPS-19) until further orders; and (iv) that the Tribunal completely ignored the objection raised by the petitioners relative to the incompetency of the appeal on the ground that his appeal/representation to the departmental appellate authority was barred by time. 6. Syed Affair Hussain Safari, ASC appearing on behalf of the respondent while supporting the impugned judgment submitted as under:--- (1) that vide notification dated 29.6.2002 respondent was promoted to the post of Secretary in BPS-19 on regular basis, and he could not have been reverted or downgraded in BPS-18 without giving him an opportunity of hearing; and (i) that the petitioners could not agitate the question of limitation as it would be deemed to have been decided by the Tribunal in favor of the respondent. 7. After taking into consideration the arguments of learned counsel for the parties and perusal of record it may be observed that the impugned judgment suffers from grave and serious illegalities and infirmities. The Tribunal had failed to interpret the notification dated 29.6.2000 in its true perspective by ignoring the clear stipulation contained therein that respondent was appointed as Secretary BPS-19 and such appointment was till further orders. From such stipulation it can be inferred without any doubt that it was not a regular appointment in accordance with section 11 (1) of the Act and was by way of stop gap arrangement. This Court in the case of Abdul Majid Sheikh Vs. Mustache Ahmed and another (PLD 1965 S.C. 208) while examine the effect of the phrase “a person holds an appointment till further orders” pronounced that it only means that he holds it till orders are passed terminating his services. The mere fact that the notification also contained another stipulation that the appointment was on the same terms and conditions as are applicable to an officer promoted to BS-19 post on regular basis would not confer any vested right on respondent to claim appointment to the post of Secretary, Evacuee Trust Property Board. 8. The Tribunal also failed to take MTO consideration that the Evacuee Trust Property Board with the approval of the Federal Government framed Regulations namely Evacuee Trust Property Board Employees (Service) Regulations, 1984 according to which promotion of the employees of ETP Board has been confined up to BS-18 and the post of the Secretary of the Board being in BPS-19 is not a promotion post for such employees. As the appointment of the respondent as Secretary to the Board was by way of stop gap arrangement until further orders, he could be reverted without issue him a show-cause notice or providing him an opportunity of hearing as no vested right has been created in his favor to hold the post

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2006-02-27): appointment of the respondent as Secretary to the Board was by way of stop gap arrangement until further orders, he could be reverted without issue him a show-cause notice or providing him an opportunity of hearing as no vested right has been created in his favor to hold the post of the Secretary of the Board. In the circumstances notification dated 14.2.2002 issued by the Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Minorities, Culture, Sports, Tourism and Youth Affairs, apporting one Muhammad Jazz an officer of District Management Group on deputation as Secretary of the Board and reverting the respondents in his own substantive pay scale of BS-18 was not in violation of any law, rules or regulation. 9. Petitioners in objections/parawise comments had objected to the competency of the appeal before the Tribunal on the ground that his appeal was barred by time. having been filed after 52 days of the impugned notification. The reason advanced by Syed Affair Ali Safari for delay in filing the appeal was that the notification/order dated 14.2.2002 was not brought to his notice by the Board which fact came to his knowledge through a newspaper, he filed the departmental appeal on 8.4.2002. Even if admitting for the sake of arguments the above explanation, it has not been stated as to when he came to know about the notification dated 14.2.2002 through newspaper to determine whether appeal filed on. 8.4.2002 was filed within 30 days of his acquiring knowledge of his reversion. However, the contention that respondent had no knowledge of the notification dated 14.2.2002 as it was not brought to his notice is absolutely a false plea as from the material on record TT is established that notification dated 14.2.2002 had been brought to his notice on very that day as he relinquished the charge of post of Secretary on 14.2.2002 in the fore noon. On 15,2.2002 he applied for 120 days earned leave, and such application was signed by him as Ex-Secretary. Respondent should have filed his departmental appeal/representation/review within 15 days from 14.2.2002 but the same was filed on 8.4.2002 in accordance with section 9 of Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000, which was in force at the relevant time, which on that face of it was barred by time. This Court has laid down the principle that when the departmental appeal/representation is time-barred then the Service Appeal would not be competent. Reference is made to the case of State Bank of Pakistan v. Khmer Haman and others (2004 SCMR 1426). '10. The contention of Syed Affair Hussain Safari that the delay in filing the appeal would be deemed to have been condoned by the Tribunal, is without any substance as there is no provision in the Ordinance of 2000 for condonation of delay I'm filing a departmental appeal/representation/review. 11. For the above facts, discussion and reasons reversion of the respondent from the post of Secretary (BS- 19) to his original position/status as an officer in BS-18 did not suffer from any

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2006-02-27): is no provision in the Ordinance of 2000 for condonation of delay I'm filing a departmental appeal/representation/review. 11. For the above facts, discussion and reasons reversion of the respondent from the post of Secretary (BS- 19) to his original position/status as an officer in BS-18 did not suffer from any illegality, regularity or infirmity. The notification appointing Muhammad Jazz as Secretary and reverting the respondent to BS-18 did not violate any right of the respondent as according to the Service Regulations of the Board an officer of the Board was not legally entitled to hold the post of the Secretary which is to be filled in by way of appointment and not by way of promotion. 12. Accordingly this petition is converted MTO appeal and is allowed. The impugned judgment of the Federal Service Tribunal is set aside with no order as to costs. Petition allowed

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2005-11-23. The case involved SAID MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AJK, MUZAFFARABAD ANDOTHERS. The relevant statutes include REFUGEE AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT 1974 -S. 45. The case was heard by SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILANI AND KHAWAJA SHAHAD AHMED.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: REFUGEE AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT 1974 -S. 45. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2005-11-23.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE APPELLANTS: RAJA MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE, ADVOCATE. FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. 1: CH. SHAH WALI, ADVOCATE.. The judges presiding were: SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILANI AND KHAWAJA SHAHAD AHMED.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: SAID MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY AJK, MUZAFFARABAD ANDOTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILANI, J.- This appeal is filed against the judgment of learned Judge of the High Court dated 1.2.2005 at Mirror, in two Writ Petitions No. 74 of 2003 and No. html 2. Facts giving rise to the filing of the present appeal are that evacuee land measuring 25 canals, 2 Marley comprising number Kara 472 re-numbered as 773 situate in village Chamber Raj ani was allotted m the name of appellants on 18.3.1971. They obtained Proprietary Rights Transfer Order on 15.4.1993. A review petition was filed by respondents against the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order before the Custodian on 16.7.2001, which was dismissed on 19.6.2002 as time-barred. The respondents were held to be in unauthorized possession of the land. The respondents simultaneously filed a suit m the Court of Civil Judge Chamber on 2.10.2000, for a declaration that they are in adverse possession of the land. This was dismissed on 27.6.2002. Appeal against it was also dismissed by the District Judge on 20.11.2002. The respondents thereafter filed a second review petition before the Custodian on 18.7.2002. This review petition was accepted by the Custodian on 25.4.2003, however, holding the appellants as allottees of the land, but the respondent’s possession is given protection as its old tenants. This order was challenged before the High Court by both the parties. The learned Judge of the High Court felt pleased to dismiss the petition filed by Said Muhammad and others by vacating their allotment and directing the rehabilitation authority to allot the land in favor of respondent if found deserving on preferential basis on account of their being old tenants. The petition No. of 2002 filed by respondents is consequently accepted. 3. The learned Advocate appearing for the appellants contended that the Custodian had in earlier round of litigation accepted the claim of the appellants on 19.6.2002, which was not assailed before any forum and it attained finality. He further contended that the respondents’ suit was dismissed by Civil Court and this finding was also upheld by the District Judge, which was not set aside by any competent forum, hence it has also at tamed finality. According to him, in presence of these facts, there was no occasion for the respondents to file any fresh review petition before the Custodian, Moreno, when the ports agitated in subsequent review petition were the same as agitated in the earlier review petition which was disallowed. He further contended that appellants had raised several preliminary objections to the maintainability of the writ petition filed by the respondents before the High Court, but the learned Judge of the High Court has not dilated upon even a single objection nor decided the same. It is failure to exercise the jurisdiction which renders the judgment as illegal. He relied upon the report of decision in Civil Review No. html 22 of 2000 in the case of Muhammad Fate v. Muhammad Shaft, whereby the case was remanded by the Supreme Court in second review that the High Court failed to decide the ports raised before it. According to the learned Advocate, the Civil Court as well as the District Judge disallowed the claim' of the respondents to be in the possession of the land, not to speak of adverse possession or as old tenants. 4. The learned Advocate for the respondents defended the order passed by the High Court contending that second review petition is equally competent when it is brought on record that the material points are not considered by the High Court, and it is an error apparent on the face of record. He relied upon a case reported as Vardar Alt and others v. Kara mat Ali Khan and others 1993 SCR 226. According to him, the respondents are admittedly the old tenants and have’ been entered as such in revenue record. He further contended the appellant, Said Muhammad, is admittedly born in Azad Kashmir. He has never migrated from the other part of the State, hence he is not refugee and cannot clam the allotment. He relied upon cases reported as 2003 SCR 242 and 2002 SCR 93. 5. We have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the orders passed by the learned Custodian in review petitions as well as the judgment of the Civil Court and that of District Judge. 6. The respondents filed first review petition on 16.7.2001 calling in question the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued MN favor of appellants on 15.4.1993. Respondents also kept on pursuing civil suit before Senior Civil Judge Chamber filed on 2.10.2000, claiming declaration from the Senior Civil Judge that they are in adverse possession of the land. This suit was dismissed on 27.6.2002 holding that the respondents have not been able to prove their case for a decree of adverse possession over the land. In deciding issue No. 1, it is observed by Civil Judge that respondents have not been able to prove their possession over the land not to speak of adverse possession. The District Judge Chamber dismissed the appeal filed by the respondents on 20.11.2002 upholding the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Judge. This finding is not assailed before the High Court and is tact. This fact does not appear to have been brought to the notice of High Court as it is not discussed by the learned Judge. The only ground on the basis of which the learned Judge of the High Court has cancelled the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfers Orders issued in favor of appellants is that HTML Said Muhammad was born in 1948 and e is included in the family of his mother on account of which he was not entitled to separate allotment. It appears that the ha t the High Court has failed take notice of the fact that the petition before the High Curt was filed by five persons all of whom claim the allotment jointly as sons °.L Din (father) and Hand (mother). Said Muhammad was not alone, but a member of the family whose mother was a refugee (their father had perhaps died before migration, as the allotment proceedings were conducted in and around the name of their mother). The learned Custodian in his judgment dated 25.4.2003 at page has recorded that mother of Said Muhammad has got her want f<;Order that she bein9 in advanced old age wants the allotment to be made m the name of her son Said Muhammad and if there is any allotment in her name anywhere else that may be cancelled and that she has earl'er surrendered the allotment, if any, in her name. This tact has also not been taken into consideration by the learned Judge of the High Court. y 8. There is no cavil with the proposition that a person who is not refugee. Cannot claim the benefits and perks attached to the refugee’s status. But if one TS the descended of the refugee, who was entitled to the perks as in the case in hand to the allotment and has not obtained the benefits/clerks to which he/she was entitled, and by way of a statement categorically stated that allotment may be made in the name of her son, the descendant of that refugee cannot be deprived of that right, which his father or mother had Thus the authorities of law cited by the learned counsel for the respondents MN the case in hand do not help, as the facts of the case are totally different. *s as revealed from the perusal of the record that the question raised in the second review petition are same as were in the first, whether this could be allowed and first order reversed by challenging the Archer view has also to be considered by the High Court. None of the preliminary objections which go to the root of the case has been attended. It is of course, open to the Court to observe that the preliminary objections do not merit consideration or that they are not worth credence, but the objections are substantive in nature, these ought to have been considered by the High Court and decided. 10. In the absence of my categoric finding on the important questions of law and facts, this Court does not deem it proper to decide the case in appeal without first having the finding by the High Court. In view of above, accepting the appeal with costs, impugned order is set aside, and the case is remanded to the High Court with the direction to decide it afresh MN the light of above HTML observations. Case remanded

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2005-11-23): SYED MANZOOR HUSSAIN GILANI, J.- This appeal is filed against the judgment of learned Judge of the High Court dated 1.2.2005 at Mirror, in two Writ Petitions No. 74 of 2003 and No. html 2. Facts giving rise to the filing of the present appeal are that evacuee land measuring 25 canals, 2 Marley comprising number Kara 472 re-numbered as 773 situate in village Chamber Raj ani was allotted m the name of appellants on 18.3.1971. They obtained Proprietary Rights Transfer Order on 15.4.1993. A review petition was filed by respondents against the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfer Order before the Custodian on 16.7.2001, which was dismissed on 19.6.2002 as time-barred. The respondents were held to be in unauthorized possession of the land. The respondents simultaneously filed a suit m the Court of Civil Judge Chamber on 2.10.2000, for a declaration that they are in adverse possession of the land. This was dismissed on 27.6.2002. Appeal against it was also dismissed by the District Judge on 20.11.2002. The respondents thereafter filed a second review petition before the Custodian on 18.7.2002. This review petition was accepted by the Custodian on 25.4.2003, however, holding the appellants as allottees of the land, but the respondent’s possession is given protection as its old tenants. This order was challenged before the High Court by both the parties. The learned Judge of the High Court felt pleased to dismiss the petition filed by Said Muhammad and others by vacating their allotment and directing the rehabilitation authority to allot the land in favor of respondent if found deserving on preferential basis on account of their being old tenants. The petition No. of 2002 filed by respondents is consequently accepted. 3. The learned Advocate appearing for the appellants contended that the Custodian had in earlier round of litigation accepted the claim of the appellants on 19.6.2002, which was not assailed before any forum and it attained finality. He further contended that the respondents’ suit was dismissed by Civil Court and this finding was also upheld by the District Judge, which was not set aside by any competent forum, hence it has also at tamed finality. According to him, in presence of these facts, there was no occasion for the respondents to file any fresh review petition before the Custodian, Moreno, when the ports agitated in subsequent review petition were the same as agitated in the earlier review petition which was disallowed. He further contended that appellants had raised several preliminary objections to the maintainability of the writ petition filed by the respondents before the High Court, but the learned Judge of the High Court has not dilated upon even a single objection nor decided the same. It is failure to exercise the jurisdiction which renders the judgment as illegal. He relied upon the report of decision in Civil Review No. html 22 of 2000 in the case of Muhammad Fate v. Muhammad Shaft, whereby the case was remanded by the Supreme Court in second review that the High

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2005-11-23): failure to exercise the jurisdiction which renders the judgment as illegal. He relied upon the report of decision in Civil Review No. html 22 of 2000 in the case of Muhammad Fate v. Muhammad Shaft, whereby the case was remanded by the Supreme Court in second review that the High Court failed to decide the ports raised before it. According to the learned Advocate, the Civil Court as well as the District Judge disallowed the claim' of the respondents to be in the possession of the land, not to speak of adverse possession or as old tenants. 4. The learned Advocate for the respondents defended the order passed by the High Court contending that second review petition is equally competent when it is brought on record that the material points are not considered by the High Court, and it is an error apparent on the face of record. He relied upon a case reported as Vardar Alt and others v. Kara mat Ali Khan and others 1993 SCR 226. According to him, the respondents are admittedly the old tenants and have’ been entered as such in revenue record. He further contended the appellant, Said Muhammad, is admittedly born in Azad Kashmir. He has never migrated from the other part of the State, hence he is not refugee and cannot clam the allotment. He relied upon cases reported as 2003 SCR 242 and 2002 SCR 93. 5. We have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the orders passed by the learned Custodian in review petitions as well as the judgment of the Civil Court and that of District Judge. 6. The respondents filed first review petition on 16.7.2001 calling in question the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued MN favor of appellants on 15.4.1993. Respondents also kept on pursuing civil suit before Senior Civil Judge Chamber filed on 2.10.2000, claiming declaration from the Senior Civil Judge that they are in adverse possession of the land. This suit was dismissed on 27.6.2002 holding that the respondents have not been able to prove their case for a decree of adverse possession over the land. In deciding issue No. 1, it is observed by Civil Judge that respondents have not been able to prove their possession over the land not to speak of adverse possession. The District Judge Chamber dismissed the appeal filed by the respondents on 20.11.2002 upholding the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Judge. This finding is not assailed before the High Court and is tact. This fact does not appear to have been brought to the notice of High Court as it is not discussed by the learned Judge. The only ground on the basis of which the learned Judge of the High Court has cancelled the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfers Orders issued in favor of appellants is that HTML Said Muhammad was born in 1948 and e is included in the family of his mother on account of which he was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2005-11-23): the basis of which the learned Judge of the High Court has cancelled the allotment and Proprietary Rights Transfers Orders issued in favor of appellants is that HTML Said Muhammad was born in 1948 and e is included in the family of his mother on account of which he was not entitled to separate allotment. It appears that the ha t the High Court has failed take notice of the fact that the petition before the High Curt was filed by five persons all of whom claim the allotment jointly as sons °.L Din (father) and Hand (mother). Said Muhammad was not alone, but a member of the family whose mother was a refugee (their father had perhaps died before migration, as the allotment proceedings were conducted in and around the name of their mother). The learned Custodian in his judgment dated 25.4.2003 at page has recorded that mother of Said Muhammad has got her want f<;Order that she bein9 in advanced old age wants the allotment to be made m the name of her son Said Muhammad and if there is any allotment in her name anywhere else that may be cancelled and that she has earl'er surrendered the allotment, if any, in her name. This tact has also not been taken into consideration by the learned Judge of the High Court. y 8. There is no cavil with the proposition that a person who is not refugee. Cannot claim the benefits and perks attached to the refugee’s status. But if one TS the descended of the refugee, who was entitled to the perks as in the case in hand to the allotment and has not obtained the benefits/clerks to which he/she was entitled, and by way of a statement categorically stated that allotment may be made in the name of her son, the descendant of that refugee cannot be deprived of that right, which his father or mother had Thus the authorities of law cited by the learned counsel for the respondents MN the case in hand do not help, as the facts of the case are totally different. *s as revealed from the perusal of the record that the question raised in the second review petition are same as were in the first, whether this could be allowed and first order reversed by challenging the Archer view has also to be considered by the High Court. None of the preliminary objections which go to the root of the case has been attended. It is of course, open to the Court to observe that the preliminary objections do not merit consideration or that they are not worth credence, but the objections are substantive in nature, these ought to have been considered by the High Court and decided. 10. In the absence of my categoric finding on the important questions of law and facts, this Court does not deem it proper to decide the case in appeal without first having the finding by the High Court. In view of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2005-11-23): have been considered by the High Court and decided. 10. In the absence of my categoric finding on the important questions of law and facts, this Court does not deem it proper to decide the case in appeal without first having the finding by the High Court. In view of above, accepting the appeal with costs, impugned order is set aside, and the case is remanded to the High Court with the direction to decide it afresh MN the light of above HTML observations. Case remanded

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR on 2006-03-17. The case involved MUHAMMAD BASHIR AND OTHERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS. The relevant statutes include AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (1974) - S. 42-D AJ&K SUPREME COURT RULES, 1978 - O. XLVI, R. VOID ORDER. The case was heard by KH. MUHAMMAD SAEED, CJ..

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR INTERIM CONSTITUTION ACT (1974) - S. 42-D AJ&K SUPREME COURT RULES, 1978 - O. XLVI, R. VOID ORDER. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR and decided on 2006-03-17.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE PETITIONERS: SARDAR MUHAMMAD AZAM KHAN, ADVOCATE.. The judges presiding were: KH. MUHAMMAD SAEED, CJ..

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: MUHAMMAD BASHIR AND OTHERS VERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTYAND OTHERS. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: KM. MUHAMMAD SAEED, CJ. - This review petition is directed against the judgment of this Court dated 17.3.2006. ’ 2. The Custodian vide his order dated 27.3.1991, on the basis allotment order, issued Proprietary Rights Transfer Order in favor of respondent No. 2. The petitioners filed a review petition before the Custodian on 28.2.1994 which was dismissed in default of appearance on 5.11.1998. Again on 29.3.2000 they filed second review petition before the Custodian which was ultimately dismissed on merits by -him on 20.6.2002. The order of the Custodian was challenged in a writ petition before the High Court which was dismissed vide judgment dated 22.12.2005. A petition for leave to appeal filed by the petitioners was dismissed by this Court vide judgment under challenge dated 17.3.2006. Hence this review petition. 3. Even though various grounds were taken by the learned counsel for the petitioners in support of this review petition, however, he stressed only two ports. Firstly that at the time when respondent No. migrated with his mother from the occupied part of the State, he was only six years old and was therefore included in the family members of his elder brother. New Muhammad, who was obtained allotment of 64 canals of land. In these circumstances he was wrongly treated as separate family. Therefore, allotment made in his favor is a nullity in the eye of law. His second point is that the petitioners are old. tenants of the disputed land. This point was raised before the Custodian and the same was refuted by other side therefore the Custodian should have framed an issue to this effect and then resolved the same after receiving evidence from the parties. Alternatively he argued that his clients are old tenants and the land renamed in the continuous possession without payment of any rent to true owners or the allottees, as such their long possession over the same had ripened into ownership which had extinguished the rights of ownership of true owners or. any allottee, but this question has not been taken into consideration. The order of allotment in favor of respondent No. was void ab initio as he BMG minor at the time of his migration was not competent to obtain allotment of land. According to the learned counsel, the Supreme Court of Pakistan has held in some authorities that where an order is vide ab initio, the question of limitation does not carry any weight. He, therefore, craved that the point of limitation in the instant case should not be given much v importance. 4. I have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners. In the order under review it is clearly laid down that whenever status of a person or property whether he or such property is evacuee or not is evolved, the Custodian has got exclusive jurisdiction under section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act to declare so. In the order of the Custodian, the status of respondent as evacuee perhaps was not disputed as such this question was not resolved by him Presumption of correctness is attached to all the official acts, however, there is no dispute that this presumption is rebutted able in case some convincing evidence is brought on record. In the present case the evacuee land comprising various survey numbers has been allotted to respondent No. by the Rehabilitation authorities which fact proves that he has been taken as a refugee of 1947 and evacuee land has been allotted to him MN that capacity. Even the case of petitioners 1s that respondent No. migrated with his mother and elder brother when he wads too small. This itself shows that his father was not alive at the time when whole family migrated to liberated part of the State. Like his elder brother and any other member of family, the presumption would be that he had also merited property which was left by his father. Therefore against such property he was justified to obtain allotment independently. Even otherwise whether all the brothers constitute one family or not, is a question of multiple allotment which cannot be resolved by this Court in exercise of its review jurisdiction. As this would be a disputed question of fact which even otherwise cannot be resolved without recording evidence of the parties. 5. The second question raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the petitioners are old tenants, and they had not paid rent either to Hindu owners or respondent No. 2, as such other long possession has matured into ownership. No doubt the governing principles of C.P.C. are applicable before the Custodian while resolving disputes under the provisions-of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. However, this question should have been first mooted before the Custodian, the High Court and then before this Court. The same having been raised for the first time in review jurisdiction cannot be considered at this belated stage. 6. The last point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that no limitation 1s provided against a void order. The first review petition was filed on 28.2.1994 against the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued MN favor of respondent No. on 27.3.1991 on the basis of allotment obtained by him on 23.6.1990. The review petition was filed after more than three years which was dismissed in default of appearance on 25.11.1998. Without moving any application for its restoration, another review petition was filed on 29.3.2000 which was dismissed by the Custodian on 20.6.2002. The learned Custodian was therefore, justified m law to hold that the review petition filed by the petitioners was barred by Imitation. In this regard the petitioners cannot blame anybody else except themselves for their indolence and negligence. This Court in the cases reported as Mira Lai Hussain vs. Custodian of Evacuee Property others (1992 SCR 214) and Muhammad Ilyas Khan vs. Vardar Muhammad Heifetz Khan (2001 SCR 179) has. laid down that even a void order adversely affecting the interests of a person should be challenged by him within a reasonable time. The authority cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner titled Fate Muhammad vs. Muhammad Shaft and others (Civil Review Petition No. 22 of 2000, decided on 25.4.2001) has nothing common with the facts of present case and is not applicable to the case m hand. 7. Through the mutant review petition, the petitioners MN fact want rehear mg of while of the case on the basis of new ground which is not permissible under law. Therefore this review petition beg devoid of force is hereby dismissed. Review edition dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2006-03-17): KM. MUHAMMAD SAEED, CJ. - This review petition is directed against the judgment of this Court dated 17.3.2006. ’ 2. The Custodian vide his order dated 27.3.1991, on the basis allotment order, issued Proprietary Rights Transfer Order in favor of respondent No. 2. The petitioners filed a review petition before the Custodian on 28.2.1994 which was dismissed in default of appearance on 5.11.1998. Again on 29.3.2000 they filed second review petition before the Custodian which was ultimately dismissed on merits by -him on 20.6.2002. The order of the Custodian was challenged in a writ petition before the High Court which was dismissed vide judgment dated 22.12.2005. A petition for leave to appeal filed by the petitioners was dismissed by this Court vide judgment under challenge dated 17.3.2006. Hence this review petition. 3. Even though various grounds were taken by the learned counsel for the petitioners in support of this review petition, however, he stressed only two ports. Firstly that at the time when respondent No. migrated with his mother from the occupied part of the State, he was only six years old and was therefore included in the family members of his elder brother. New Muhammad, who was obtained allotment of 64 canals of land. In these circumstances he was wrongly treated as separate family. Therefore, allotment made in his favor is a nullity in the eye of law. His second point is that the petitioners are old. tenants of the disputed land. This point was raised before the Custodian and the same was refuted by other side therefore the Custodian should have framed an issue to this effect and then resolved the same after receiving evidence from the parties. Alternatively he argued that his clients are old tenants and the land renamed in the continuous possession without payment of any rent to true owners or the allottees, as such their long possession over the same had ripened into ownership which had extinguished the rights of ownership of true owners or. any allottee, but this question has not been taken into consideration. The order of allotment in favor of respondent No. was void ab initio as he BMG minor at the time of his migration was not competent to obtain allotment of land. According to the learned counsel, the Supreme Court of Pakistan has held in some authorities that where an order is vide ab initio, the question of limitation does not carry any weight. He, therefore, craved that the point of limitation in the instant case should not be given much v importance. 4. I have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners. In the order under review it is clearly laid down that whenever status of a person or property whether he or such property is evacuee or not is evolved, the Custodian has got exclusive jurisdiction under section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act to declare so. In the order of the Custodian, the status of respondent as evacuee perhaps was not

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2006-03-17): of a person or property whether he or such property is evacuee or not is evolved, the Custodian has got exclusive jurisdiction under section 41 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act to declare so. In the order of the Custodian, the status of respondent as evacuee perhaps was not disputed as such this question was not resolved by him Presumption of correctness is attached to all the official acts, however, there is no dispute that this presumption is rebutted able in case some convincing evidence is brought on record. In the present case the evacuee land comprising various survey numbers has been allotted to respondent No. by the Rehabilitation authorities which fact proves that he has been taken as a refugee of 1947 and evacuee land has been allotted to him MN that capacity. Even the case of petitioners 1s that respondent No. migrated with his mother and elder brother when he wads too small. This itself shows that his father was not alive at the time when whole family migrated to liberated part of the State. Like his elder brother and any other member of family, the presumption would be that he had also merited property which was left by his father. Therefore against such property he was justified to obtain allotment independently. Even otherwise whether all the brothers constitute one family or not, is a question of multiple allotment which cannot be resolved by this Court in exercise of its review jurisdiction. As this would be a disputed question of fact which even otherwise cannot be resolved without recording evidence of the parties. 5. The second question raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the petitioners are old tenants, and they had not paid rent either to Hindu owners or respondent No. 2, as such other long possession has matured into ownership. No doubt the governing principles of C.P.C. are applicable before the Custodian while resolving disputes under the provisions-of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act. However, this question should have been first mooted before the Custodian, the High Court and then before this Court. The same having been raised for the first time in review jurisdiction cannot be considered at this belated stage. 6. The last point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that no limitation 1s provided against a void order. The first review petition was filed on 28.2.1994 against the Proprietary Rights Transfer Order issued MN favor of respondent No. on 27.3.1991 on the basis of allotment obtained by him on 23.6.1990. The review petition was filed after more than three years which was dismissed in default of appearance on 25.11.1998. Without moving any application for its restoration, another review petition was filed on 29.3.2000 which was dismissed by the Custodian on 20.6.2002. The learned Custodian was therefore, justified m law to hold that the review petition filed by the petitioners was barred by Imitation. In this regard the petitioners cannot blame anybody else except themselves for their

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT OFAZAD JAMMU KASHMIR, 2006-03-17): another review petition was filed on 29.3.2000 which was dismissed by the Custodian on 20.6.2002. The learned Custodian was therefore, justified m law to hold that the review petition filed by the petitioners was barred by Imitation. In this regard the petitioners cannot blame anybody else except themselves for their indolence and negligence. This Court in the cases reported as Mira Lai Hussain vs. Custodian of Evacuee Property others (1992 SCR 214) and Muhammad Ilyas Khan vs. Vardar Muhammad Heifetz Khan (2001 SCR 179) has. laid down that even a void order adversely affecting the interests of a person should be challenged by him within a reasonable time. The authority cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner titled Fate Muhammad vs. Muhammad Shaft and others (Civil Review Petition No. 22 of 2000, decided on 25.4.2001) has nothing common with the facts of present case and is not applicable to the case m hand. 7. Through the mutant review petition, the petitioners MN fact want rehear mg of while of the case on the basis of new ground which is not permissible under law. Therefore this review petition beg devoid of force is hereby dismissed. Review edition dismissed

Question: What is case  about?
Answer: Case  was decided by SUPREME COURT on 2005-12-15. The case involved CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS VERSUS MUHAMMAD YAKUB KHAN. The relevant statutes include CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT, 1975. The case was heard by RANA BHAGWANDAS, SATYED SAEED ASHHAD AND HAMID ALI MIRZA.

Question: What statutes were applied in case ?
Answer: In case , the court applied the following statutes: CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 1973 - ARTICLE 185(3) EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT, 1975. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT and decided on 2005-12-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case ?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case  were: FOR THE PETITIONERS: MUHAMMAD QAMAR-UZ-ZAMAN, ASC.FOR THE RESPONDENT: BASHARATULLAH, SR. ASC.. The judges presiding were: RANA BHAGWANDAS, SATYED SAEED ASHHAD AND HAMID ALI MIRZA.

Question: Who were the parties in case ?
Answer: The parties in case  were: CHAIRMAN, EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS VERSUS MUHAMMAD YAKUB KHAN. This case was heard in SUPREME COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case .
Answer: RANA BHAGWANDAS, J.- Petitioners seek leave to appeal against Division Bench judgment of the. Balochistan High Court allowing respondent’s writ petition directed against order dated 21.3.2001 passed by petitioner No. 1e. Evacuee Trust Property Board (hereinafter referred as the Board) and order in revision dated 27.6.200-1 passed by petitioner* No. 1e. Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan. 2. Facts leading to this petition appear to be that the respondent is a tenant/lessee of the Board constituted under the provisions of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 (hereafter referred as Act 1975) in respect of certain land in the city of Quetta by virtue of an agreement of lease. Respondent raised construction on the land after demolishing the old structure without any approval or permission of the Board and was, therefore, proceeded against for violation of the terms and conditions of the lease and the provisions of the Act, 1975 as well as the Rules framed under section 30 It further appears that unauthorized/illegal construction having come to the notice of petitioner No. vide order dated 21.3.2001, Chairman of the Board directed recovery of Rs. 64, 000/- as cost of removing Malta, fine of Rs. 8,00,000/- for regularization of unauthorized construction and recovery of rent at the rate of Rs. 27,745/- per month with effect from 1.7.2001 with increase in rent by 10% per annum. Respondent being aggrieved and dissatisfied preferred a revision application under section 17 of the Act, 1975 before the Federal Government, which was heard by the competent authority and dismissed vide order dated 27.6.2001. Respondent, being frustrated, invoked the Constitutional Jurisdiction of the Balochistan High Court and challenged the virus of the both orders through a writ petition, which after hearing the parties counsel, was disposed of vide judgment impugned in this petition. 3. We have heard Mr. Muhammad Qatar-uz-Zaman. learned ASC for the petitioners and Mr. Basharatullah, learned Sr. ASC, who has entered caveat on behalf of the respondent at quite some length and gone through the impugned judgment as well as the orders assailed before the High Court. It is contended on behalf of the petitioners that under the Provisions of the Act, 1975, Chairman of the Board enjoys vast powers to deal with the evacuee trust properties with a view to manage and administer the same under the provisions of the Act, 1975, police decisions of the Federal Government and the statutory rules framed under the Act, 1975. It may be pertinent to observe that before the promulgation of Act, 1975, evacuee trust properties were dealt with under the Scheme for the Management and Disposal of Evacuee Trust Properties 1971, which was substituted after the enactment of Act, 1975. 4. Main thrust of the argument of learned counsel was that since the respondent had demolished the old structure and raised a new building on the plot of land without any permission and approval of the Board the Chairman was fully competent to regularize the unauthorized/illegai1 construction raised op the property vesting in the Board-, subject to terms. Learned counsel pointed out that in view of large area of the plot reassessment of rent by the Chairman was neither unfair nor unjustified as at the time of execution of original agreement. in 1962, the property was let out on monthly rent of Rs. 1200/-. It was later decided, by way of policy decision, to charge rent from the tenants at a rate of per square feet. In accordance with the policy laid down by the Government/Board, the Chairman reassessed the rate of rent as aforesaid with increase at the rate of 10% per annum. Likewise the Chairman was competent to charge the amount of penalty for regularizing unauthorized construction, admittedly raised by the respondent, who is none else but a Senior Advocate of Balochistan High Court. It was further pointed out that Division Bench of the Balochistan High Court wrongly placed reliance on Single Bench judgment of the Lahore High Court reported as Metaphor Khan v. Evacuee Trust Property Board (2002 CLC 1819), in which enhancement of rent from 150% to 224092% was disapproved by the Lahore High Court and amendment in clause 11 of the Scheme for Management and Disposal of Urban Evacuee Trust Property 1977 framed under section 30 of the Act 1975 as amended was declared to be ultra vires of the parent Act. The submission is that in the present case it was the reconstruction of a building on a piece of land vesting in the Board, which was the main issue before the Chairman who could either order demolition thereof or regularize its construction subject to terms. Be that as it may, the fact reams that the order passed by Chairman, was challenged before the Federal Government in revision but without any success and held the filed. 5. Mr. Basharatullah, learned ASC, who entered appearance on caveat referred us to the police directions issued by the Trust vide circular letter dated 5.8.2002 laying down that the policy of the Board for enhancement of rent has been set aside by the Lahore High Court vide order dated 6.6.2002, and it was decided that the said judgment shall not be challenged and the cases/writ petition pending before different Courts of law shall not be contested. Learned counsel attempted to argue that in* the face of this policy decision by the Board itself} writ petition filed by the respondent should not have been contested, and the claim acceded to. 6. We are afraid we cannot subscribe to this view of the learned counsel as apart from reassessment of rent after reconstruction of building at the site, cost of removal of Malta as well as the amount of penalty in order to regularize the unauthorized construction were the questions involved in the writ petition, which are not covered by the policy decision referred to by the learned counsel. On overall consideration of the impugned judgment of the High Court, we feel that in that exercise of its writ jurisdiction, High Court should not have substituted its finding for the findings recorded by the authorities apported under the Act, 1975 without posting out the error of jurisdiction or the error of law. While dong so, High Court evidently acted beyond its jurisdiction because. The High Court did not find the impugned orders perverse or contrary to the provisions of law. To our mind, proper course for the' High Court would have been to remit the case to the Chairman for reconsideration after laying down guidelines and making necessary observations after declaring the orders to be without lawful authority and of no legal effect. Indeed disputed questions of fact ought not to have been decided in the exercise of Constitutional jurisdiction. 7. For the aforesaid facts, circumstances and reasons, we do not uphold impugned judgment of the Balochistan High Court, which patently suffers from error of law as well as jurisdictional defect. Consequently this petition is converted into appeal and allowed. Impugned judgment of the High Court as well as orders impugned in the writ petition are set aside and case is remanded to the Chairman of the Board for reconsideration of the question raised by the respondent in the writ petition, after allowing him an opportunity of hearing and passing a fresh order strictly in accordance with policy decisions of the Federal Government, the provisions of Act, 1975 and the Rules framed thereunder. No order as to costs. Petition allowed/Case remanded.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2005-12-15): RANA BHAGWANDAS, J.- Petitioners seek leave to appeal against Division Bench judgment of the. Balochistan High Court allowing respondent’s writ petition directed against order dated 21.3.2001 passed by petitioner No. 1e. Evacuee Trust Property Board (hereinafter referred as the Board) and order in revision dated 27.6.200-1 passed by petitioner* No. 1e. Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan. 2. Facts leading to this petition appear to be that the respondent is a tenant/lessee of the Board constituted under the provisions of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975 (hereafter referred as Act 1975) in respect of certain land in the city of Quetta by virtue of an agreement of lease. Respondent raised construction on the land after demolishing the old structure without any approval or permission of the Board and was, therefore, proceeded against for violation of the terms and conditions of the lease and the provisions of the Act, 1975 as well as the Rules framed under section 30 It further appears that unauthorized/illegal construction having come to the notice of petitioner No. vide order dated 21.3.2001, Chairman of the Board directed recovery of Rs. 64, 000/- as cost of removing Malta, fine of Rs. 8,00,000/- for regularization of unauthorized construction and recovery of rent at the rate of Rs. 27,745/- per month with effect from 1.7.2001 with increase in rent by 10% per annum. Respondent being aggrieved and dissatisfied preferred a revision application under section 17 of the Act, 1975 before the Federal Government, which was heard by the competent authority and dismissed vide order dated 27.6.2001. Respondent, being frustrated, invoked the Constitutional Jurisdiction of the Balochistan High Court and challenged the virus of the both orders through a writ petition, which after hearing the parties counsel, was disposed of vide judgment impugned in this petition. 3. We have heard Mr. Muhammad Qatar-uz-Zaman. learned ASC for the petitioners and Mr. Basharatullah, learned Sr. ASC, who has entered caveat on behalf of the respondent at quite some length and gone through the impugned judgment as well as the orders assailed before the High Court. It is contended on behalf of the petitioners that under the Provisions of the Act, 1975, Chairman of the Board enjoys vast powers to deal with the evacuee trust properties with a view to manage and administer the same under the provisions of the Act, 1975, police decisions of the Federal Government and the statutory rules framed under the Act, 1975. It may be pertinent to observe that before the promulgation of Act, 1975, evacuee trust properties were dealt with under the Scheme for the Management and Disposal of Evacuee Trust Properties 1971, which was substituted after the enactment of Act, 1975. 4. Main thrust of the argument of learned counsel was that since the respondent had demolished the old structure and raised a new building on the plot of land without any permission and approval of the Board the Chairman was fully competent to regularize the unauthorized/illegai1 construction raised op the property

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2005-12-15): Main thrust of the argument of learned counsel was that since the respondent had demolished the old structure and raised a new building on the plot of land without any permission and approval of the Board the Chairman was fully competent to regularize the unauthorized/illegai1 construction raised op the property vesting in the Board-, subject to terms. Learned counsel pointed out that in view of large area of the plot reassessment of rent by the Chairman was neither unfair nor unjustified as at the time of execution of original agreement. in 1962, the property was let out on monthly rent of Rs. 1200/-. It was later decided, by way of policy decision, to charge rent from the tenants at a rate of per square feet. In accordance with the policy laid down by the Government/Board, the Chairman reassessed the rate of rent as aforesaid with increase at the rate of 10% per annum. Likewise the Chairman was competent to charge the amount of penalty for regularizing unauthorized construction, admittedly raised by the respondent, who is none else but a Senior Advocate of Balochistan High Court. It was further pointed out that Division Bench of the Balochistan High Court wrongly placed reliance on Single Bench judgment of the Lahore High Court reported as Metaphor Khan v. Evacuee Trust Property Board (2002 CLC 1819), in which enhancement of rent from 150% to 224092% was disapproved by the Lahore High Court and amendment in clause 11 of the Scheme for Management and Disposal of Urban Evacuee Trust Property 1977 framed under section 30 of the Act 1975 as amended was declared to be ultra vires of the parent Act. The submission is that in the present case it was the reconstruction of a building on a piece of land vesting in the Board, which was the main issue before the Chairman who could either order demolition thereof or regularize its construction subject to terms. Be that as it may, the fact reams that the order passed by Chairman, was challenged before the Federal Government in revision but without any success and held the filed. 5. Mr. Basharatullah, learned ASC, who entered appearance on caveat referred us to the police directions issued by the Trust vide circular letter dated 5.8.2002 laying down that the policy of the Board for enhancement of rent has been set aside by the Lahore High Court vide order dated 6.6.2002, and it was decided that the said judgment shall not be challenged and the cases/writ petition pending before different Courts of law shall not be contested. Learned counsel attempted to argue that in* the face of this policy decision by the Board itself} writ petition filed by the respondent should not have been contested, and the claim acceded to. 6. We are afraid we cannot subscribe to this view of the learned counsel as apart from reassessment of rent after reconstruction of building at the site, cost of removal of Malta as well as the amount of penalty in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case ?
Answer: From case  (SUPREME COURT, 2005-12-15): should not have been contested, and the claim acceded to. 6. We are afraid we cannot subscribe to this view of the learned counsel as apart from reassessment of rent after reconstruction of building at the site, cost of removal of Malta as well as the amount of penalty in order to regularize the unauthorized construction were the questions involved in the writ petition, which are not covered by the policy decision referred to by the learned counsel. On overall consideration of the impugned judgment of the High Court, we feel that in that exercise of its writ jurisdiction, High Court should not have substituted its finding for the findings recorded by the authorities apported under the Act, 1975 without posting out the error of jurisdiction or the error of law. While dong so, High Court evidently acted beyond its jurisdiction because. The High Court did not find the impugned orders perverse or contrary to the provisions of law. To our mind, proper course for the' High Court would have been to remit the case to the Chairman for reconsideration after laying down guidelines and making necessary observations after declaring the orders to be without lawful authority and of no legal effect. Indeed disputed questions of fact ought not to have been decided in the exercise of Constitutional jurisdiction. 7. For the aforesaid facts, circumstances and reasons, we do not uphold impugned judgment of the Balochistan High Court, which patently suffers from error of law as well as jurisdictional defect. Consequently this petition is converted into appeal and allowed. Impugned judgment of the High Court as well as orders impugned in the writ petition are set aside and case is remanded to the Chairman of the Board for reconsideration of the question raised by the respondent in the writ petition, after allowing him an opportunity of hearing and passing a fresh order strictly in accordance with policy decisions of the Federal Government, the provisions of Act, 1975 and the Rules framed thereunder. No order as to costs. Petition allowed/Case remanded.

Question: What is case 2001 YLR 394 about?
Answer: Case 2001 YLR 394 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2001-05-08. The case involved ZAHOOR AHMAD AND OTHERS—PETITIONERSVERSUS DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR (RESIDUAL PROPERTY) AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include EVACUEE PROPERTYAND DISPLACED PERSONS LAWS (REPEAL) ACT (XIV OF 1975) - S. 2(2) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by SYED ZAHID HUSSAIN.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: In case 2001 YLR 394, the court applied the following statutes: EVACUEE PROPERTYAND DISPLACED PERSONS LAWS (REPEAL) ACT (XIV OF 1975) - S. 2(2) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2001-05-08.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2001 YLR 394 were: RANA MUHAMMAD SARWAR FOR PETITIONERS. MIAN DILAWAR MAHMOOD FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SYED ZAHID HUSSAIN.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: The parties in case 2001 YLR 394 were: ZAHOOR AHMAD AND OTHERS—PETITIONERSVERSUS DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR (RESIDUAL PROPERTY) AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2001 YLR 394.
Answer: Order, dated 11-12-1986 of the Administrator (R. P.)/Additional Commissioner, Lahore Division Lahore, whereby, the revision petition, filed by the petitioners, was dismissed, has LR/html_TXT/Y been challenged through this petition under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 2. The dispute concerns with Property No.SE-IV-16-S-14, Lariat Street, Nicholson Road, Vila Guitar Singh, Lahore which was an evacuee property and was burnt partly during the disturbances of 1947. As per survey list, it was occupied by Abdul Aziz, Yahoo Ahmed son of M. Hidayatullah, Sheikh Abdul Hammed, Suraj Din and Abdul Shaffer. It may be mentioned here that Abdul Aziz and Sheikh Abdul Hammed were b'others. With the commencement of the settlement operation Hidayatullah predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners, submitted C.H. Form for the transfer of the property. On 28-12-1959, Cheered Din, Settlement Inspector, after section of the spot, submitted report that Hidayatullah, a refugee/claimant was the only person who had submitted C.H. Form. Finding the property indivisible he recommended the transfer to him. It was on 6-1-1960 that the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Lahore ordered the transfer of the property to Hidayatullah, as a consequence of which P.T.O. dated 8-1-1960 was issued. Thereafter, P.T.D. dated 20-4-1963 was also issued. Abdul Aziz and Abdul Hammed challenged the order of transfer through separate appeals which were dismissed by the learned Additional Settlement Commissioner (Judicial) Lahore on 13-6-1960. Abdul Aziz filed a revision petition there against which was dismissed by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore on 13-6-1963. Writ Petition No.I700/R of 1963 was filed by him against the abovementioned orders which was dismissed by this Court on 11-6-1964. L.P.A. No.368 of 1964 filed by him met with the same fate and was dismissed in liming on 15-9-1964. With this order litigation by Abdul Aziz qua the transfer in favor of Hidayatullah concluded and came to an end. 3. Abdul Hammed had also challenged the order of the Additional Settlement Commissioner, dated 13-6-1960 whereby his appeal had been dismissed by filing revision petition. His revision petition was dismissed by the S;element and Rehabilitation Commissioner on 24-10-1960. He filed a second revision petition which was dismissed on 29-7-1961. Writ Petition No.272/R of 1964 was then filed by him which was dismissed in imine on 12-3-1964. He filed L.P.A. No. 34 of 1964 which was dismissed on 15-9-19£4. These orders were challenged by hm before the Supreme Court of Pakistan through C.P.S.L.A. No.328 of 1964 which was dismissed on 3-12-1964. The contest between TL LR/html_TXT/Y ESE two parties namely Abdul Hammed ARD Hidayatullah in respect of the transfer of the property concluded accordingly. 4. H ayatollah, the transferee of the house, he'd in the meantime taken out proceedings for ejectment against Suraj Din and other occupants after issuance of requisite notice under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1918. The ejectment petition was, however, dismissed on 26-4-1961 for the reason that Hidayatullah had demanded higher rate of rent. However, on an appeal, filed by Hidayatullah the learned District Judge remanded the matter to the Rent Controller by accepting his appeal vide order, dated 22-7-1961. On remand, the ejectment petition was accepted by the learned Rent Controller on 20-11-1963. Suraj Din challenged the said order in appeal which was dismissed by a learned Additional District Judge, Lahore on 5-2-1964. He filed S.A.O. No. 101 of 1964 which was dismissed on 21-2-1S 67. While the ejectment proceedings were going on against Suraj Din, he filed a miscellaneous application before the Additional Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore that he had filed an appeal against the order dated 6-1-1960 (whereby the property had been transferred by Deputy Settlement Commissioner in favor of Hidayatullah) which had remained undecided. However, the learned Additional Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner (Judy.) Lahore rejected the said application on 10-1-1966 that no such appeal was pending for disposal. A revision petition was filed by Suraj Din which was accepted by the Settlement Commissioner Lahore on 27-5-1967 by observing that order of transfer passed by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner merits to be so moth revised and set aside with a direction for fresh disposal of the C.H. Form. This order was challenged by Hidayatullah by filing Writ Petition No.510/R of 1967 which was accepted by this Court on 19-11-1973. Since the hearing of the said petition had taken place ex parte, an application (C.M. No.3 of 1974) for setting aside of the said order was filed which was dismissed by the learned Single Judge on 23-4- 1974, yet another application was filed by him which was also dismissed on 14-5-1974. Suraj Din then filed C.P.S.L.A. No.587 of 1974 which was dismissed by their Lordships on 5-2-1976. With the conclusion of the above proceedings the controversy ought to have been set at rest, however, it was not so and Suraj Din filed a suit for declaration challenging - the transfer in favor of Hidayatullah and the issuance of P.T.D. to him. Along with the suit he had filed an application for the grant of temporary injunction which application was granted by the Trial Court on 11-10-1976 that "till the disposal of the suit the petitioner may not be ejected in any manner from the portion of the property". Hidayatullah challenged this LR/html_TXT/Y order of the learned Trial Court by filing C.R. No. 1129 of 1979 which was accepted by this Court on 12-12-1979. Eventually, the said suit was dismissed by the Trial Court on 22- 12-1982. This limb of the litigation also concluded. 5. Hidayatullah had also taken out ejectment proceedings against Abdul Hammed, but the ejectment petition was dismissed by the learned Rent Controller on 26-4-1961, where against, the appeal filed by Hidayatullah was dismissed on 4-11-1961 that the default in payment of rent had not been proved. Hidayatullah took out the fresh ejectment proceedings against him in the year, 1974 which ejectment petition was accepted by the Rent Controller on 2-10-1974. Leaving aside some other proceedings, it may be noted that the successors of Abdul Hammed had filed Writ Petition No. 377 of 1982 against the order, dated 13-12-1981 of the learned Rent Controller, Lahore which was dismissed for non- prosecution on 28-10-1984. The said petition was, however, restored vide order dated 16-3-1985, thereafter, writ petition was dismissed on its merits on 26-3-1985. It was thereafter on 3-6-1985 that an order was passed by the learned Rent Controller striking of the defense. They filed an appeal there against which was dismissed by the Appellate Court on 25-7-1985. Writ Petition No.3544 of 1985 was filed by them which was dismissed on 14-12-1985. It appears that an application was moved in the said writ petition by the parties that they had settled the matter through compromise that the petitioner would vacate the premises on or before 5-4-1986. It is stated that the possession was accordingly delivered to the petitioners the successors-in- interest of Hidayatullah. 6. Late Rabat Amin-up-Din, respondent No.3 (son-in-law of Sh. Abdul Hammed) had filed a suit for declaration and permanent injunction on 16-2-1976 that he was not label to eviction from five rooms of the said property which were clammed by him MN his possession. The suit was eventually dismissed by the Trial Court on 24-3-1976 rejecting the plaint under Order VII, Rule 11 of C.P.C. On 14-2-1976, an application was filed by Rabat Amin-up-Din before the Deputy Settlement Commissioner that he was in occupation of an independent portion of the disputed property consisting of five rooms for which he claimed to have submitted Form under Settlement Scheme No.VUI. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner directed the Settlement Inspector to submit report. On 19-2-1976, the Settlement Inspector reported that the whole house stands transferred to Hidayatullah and P.T.D, issued to him. LR/html_TXT/Y Form may be rejected. In view of this the Deputy Settlement Commissioner rejected the Form. This order was not challenged by Rabat Amin-up-Din any further despite having noted the said order by him on 25-2-1976. Another Form, dated 31-10-1977 is said to have been filed by him. An application thereafter was submitted by him to the Deputy Settlement Commissioner with the prayer that his Form No. 520, dated 31-10-1977 under the Residual Property Scheme be disposed of On this the Deputy Settlement Commissioner obtained the report of Settlement Inspector and thereafter rejected the Form on 11-4-1979 as the property already stood transferred to Hidayatullah for which P.T.D. had already been issued. This order again was not challenged by him. 7. It was on 20-3-1984 when he again made an application to Deputy Administrator (R.P.) for the disposal of his Form No.520, dated 31-10-1977 (which had already been rejected by D.S.C. dated 11-4-1979). It is now that the Settlement Inspector reported that he was in possession of an independent portion of the property. On this the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) Centre Farid Court House, Lahore passed order, dated 10-9-1984 this the property in dispute consisted of 13 rooms, out of which, 8 rooms have been transferred to Hidayatullah and remaining FIV; rooms and one staircase were in occupation of Rabat Amin- adding for which he applied under the Residual Property SCL EME and ordered its transfer to him. This order was challenged by the petitioners, successors of Hidayatullah, by filing a revision petition before the Administrator of the Residual Property who by order, dated 11-12-1986 dismissed their revision petition upholding the order of the Deputy Administrator of Residual Property. This petition has been filed. against the ABO /mentioned orders. Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that full house (Property No.SE-IV- 16-5-14, Lariat Street, Nicholson Road, Vila Guard Singh, Lahore) was transferred to Hidiyatullah, predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners and P.T.D. issued for the same and the transfer of the said property having been maintained by the Courts in successive rounds of litigation, there was nothing available for which late Rabat Amin-up-Din, respondent No.3 could have applied. It is contended that twice his forms were rejected which i rejection order attained finality as he did rot challenge those orders, there was no power or jurisdiction available with the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) to order transfer in his favor on 10-9- 1984. It is further Conte IDed that besides that the said order was passed by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) without any notice or hearing the petitioners, the same was without jurisdiction having LR/html_TXT/Y been passed after the repeal of the laws when there were no proceedings pending at the time of repeal nor the property was available for transfer. It is further contended that late Rabat AMM-ud-Din was son-in-law of Sh. Abdul Hammed, a contestant of the property, who had lost his case and he also acted as attorney for Suraj Din another contentment, and, was fully aware of the litigation concerning the property that the same had been transferred to late Hidayatullah and P.T.D. issued to him. The order of the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) and that of the Administrator are thus, assailed that they have acted without lawful authority in the matter. 9. Learned counsel for the successors-in-interest of late Rabat AMM-ud-Dm, respondent No.3, contends that the property consisted of 13 rooms and only 8 rooms had been transferred to late Hidayatullah, the rest of 5 rooms were available for transfer which were rightly transferred by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) to Rabat Amin-up-Dmn. It 1s contended that the finding as to the availability of 5 rooms and staircase for transfer cannot be interfered with by this Court in writ jurisdiction as the equity would also lean in favor of the respondents. It is further contended that even if it was one property the question of its divisibility cannot be gone into by this Court. According to him, the transfer order passed by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) as maintained by the Administrator is legal and does not warrant interference. 10. Through C.M. No.1 of 1997 Sad Ashraf and Axial Ashraf had sought to be imp leaded as party to the writ petition. They were imp leaded so but are not represented despite the fact that the name of their learned counsel duly appears in the cause list. The case has thus, been heard ex parte qua them. 11. The resume of the factual background of the litigation going on between the parties, mentioned above, qua the Property No.SE-IV-16-S-146, Lariat Street Nicholson Road, Vila Guard Singh, Lahore would show that (a) late Abdul Aziz failed in his claim with the dismissal of his L.P.A. No.368 of 1964 on 15-9-1964 which attained finality as TT was not challenged any further, (b) Late Abdul Hammed, brother of late Abdul Aziz (father-in-law of late Rabat Mind- Din, respondent No.3) lost his contest with the dismissal of C.P.S.L.A. No.328 of 1964 on 3-12-1964. (c) Suraj Din, the other contestant, lost his case up to the Supreme Court of LR/html_TXT/Y Pakistan when C.P.S.L.A. No.587 of 1974 was dismissed by their Lordships. A declaratory suit, filed by Suraj Din was also dismissed on 22-12-1982. (d) So far Rabat AMM-ud-Din was concerned, his suit was dismissed on 24-3-1976 by the Trial Court which order was not challenged any further. His Form was rejected by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on 19-2- 1976. This was not challenged by him, his second attempt on the settlement side also failed when his Form No.520, dated 31- 10-1977 was rejected by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) on 11-4-1979, even this order was not challenged by him. Quite strangely the same Form No. 520 which had been rejected on 11-4-1979 was sought to be resuscitated by him when he made an application on 20-3-1984 to the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) as a result of which, for the first time, he was ordered to be transferred 5 rooms and staircase. It was long after the issuance of P.T.D. in favor of late Hidayatullah and the repeal of the evacuee laws that the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) endeavored to erode the finality of the abovementioned orders and the transfer of the property in favor of late Hidayatullah. His approach to the matter was oblivious of the long-drawn litigation and contest between the various contestants and the tenor of the P.T.D. which described the property transferred as "Full House". It was transfer of the full house which had been maintained by the Settlement Authorities, the High Court and the Honorable Supreme Court in the litigation, mentioned above. The full house having been transferred in favor of late Hidayatullah and P.T.D. issued to him, there was nothing available to be dealt with by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) after the repeal of Evacuee Laws by the Evacuee Property and Displaced Persons Laws (Repeal) Act, 1975 nor any Form could be entertained or transfer made in pursuance thereof in the stated circumstances. It is pertinent to be noted here that the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) had not issued any notice to the petitioners nor was even conscious of the fact that previously as well-twice the respondent had failed in securing the transfer and his forms had been rejected. In view of the judicial precedents and Deputy Administrator (R.P.) could not have entertained the application of respondent No.3 nor made transfer order in his favor. In Ali Muhammad v. Heidi Hussain and 2 others PLD 1975 Keir. 971 which was a case wherein the matter of transfer was sought to be reopened after the issuance of P.T.D. it was observed by the Division Bench as follows "Heidi Hussain merely made a miscellaneous application for demarcation and as held by the Lordships of the Supreme Court in S. Anwar Hussain San v. Array Ahmad and 2 others PLD 1971 SC 669, such procedure is LR/html_TXT/Y not available to increase the area, or add to, the property transferred to a person under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, by cancelling transfer of a property to another person. It may here be added that the view we have taken in this judgment, that no power was available to the Additional Settlement Commissioner or any other Settlement Authority to deal with the property transferred to the appellant, has also been adopted in a Karachi decision, MST. Damiani Fatima Bai and 6 others v. Ibrahim and 13 others PLD 1972 Keir. 610." In Bilges Begum and others v. Fatal Wuhan ad and others 1987 SCMR 1441, a part of the composite building was transferred to one J mislaid Ali Khan (predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners) and other to Nail Muhammad (predecessor-in-interest of the respondents), where after P.T.D. was issued to Nail Muhammad. Rao Jamshid Ali Khan challenge the entitlement of Nail Muhammad in which he successes before the Settlement Authority and P.T.D. issued to Nail Muhammad was cancelled. On the writ petition filed by successors of Nail Muhammad, the said order of the Department was declared as illegal that after the repeal of the law, TF ere was no jurisdiction with the Department to proceed in the matter and that the saving provision of section 2(2) of the Evacuee Property and Displaced Persons Laws (Repeal) Act, 1975 only covered the cases pend.g immediately before the repeal of the law 1.1-7-1974. It was found that the application in the case was made on 20-3-1976, tie same could not be enter tamed by the Department. The Honorable Supreme Court upheld the order of the High Court whereby the order of the Department was set aside. In Khadija Bashir Ahmad v. The Additional Settlement Commissioner, Rawalpindi and others 1991 SCMR 1604, question as to the effect of the issuance of the P.T.D. before the repeal of Laws and assumption of jurisdiction by the departmental functionaries after the repeal of the Laws had arisen, it was observed by their Lordships that the P.T.D. had been issued to the transferee in the year, 1964 but the matter was reopened on an application in the year, 1975. It was observed at page 1607 as follows:- "On 28-1-1975, the present case was neither pending before any of the Settlement Authorities nor remanded by the High Court or the Supreme Court, therefore, the Settlement Commissioner (notified officer) had no jurisdiction, whatsoever to reopen the transaction which was past and closed." The legal position thus, is fairly settled that after the issuance of P.T.D. and when the matter of transfer attains finality, the same cannot be reopened to accommodate another which may denude the rights of the transferee. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners thus, has a lot of substance that a property which had already been transferred to the predecessor-in- LR/html_TXT/Y interest of the petitioners as a "Full House", a portion of the same could not be sliced away and transferred to respondent No.3. 12. The observation made by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) in his order, dated 10-9- 1984 that late Rabat Amin-up-Din was in possession since independence, is belied by survey list which did not show him as one of the occupants, although the other occupants of the property were mentioned therein and also by the fact that he never lodged his claim for transfer or agitated the transfer in favor of Hidayatullah except the forms which were rejected in 1976 and 1979. He cannot be ‘heard to say that he was not aware of the whole gamut of litigation regarding the transfer of property which ended against late Sh. Abdul Hammed (his father-in-law, one of the contestants) but also had been acting as attorney for Suraj Din, another contestant. The fac tum of his being attorney of Suraj Din is undeniable as the same finds mention in the order of Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan in C.P.S.L.A. No.587 of 1974 which had been filed by Suraj Din and was dismissed by their Lordships. The contention of the learned counsel for the successors-in interest of respondent No.3 that equitable approach should be adopted in the matter, loses its significance in view of the factual and legal position obtaining in the matter. Likewise, the contention that in writ jurisdiction the orders passed by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) cannot be interfered with, has no merits mas much as it is established on record that the predecessor-in-A interest of the petitioners had been transferred the whole of the property and P.T.D. was issued for the same and also that such a transfer had attained finality with the conclusion of litigation between the contestants. The form of respondent No.3 had twice been rejected which orders also attained finality and the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) could not have by ignoring all these facts ordered the transfer of a part of the same property in favor of respondent No.3. In Perlman Muhammad Nazi v. Abdul Hamid and others 1988 SCMR 1153 the contention that the High Court could not interfere with the findings of the Settlement Authorities m its Constitutional jurisdiction, was repelled observing that "we do not agree with the learned counsel that, in all cases, the High Court is prohibited from noticing obvious and/or undeniable facts and cannot draw necessary faiences from them; particularly, in the Rehabilitation Settlement cases under the laws relating to displaced persons". The whole object of giving the resume of the litigation in respect of the transfer of the property'is as to how a transferee had to face successive litigation at different fronts and LR/html_TXT/Y forum but by ignoring the hard facts established on record, the orders impugned were passed by respondents Nos.] and 2. The Deputy Administrator (Residual Property) clearly acted without jurisdiction in the matter Anthe order of the Administrator dismissing the revision petition, filed by the petitioners, also does not stand on better footing than without lawful authority. In view of the above, order of the Deputy Administrator (R.P.)/respondent No.] and that of the Administrator/ respondent No.2 are declared to be illegal, without jurisdiction and of no legal effect. This petition is accepted accordingly. No order as to costs. Q.M.H./M.A.K./Z-46/L Petition allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 394 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-05-08): Order, dated 11-12-1986 of the Administrator (R. P.)/Additional Commissioner, Lahore Division Lahore, whereby, the revision petition, filed by the petitioners, was dismissed, has LR/html_TXT/Y been challenged through this petition under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 2. The dispute concerns with Property No.SE-IV-16-S-14, Lariat Street, Nicholson Road, Vila Guitar Singh, Lahore which was an evacuee property and was burnt partly during the disturbances of 1947. As per survey list, it was occupied by Abdul Aziz, Yahoo Ahmed son of M. Hidayatullah, Sheikh Abdul Hammed, Suraj Din and Abdul Shaffer. It may be mentioned here that Abdul Aziz and Sheikh Abdul Hammed were b'others. With the commencement of the settlement operation Hidayatullah predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners, submitted C.H. Form for the transfer of the property. On 28-12-1959, Cheered Din, Settlement Inspector, after section of the spot, submitted report that Hidayatullah, a refugee/claimant was the only person who had submitted C.H. Form. Finding the property indivisible he recommended the transfer to him. It was on 6-1-1960 that the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Lahore ordered the transfer of the property to Hidayatullah, as a consequence of which P.T.O. dated 8-1-1960 was issued. Thereafter, P.T.D. dated 20-4-1963 was also issued. Abdul Aziz and Abdul Hammed challenged the order of transfer through separate appeals which were dismissed by the learned Additional Settlement Commissioner (Judicial) Lahore on 13-6-1960. Abdul Aziz filed a revision petition there against which was dismissed by the Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore on 13-6-1963. Writ Petition No.I700/R of 1963 was filed by him against the abovementioned orders which was dismissed by this Court on 11-6-1964. L.P.A. No.368 of 1964 filed by him met with the same fate and was dismissed in liming on 15-9-1964. With this order litigation by Abdul Aziz qua the transfer in favor of Hidayatullah concluded and came to an end. 3. Abdul Hammed had also challenged the order of the Additional Settlement Commissioner, dated 13-6-1960 whereby his appeal had been dismissed by filing revision petition. His revision petition was dismissed by the S;element and Rehabilitation Commissioner on 24-10-1960. He filed a second revision petition which was dismissed on 29-7-1961. Writ Petition No.272/R of 1964 was then filed by him which was dismissed in imine on 12-3-1964. He filed L.P.A. No. 34 of 1964 which was dismissed on 15-9-19£4. These orders were challenged by hm before the Supreme Court of Pakistan through C.P.S.L.A. No.328 of 1964 which was dismissed on 3-12-1964. The contest between TL LR/html_TXT/Y ESE two parties namely Abdul Hammed ARD Hidayatullah in respect of the transfer of the property concluded accordingly. 4. H ayatollah, the transferee of the house, he'd in the meantime taken out proceedings for ejectment against Suraj Din and other occupants after issuance of requisite notice under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1918. The ejectment petition was, however, dismissed on 26-4-1961 for the reason that Hidayatullah had demanded higher rate of rent. However, on an appeal, filed by Hidayatullah the learned District Judge remanded

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 394 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-05-08): other occupants after issuance of requisite notice under section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1918. The ejectment petition was, however, dismissed on 26-4-1961 for the reason that Hidayatullah had demanded higher rate of rent. However, on an appeal, filed by Hidayatullah the learned District Judge remanded the matter to the Rent Controller by accepting his appeal vide order, dated 22-7-1961. On remand, the ejectment petition was accepted by the learned Rent Controller on 20-11-1963. Suraj Din challenged the said order in appeal which was dismissed by a learned Additional District Judge, Lahore on 5-2-1964. He filed S.A.O. No. 101 of 1964 which was dismissed on 21-2-1S 67. While the ejectment proceedings were going on against Suraj Din, he filed a miscellaneous application before the Additional Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Lahore that he had filed an appeal against the order dated 6-1-1960 (whereby the property had been transferred by Deputy Settlement Commissioner in favor of Hidayatullah) which had remained undecided. However, the learned Additional Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner (Judy.) Lahore rejected the said application on 10-1-1966 that no such appeal was pending for disposal. A revision petition was filed by Suraj Din which was accepted by the Settlement Commissioner Lahore on 27-5-1967 by observing that order of transfer passed by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner merits to be so moth revised and set aside with a direction for fresh disposal of the C.H. Form. This order was challenged by Hidayatullah by filing Writ Petition No.510/R of 1967 which was accepted by this Court on 19-11-1973. Since the hearing of the said petition had taken place ex parte, an application (C.M. No.3 of 1974) for setting aside of the said order was filed which was dismissed by the learned Single Judge on 23-4- 1974, yet another application was filed by him which was also dismissed on 14-5-1974. Suraj Din then filed C.P.S.L.A. No.587 of 1974 which was dismissed by their Lordships on 5-2-1976. With the conclusion of the above proceedings the controversy ought to have been set at rest, however, it was not so and Suraj Din filed a suit for declaration challenging - the transfer in favor of Hidayatullah and the issuance of P.T.D. to him. Along with the suit he had filed an application for the grant of temporary injunction which application was granted by the Trial Court on 11-10-1976 that "till the disposal of the suit the petitioner may not be ejected in any manner from the portion of the property". Hidayatullah challenged this LR/html_TXT/Y order of the learned Trial Court by filing C.R. No. 1129 of 1979 which was accepted by this Court on 12-12-1979. Eventually, the said suit was dismissed by the Trial Court on 22- 12-1982. This limb of the litigation also concluded. 5. Hidayatullah had also taken out ejectment proceedings against Abdul Hammed, but the ejectment petition was dismissed by the learned Rent Controller on 26-4-1961, where against, the appeal filed by Hidayatullah was dismissed on 4-11-1961 that the default in payment

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 394 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-05-08): on 22- 12-1982. This limb of the litigation also concluded. 5. Hidayatullah had also taken out ejectment proceedings against Abdul Hammed, but the ejectment petition was dismissed by the learned Rent Controller on 26-4-1961, where against, the appeal filed by Hidayatullah was dismissed on 4-11-1961 that the default in payment of rent had not been proved. Hidayatullah took out the fresh ejectment proceedings against him in the year, 1974 which ejectment petition was accepted by the Rent Controller on 2-10-1974. Leaving aside some other proceedings, it may be noted that the successors of Abdul Hammed had filed Writ Petition No. 377 of 1982 against the order, dated 13-12-1981 of the learned Rent Controller, Lahore which was dismissed for non- prosecution on 28-10-1984. The said petition was, however, restored vide order dated 16-3-1985, thereafter, writ petition was dismissed on its merits on 26-3-1985. It was thereafter on 3-6-1985 that an order was passed by the learned Rent Controller striking of the defense. They filed an appeal there against which was dismissed by the Appellate Court on 25-7-1985. Writ Petition No.3544 of 1985 was filed by them which was dismissed on 14-12-1985. It appears that an application was moved in the said writ petition by the parties that they had settled the matter through compromise that the petitioner would vacate the premises on or before 5-4-1986. It is stated that the possession was accordingly delivered to the petitioners the successors-in- interest of Hidayatullah. 6. Late Rabat Amin-up-Din, respondent No.3 (son-in-law of Sh. Abdul Hammed) had filed a suit for declaration and permanent injunction on 16-2-1976 that he was not label to eviction from five rooms of the said property which were clammed by him MN his possession. The suit was eventually dismissed by the Trial Court on 24-3-1976 rejecting the plaint under Order VII, Rule 11 of C.P.C. On 14-2-1976, an application was filed by Rabat Amin-up-Din before the Deputy Settlement Commissioner that he was in occupation of an independent portion of the disputed property consisting of five rooms for which he claimed to have submitted Form under Settlement Scheme No.VUI. The Deputy Settlement Commissioner directed the Settlement Inspector to submit report. On 19-2-1976, the Settlement Inspector reported that the whole house stands transferred to Hidayatullah and P.T.D, issued to him. LR/html_TXT/Y Form may be rejected. In view of this the Deputy Settlement Commissioner rejected the Form. This order was not challenged by Rabat Amin-up-Din any further despite having noted the said order by him on 25-2-1976. Another Form, dated 31-10-1977 is said to have been filed by him. An application thereafter was submitted by him to the Deputy Settlement Commissioner with the prayer that his Form No. 520, dated 31-10-1977 under the Residual Property Scheme be disposed of On this the Deputy Settlement Commissioner obtained the report of Settlement Inspector and thereafter rejected the Form on 11-4-1979 as the property already stood transferred to Hidayatullah for which P.T.D. had already been issued. This order again was not challenged by him. 7.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 394 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-05-08): the Residual Property Scheme be disposed of On this the Deputy Settlement Commissioner obtained the report of Settlement Inspector and thereafter rejected the Form on 11-4-1979 as the property already stood transferred to Hidayatullah for which P.T.D. had already been issued. This order again was not challenged by him. 7. It was on 20-3-1984 when he again made an application to Deputy Administrator (R.P.) for the disposal of his Form No.520, dated 31-10-1977 (which had already been rejected by D.S.C. dated 11-4-1979). It is now that the Settlement Inspector reported that he was in possession of an independent portion of the property. On this the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) Centre Farid Court House, Lahore passed order, dated 10-9-1984 this the property in dispute consisted of 13 rooms, out of which, 8 rooms have been transferred to Hidayatullah and remaining FIV; rooms and one staircase were in occupation of Rabat Amin- adding for which he applied under the Residual Property SCL EME and ordered its transfer to him. This order was challenged by the petitioners, successors of Hidayatullah, by filing a revision petition before the Administrator of the Residual Property who by order, dated 11-12-1986 dismissed their revision petition upholding the order of the Deputy Administrator of Residual Property. This petition has been filed. against the ABO /mentioned orders. Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that full house (Property No.SE-IV- 16-5-14, Lariat Street, Nicholson Road, Vila Guard Singh, Lahore) was transferred to Hidiyatullah, predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners and P.T.D. issued for the same and the transfer of the said property having been maintained by the Courts in successive rounds of litigation, there was nothing available for which late Rabat Amin-up-Din, respondent No.3 could have applied. It is contended that twice his forms were rejected which i rejection order attained finality as he did rot challenge those orders, there was no power or jurisdiction available with the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) to order transfer in his favor on 10-9- 1984. It is further Conte IDed that besides that the said order was passed by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) without any notice or hearing the petitioners, the same was without jurisdiction having LR/html_TXT/Y been passed after the repeal of the laws when there were no proceedings pending at the time of repeal nor the property was available for transfer. It is further contended that late Rabat AMM-ud-Din was son-in-law of Sh. Abdul Hammed, a contestant of the property, who had lost his case and he also acted as attorney for Suraj Din another contentment, and, was fully aware of the litigation concerning the property that the same had been transferred to late Hidayatullah and P.T.D. issued to him. The order of the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) and that of the Administrator are thus, assailed that they have acted without lawful authority in the matter. 9. Learned counsel for the successors-in-interest of late Rabat AMM-ud-Dm, respondent No.3, contends that the property consisted of 13 rooms and only 8 rooms had been transferred to late Hidayatullah, the rest

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 394 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-05-08): and that of the Administrator are thus, assailed that they have acted without lawful authority in the matter. 9. Learned counsel for the successors-in-interest of late Rabat AMM-ud-Dm, respondent No.3, contends that the property consisted of 13 rooms and only 8 rooms had been transferred to late Hidayatullah, the rest of 5 rooms were available for transfer which were rightly transferred by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) to Rabat Amin-up-Dmn. It 1s contended that the finding as to the availability of 5 rooms and staircase for transfer cannot be interfered with by this Court in writ jurisdiction as the equity would also lean in favor of the respondents. It is further contended that even if it was one property the question of its divisibility cannot be gone into by this Court. According to him, the transfer order passed by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) as maintained by the Administrator is legal and does not warrant interference. 10. Through C.M. No.1 of 1997 Sad Ashraf and Axial Ashraf had sought to be imp leaded as party to the writ petition. They were imp leaded so but are not represented despite the fact that the name of their learned counsel duly appears in the cause list. The case has thus, been heard ex parte qua them. 11. The resume of the factual background of the litigation going on between the parties, mentioned above, qua the Property No.SE-IV-16-S-146, Lariat Street Nicholson Road, Vila Guard Singh, Lahore would show that (a) late Abdul Aziz failed in his claim with the dismissal of his L.P.A. No.368 of 1964 on 15-9-1964 which attained finality as TT was not challenged any further, (b) Late Abdul Hammed, brother of late Abdul Aziz (father-in-law of late Rabat Mind- Din, respondent No.3) lost his contest with the dismissal of C.P.S.L.A. No.328 of 1964 on 3-12-1964. (c) Suraj Din, the other contestant, lost his case up to the Supreme Court of LR/html_TXT/Y Pakistan when C.P.S.L.A. No.587 of 1974 was dismissed by their Lordships. A declaratory suit, filed by Suraj Din was also dismissed on 22-12-1982. (d) So far Rabat AMM-ud-Din was concerned, his suit was dismissed on 24-3-1976 by the Trial Court which order was not challenged any further. His Form was rejected by the Deputy Settlement Commissioner on 19-2- 1976. This was not challenged by him, his second attempt on the settlement side also failed when his Form No.520, dated 31- 10-1977 was rejected by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) on 11-4-1979, even this order was not challenged by him. Quite strangely the same Form No. 520 which had been rejected on 11-4-1979 was sought to be resuscitated by him when he made an application on 20-3-1984 to the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) as a result of which, for the first time, he was ordered to be transferred 5 rooms and staircase. It was long after the issuance of P.T.D. in favor of late Hidayatullah and the repeal of the evacuee laws that the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) endeavored to erode the finality of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 394 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-05-08): a result of which, for the first time, he was ordered to be transferred 5 rooms and staircase. It was long after the issuance of P.T.D. in favor of late Hidayatullah and the repeal of the evacuee laws that the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) endeavored to erode the finality of the abovementioned orders and the transfer of the property in favor of late Hidayatullah. His approach to the matter was oblivious of the long-drawn litigation and contest between the various contestants and the tenor of the P.T.D. which described the property transferred as "Full House". It was transfer of the full house which had been maintained by the Settlement Authorities, the High Court and the Honorable Supreme Court in the litigation, mentioned above. The full house having been transferred in favor of late Hidayatullah and P.T.D. issued to him, there was nothing available to be dealt with by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) after the repeal of Evacuee Laws by the Evacuee Property and Displaced Persons Laws (Repeal) Act, 1975 nor any Form could be entertained or transfer made in pursuance thereof in the stated circumstances. It is pertinent to be noted here that the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) had not issued any notice to the petitioners nor was even conscious of the fact that previously as well-twice the respondent had failed in securing the transfer and his forms had been rejected. In view of the judicial precedents and Deputy Administrator (R.P.) could not have entertained the application of respondent No.3 nor made transfer order in his favor. In Ali Muhammad v. Heidi Hussain and 2 others PLD 1975 Keir. 971 which was a case wherein the matter of transfer was sought to be reopened after the issuance of P.T.D. it was observed by the Division Bench as follows "Heidi Hussain merely made a miscellaneous application for demarcation and as held by the Lordships of the Supreme Court in S. Anwar Hussain San v. Array Ahmad and 2 others PLD 1971 SC 669, such procedure is LR/html_TXT/Y not available to increase the area, or add to, the property transferred to a person under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1958, by cancelling transfer of a property to another person. It may here be added that the view we have taken in this judgment, that no power was available to the Additional Settlement Commissioner or any other Settlement Authority to deal with the property transferred to the appellant, has also been adopted in a Karachi decision, MST. Damiani Fatima Bai and 6 others v. Ibrahim and 13 others PLD 1972 Keir. 610." In Bilges Begum and others v. Fatal Wuhan ad and others 1987 SCMR 1441, a part of the composite building was transferred to one J mislaid Ali Khan (predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners) and other to Nail Muhammad (predecessor-in-interest of the respondents), where after P.T.D. was issued to Nail Muhammad. Rao Jamshid Ali Khan challenge the entitlement of Nail Muhammad in which he successes before the Settlement Authority and P.T.D. issued to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 394 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-05-08): transferred to one J mislaid Ali Khan (predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners) and other to Nail Muhammad (predecessor-in-interest of the respondents), where after P.T.D. was issued to Nail Muhammad. Rao Jamshid Ali Khan challenge the entitlement of Nail Muhammad in which he successes before the Settlement Authority and P.T.D. issued to Nail Muhammad was cancelled. On the writ petition filed by successors of Nail Muhammad, the said order of the Department was declared as illegal that after the repeal of the law, TF ere was no jurisdiction with the Department to proceed in the matter and that the saving provision of section 2(2) of the Evacuee Property and Displaced Persons Laws (Repeal) Act, 1975 only covered the cases pend.g immediately before the repeal of the law 1.1-7-1974. It was found that the application in the case was made on 20-3-1976, tie same could not be enter tamed by the Department. The Honorable Supreme Court upheld the order of the High Court whereby the order of the Department was set aside. In Khadija Bashir Ahmad v. The Additional Settlement Commissioner, Rawalpindi and others 1991 SCMR 1604, question as to the effect of the issuance of the P.T.D. before the repeal of Laws and assumption of jurisdiction by the departmental functionaries after the repeal of the Laws had arisen, it was observed by their Lordships that the P.T.D. had been issued to the transferee in the year, 1964 but the matter was reopened on an application in the year, 1975. It was observed at page 1607 as follows:- "On 28-1-1975, the present case was neither pending before any of the Settlement Authorities nor remanded by the High Court or the Supreme Court, therefore, the Settlement Commissioner (notified officer) had no jurisdiction, whatsoever to reopen the transaction which was past and closed." The legal position thus, is fairly settled that after the issuance of P.T.D. and when the matter of transfer attains finality, the same cannot be reopened to accommodate another which may denude the rights of the transferee. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners thus, has a lot of substance that a property which had already been transferred to the predecessor-in- LR/html_TXT/Y interest of the petitioners as a "Full House", a portion of the same could not be sliced away and transferred to respondent No.3. 12. The observation made by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) in his order, dated 10-9- 1984 that late Rabat Amin-up-Din was in possession since independence, is belied by survey list which did not show him as one of the occupants, although the other occupants of the property were mentioned therein and also by the fact that he never lodged his claim for transfer or agitated the transfer in favor of Hidayatullah except the forms which were rejected in 1976 and 1979. He cannot be ‘heard to say that he was not aware of the whole gamut of litigation regarding the transfer of property which ended against late Sh. Abdul Hammed (his father-in-law, one of the contestants)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 394?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 394 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-05-08): transfer in favor of Hidayatullah except the forms which were rejected in 1976 and 1979. He cannot be ‘heard to say that he was not aware of the whole gamut of litigation regarding the transfer of property which ended against late Sh. Abdul Hammed (his father-in-law, one of the contestants) but also had been acting as attorney for Suraj Din, another contestant. The fac tum of his being attorney of Suraj Din is undeniable as the same finds mention in the order of Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan in C.P.S.L.A. No.587 of 1974 which had been filed by Suraj Din and was dismissed by their Lordships. The contention of the learned counsel for the successors-in interest of respondent No.3 that equitable approach should be adopted in the matter, loses its significance in view of the factual and legal position obtaining in the matter. Likewise, the contention that in writ jurisdiction the orders passed by the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) cannot be interfered with, has no merits mas much as it is established on record that the predecessor-in-A interest of the petitioners had been transferred the whole of the property and P.T.D. was issued for the same and also that such a transfer had attained finality with the conclusion of litigation between the contestants. The form of respondent No.3 had twice been rejected which orders also attained finality and the Deputy Administrator (R.P.) could not have by ignoring all these facts ordered the transfer of a part of the same property in favor of respondent No.3. In Perlman Muhammad Nazi v. Abdul Hamid and others 1988 SCMR 1153 the contention that the High Court could not interfere with the findings of the Settlement Authorities m its Constitutional jurisdiction, was repelled observing that "we do not agree with the learned counsel that, in all cases, the High Court is prohibited from noticing obvious and/or undeniable facts and cannot draw necessary faiences from them; particularly, in the Rehabilitation Settlement cases under the laws relating to displaced persons". The whole object of giving the resume of the litigation in respect of the transfer of the property'is as to how a transferee had to face successive litigation at different fronts and LR/html_TXT/Y forum but by ignoring the hard facts established on record, the orders impugned were passed by respondents Nos.] and 2. The Deputy Administrator (Residual Property) clearly acted without jurisdiction in the matter Anthe order of the Administrator dismissing the revision petition, filed by the petitioners, also does not stand on better footing than without lawful authority. In view of the above, order of the Deputy Administrator (R.P.)/respondent No.] and that of the Administrator/ respondent No.2 are declared to be illegal, without jurisdiction and of no legal effect. This petition is accepted accordingly. No order as to costs. Q.M.H./M.A.K./Z-46/L Petition allowed.

Question: What is case 2001 YLR 605 about?
Answer: Case 2001 YLR 605 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2001-03-15. The case involved JAN MUHAMMAD SHAH AND OTHERS—PETITIONERSVERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include PROTECTION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY RULES 1948 - R. 7(C) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE) PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. (2) (B) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. The case was heard by SYED ZAHID HUSSAIN AND NAZIR AHMAD SIDDIQUI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: In case 2001 YLR 605, the court applied the following statutes: PROTECTION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY RULES 1948 - R. 7(C) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE) PROPERTY ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. (2) (B) CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 199. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2001-03-15.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2001 YLR 605 were: CH. NOOR ELAHI FOR PETITIONER. AZHAR JEHANGIR QURESHI FOR RESPONDENTS NOS.2 AND 3.NEMO FOR THE REMAINING RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: SYED ZAHID HUSSAIN AND NAZIR AHMAD SIDDIQUI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: The parties in case 2001 YLR 605 were: JAN MUHAMMAD SHAH AND OTHERS—PETITIONERSVERSUS CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY, LAHORE AND OTHERS— RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2001 YLR 605.
Answer: LR/html_TXT/Y SAYED ZAHID HUSSAIN, J.~ Order of the Custodian Evacuee Property, Punjab, Lahore, dated 19-2-1980 has been challenged by the petitioners through this writ petition under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, which was passed by the learned Custodian in pursuance of a remand order by this Court maintained up to the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The dispute arises in the circumstances briefly stated below. 2. Air Haman Shah (late), whose successor-in-interest are now before this Court had made an application under section 8 of the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1948 for a declaration that he was owner of -782 Canals and 11 Marla's of land situated in village Harman Thesis and District Montgomery (now Spatial). It was his case that he was owner of one half of the land whereas the rest of the half was in his adverse possession which had earlier been sold to one Lai Hand, an evacuee. The Deputy Custodian vide order, dated 31-3-1949 granted the declaration that "no part of the land described in the petition is an evacuee property". A revision was filed by Ahmad Allah and Anwar Thesean Ali Khan/respondents Nos.2 and 3 herein which was rejected by the Custodian of Evacuee Property on 14-6-1980 as time-barred. He, however, sent for the record for finding out "whether action for revising the Deputy Custodian's order so moth was called for or not’. On perusal of record, a notice was issued to Pr Haman Shah as to why the Deputy Custodian's Order should not be set aside under subsection (4) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. The learned Custodian took the view that the property in dispute was of the value of more than Rs.5000 and a device had been resorted to by undervaluing the property to prevent the Custodian to examine the case, as all cases evolving property of the value of more than Rs.5000 were to be submitted to the Custodian for confirmation. It was thus observed that the order of the Deputy Custodian had not become operative as it was not duly confirmed by the Custodian. As to the claim of adverse possession for half of the land, the learned Custodian took the view that he was not in possession of the land for more than 12 years nor there was evidence on record as to the ouster of Lai Hand, from the land. He thus modified the order of the Deputy Custodian and declared that "the respondent Haman Shah is owner of only one half share of the land in dispute and that the other half share is evacuee property BMG owned by Lai Hand". This was vide order, dated 16-12-1960. It was challenged by the petitioners by filing petition (W.P. No. ) before this Court. The case of the LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y petitioners before this Court was that since the property in dispute was not treated as evacuee property on or before 1-1-1957. It could not be treated so nor any order could be passed by the Custodian after the said date. For the view taken by late Karma Ella hi Chauhan, J. (as he then was), that this aspect had not been adverted to by the Custodian while passing the said order, the case was remanded for fresh decision in accordance with law. This was vide judgment, dated 9-10-1968. The petitioners challenged this order through L.P.A. No. which was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on 20-2-1969. It was noticed by the learned Division Bench that in view of rule 7(c) of Protection of Evacuee Property Rules, 1948, the order of the Deputy Custodian" needed confirmation by the Custodian". It was observed that "an order passed by a Deputy Custodian in respect of property which was more than Rs.5,000 in value shall not become effective and be valid unless confirmed by the Custodian. If therefore, the value of the property is more than Rs.5000 as held by the learned Custodian, then the order of the Deputy Custodian would clearly be invalid and effective in eyes of law and no advantage could accrue to the appellants on the basis thereof". A petition for leave to appeal (C.P.S.L.A. No. ) was filed by the petitioners which was dismissed on 27-10-1969 by the Hon'BLE Supreme Court. 3. In this Context, the learned Custodian took up the matter and recorded a finding that "there is nothing on record to show that Lai Hand evacuee was ousted by Pr Haman Shah, respondent No.], who later on occupied the land in question per force and continued in possession as such till the partition of the Sub-Continent of India. In the circumstances, plea of adverse possession raised by respondent No.| cannot be accepted". Adverting to the question of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, he found that "plea of adverse possession having already been repelled, he can only be considered to be a tress-passer. Since his authority to occupy the property was never confirmed by the Custodian, therefore, the property always vested in that Authority". It is this order, dated 19-2-1980 of the Custodian, that is challenged through this petition. 4. It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that upon rejection of the revision petition filed by respondents Nos.2 and 3 by the Custodian, Evacuee Property on 14-6-1960 as time-barred, the order of the Deputy Custodian stood merged into it, which could not thereafter, be subject of any so moth review of revision. It is further contended that it was section 3(1) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y which was applicable and section 3(2)(b) of the Act was not applicable to the mutant case and therefore, the property could not be declared as Evacuee after 1-1-1957. Reliance is placed on Akbar Ali and 9 others v. Cassandras and 2 others (PLD 1985 Karachi 117). Further contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that title had matured in favor of the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners through adverse possession and the view taken by the learned Custodian is incorrect in law. 5. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the contesting respondents submits that Lai Hand was shown as owner of the property in the special Jacaranda for the year 1946-47 and the claim of the petitioners as to adverse possession had no factual and legal basis. According to him section 3(2)(b) of the Act was attracted to a case of this nature and that the Custodian of Evacuee Property rightly declared the same as evacuee Property. Relies on the Custodian, Evacuee Property West Pakistan, Lahore v. Rats Ghazi Muhammad (PLD 1973 SC 537) and Muhammad Kiddie v. Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, South Zone, Karachi and 5 others (1984 CLC 1932). 6. It is evident from the order of Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated 3 1-3-1949 that a petition was filed by Air Haman Shah (late) in respect of 782 Canals and 11 Marla's of land claiming that he was owner of half of the land whereas the other half belonged to Lai Hand an evacuee. His claim was that he had become owner of the land owned by Lai Hand on account of his bag adversely in possession for more than 12 years. Such a declaration was granted by the Deputy Custodian. When the matter came to the notice of the Custodian on a review petition filed by respondents Nos.2 and 3, the same was dismissed by the learned Custodian as time-barred, but simultaneously, took the matter so moth and sent for the record of the case. It was after notice and harem Air Haman Shah that the learned Custodian came to the conclusion that although one half of the land was owned by Air Haman Shah as owner of the property, yet since there was no evidence of ouster of Lai Hand on record, Air Haman Shah's possession of the land could not be considered to be adverse as against Lai Hand, therefore, he could not become owner of Lai Hand half share by reasons of adverse possession". In W.P. No. the order of the Custodian was set aside by this Court vide judgment, dated 9-10-1968 that section 3 of Act XII of 1957 had not been adverted to by the Custodian. On LPA No. filed by the petitioner, their case was that property could not be treated as evacuee after 1-1-1957. In this context, relevant para of the order of the learned LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LPA Bench need to be kept in view, which is "in the present case the reliance of the appellants is on an order made by the learned Deputy Custodian on 31-3-1949. We have already stated that according to the learned Custodian this order needed confirmation by the Custodian in view of the provisions contained in Rule 7(c) already referred to. We find that this rule lays down in very clear terms that an order passed by a Deputy Custodian in respect of property which is more than Rs.5000 in value shall not become effective and be valid unless confirmed by the Custodian. If} therefore, the value of the property is more than Rs.5,000 as held by the learned Custodian, then the order of the Deputy Custodian would Clearly be valid and ineffective in the eyes of law and no advantage could accrue to the appellants on the basis thereof: The question whether the property was indeed more than Rs.5,000 in value TS again a question of fact and if the appellants dispute the assessment made by the learned Custodian in his order under challenge, then they have an opportunity of establishing the case before the Custodian when he re-examines the matter". As mentioned earlier, petition for leave filed by the petitioners was dismissed by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court on 27-10-1969. It was never their case in the earlier round that with the dismissal of revision petition filed by respondents Nos.2 and 3 as time-barred by the Custodian, the principle of merger was applicable, stopping him from re-opening the case is so moth jurisdiction. Indeed it was their case in that round that applicability of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 had not been examined by the Custodian. It was on these premises that the case was remanded to the Custodian, therefore, besides that the contention is meritless, what was not the stance and plea of the petitioners in the earlier round, cannot be pleaded by them nor a new case can be set up now. 7. The main stance of the petitioners is that Air Haman Shah had become owner of property owned by Lai Hand on account of adverse possession. In his order, dated 16-12-1960, the Custodian of Evacuee Property had on consideration of the material before him came to the conclusion that such a claim was not'supported by the record. Even after remand no such material was placed before the learned Custodian, which could be made basis for recording a finding in favor of the petitioners. In paragraph No.3 of the order, the learned Custodian had to observe that "there is nothing on record to show that Lai Hand evacuee was ousted by Air Haman Shah, respondent No. who later on occupied the land in question per force and continued in possession as such till the petition of the Subcontinent of India. In the circumstances, plea of adverse possession raised by respondent No.| cannot be accepted." This is a finding of fact recorded by the learned Custodian. In Jamal LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Shah and others v. The Custodian and others (PLD 1981 SC 262), it was the case of the appellant that the adverse possession over the land in dispute stood fully matured before the year, 1947 and, therefore, their title as such had been perfected and the evacuee interest of the evacuee owners therein had been lost by prescription. Besides that an adverse finding of the Custodian against the appellants could not be interfered with by the High Court in writ jurisdiction, it was observed that "in order to succeed on such a plea adverse possession should have" all the qualities of adequacy, continuity and exclusiveness" to displace the owners title". Since the appellants had failed to establish their claim, their plea was repelled, and it was held that such a property, which was "hidden evacuee property" could be treated by the Custodian as even after 1-1-1957. In Shafaullah and 13 others v. Safer Rehman and 7 others (PLD 1991 SC 1106), the petitioners had claimed that they were in adverse possession since 1931 which had matured in 1943 and that the same could not be treated as evacuee property, repelling the contention, it was observed that "there were no circumstances in this case to show that for the said period of 12 years in fact and in reality the possession of the petitioners was as hostile, as open and so dishonest as 1s required in cases like the present one. See Mira Ghulam Hussain v. Ch. Iqbal Ahmad (PLD 1991 SC 290)". ITV was further observed that "IFA suit would have been filed before 1947 undoubtedly the petitioners would have lost it. And after the partition the combined reading of all the laws relating to evacuees and evacuee property, had the effect of almost repealing law relating to adverse possession; if not otherwise, at least by intendment". The petition was dismissed accordingly. In the present case as well if the claim of the petitioners was that their adverse possession, dated back to the year, 1933-34, the question arises, why they had not filed a suit, when the evacuees owners had not yet migrated. The findings recorded by the Custodian of Evacuee Property successively against the petitioners rejecting their plea of adverse possession do not suffer from any illegality, which could warrant interference by this Court in writ jurisdiction. 8. As to the value of the property in dispute, no attempt has been made before the learned Custodian to show that its value was less than Rs.5000. It is not the case of the petitioners that they were denied of any opportunity by the Custodian. In view of the finding recorded by the Division Bench in its order, dated 20-2-1969 passed in LPA No. the declaration granted by the Deputy Custodian required confirmation by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, which was not done in terms of rule 7(c) of Protection of Evacuee LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Property Rules, 1948. The declaration so granted by the Deputy Custodian was rightly treated as ineffective and invalid. 9. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that property could not be declared as evacuee by the Custodian after 1-1-1957, in the facts and circumstances of the case has no force and is to be repelled, mas much as the case falls with the ambit of subsection (2)(b) of section 3 of the Act XII of 1957, which is in the nature of an overriding import. The learned Custodian has in post remand proceedings specifically adverted to this aspect of the matter, and rely mg on an unreported judgment by the Supreme Court in Muhammad Islam v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property and others (C.A. No.22 of 1966) held that possession of such an occupant of the land is to be regarded only a trespasser to which subsection, (2)(b) of section 3 of the Act XJI of 1957 would be applicable. The finding recorded by the learned Custodian is that "since his authority to occupy the property was never confirmed by the Custodian, therefore, the property always vested in the Authority". In Jamal Shah and others case (supra) in which the claim of the appellants was based on adverse possession, the applicability of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 came up for consideration and the argument that the land had not been treated or allotted as evacuee property before 1-1-1957, therefore, TT could not have been treated later on was repelled by their lordships. In the case of The Custodian, D Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore (supra) wherein the exercise of so moth power by the learned Custodian even after 1-1-1957 was recognized, it was observed that "In view of the above lacuna in the sale deed it was not lawfully confirmed and, therefore, the case of the respondent is covered by section 3(2)(b) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. In these circumstances, I would hold that exception to section 3(1) contained in subsection (2)(b) applied to the present case and Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad was competent to treat this property as evacuee property and could review the order, dated 2nd December, 1953. I would, therefore, set aside the order of the High Court and recall the writ of certiorari issued by it and restore the order of the Custodian, dated 16th October, 1959". In the case of Muhammad Kiddie (supra) the learned Division Bench took the view that where a property is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right is not accepted or approved by the Custodian can be declared as ever evacuee property even after 1-1-1957 in view of section 3(2)(b) Act XII of 1957. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 10. Reliance of the learned counsel for the petitioners on Akbar Ali and 9 others case (supra) is inapt inasmuch as the Custodian Authorities had successively declared the predecessor-MN-interest of the respondents their as non-evacuee before 1-1-1957 which orders had been affirmed by the High Court and the matter even had concluded up to the Hon'BLE Supreme Court, but again the matter was sought to be reopened by the Custodian when the notice issued by him was declared as illegal, and it was held that "the action commenced and proceedings taken had come to an end on 12-8-1955, when the’order of the Assistant Custodian was passed. This order declared respondents Nos.| and 2 as non-evacuees and so their properties as nonevacuee, which was not set aside or modified by any authority in the department of Custodian, with the result that the said order still holds the field; which w‘as affirmed and reaffirmed in the proceedings initiated in W.P. No. ". It was in this context that exercise of so moth jurisdiction by the Custodian after 1-1-1957 was declared as illegal The precedent case had the peculiar features, whereas the facts and circumstances of the present case are quite distinct. In view of the above, the findings recorded and the view taken by the learned Custodian that the petitioners had no valid claim to the land in dispute on the basis of adverse possession and that section 3(2)(b) of the Act XII of 1957 was attracted to the facts and circumstances of the case, do not suffer from any illegality or jurisdictional error; rather no interference by this Court in writ jurisdiction is called for with such a finding of fact. The writ petition is dismissed. No order as to costs. Ashraf, Special M.B. A./J-27/L Petition dismissed. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 605 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-03-15): LR/html_TXT/Y SAYED ZAHID HUSSAIN, J.~ Order of the Custodian Evacuee Property, Punjab, Lahore, dated 19-2-1980 has been challenged by the petitioners through this writ petition under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, which was passed by the learned Custodian in pursuance of a remand order by this Court maintained up to the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The dispute arises in the circumstances briefly stated below. 2. Air Haman Shah (late), whose successor-in-interest are now before this Court had made an application under section 8 of the West Punjab Protection of Evacuee Property Act, 1948 for a declaration that he was owner of -782 Canals and 11 Marla's of land situated in village Harman Thesis and District Montgomery (now Spatial). It was his case that he was owner of one half of the land whereas the rest of the half was in his adverse possession which had earlier been sold to one Lai Hand, an evacuee. The Deputy Custodian vide order, dated 31-3-1949 granted the declaration that "no part of the land described in the petition is an evacuee property". A revision was filed by Ahmad Allah and Anwar Thesean Ali Khan/respondents Nos.2 and 3 herein which was rejected by the Custodian of Evacuee Property on 14-6-1980 as time-barred. He, however, sent for the record for finding out "whether action for revising the Deputy Custodian's order so moth was called for or not’. On perusal of record, a notice was issued to Pr Haman Shah as to why the Deputy Custodian's Order should not be set aside under subsection (4) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957. The learned Custodian took the view that the property in dispute was of the value of more than Rs.5000 and a device had been resorted to by undervaluing the property to prevent the Custodian to examine the case, as all cases evolving property of the value of more than Rs.5000 were to be submitted to the Custodian for confirmation. It was thus observed that the order of the Deputy Custodian had not become operative as it was not duly confirmed by the Custodian. As to the claim of adverse possession for half of the land, the learned Custodian took the view that he was not in possession of the land for more than 12 years nor there was evidence on record as to the ouster of Lai Hand, from the land. He thus modified the order of the Deputy Custodian and declared that "the respondent Haman Shah is owner of only one half share of the land in dispute and that the other half share is evacuee property BMG owned by Lai Hand". This was vide order, dated 16-12-1960. It was challenged by the petitioners by filing petition (W.P. No. ) before this Court. The case of the LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y petitioners before this Court was that since the property in dispute was not treated as evacuee property on or before 1-1-1957. It could not

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 605 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-03-15): was vide order, dated 16-12-1960. It was challenged by the petitioners by filing petition (W.P. No. ) before this Court. The case of the LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y petitioners before this Court was that since the property in dispute was not treated as evacuee property on or before 1-1-1957. It could not be treated so nor any order could be passed by the Custodian after the said date. For the view taken by late Karma Ella hi Chauhan, J. (as he then was), that this aspect had not been adverted to by the Custodian while passing the said order, the case was remanded for fresh decision in accordance with law. This was vide judgment, dated 9-10-1968. The petitioners challenged this order through L.P.A. No. which was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on 20-2-1969. It was noticed by the learned Division Bench that in view of rule 7(c) of Protection of Evacuee Property Rules, 1948, the order of the Deputy Custodian" needed confirmation by the Custodian". It was observed that "an order passed by a Deputy Custodian in respect of property which was more than Rs.5,000 in value shall not become effective and be valid unless confirmed by the Custodian. If therefore, the value of the property is more than Rs.5000 as held by the learned Custodian, then the order of the Deputy Custodian would clearly be invalid and effective in eyes of law and no advantage could accrue to the appellants on the basis thereof". A petition for leave to appeal (C.P.S.L.A. No. ) was filed by the petitioners which was dismissed on 27-10-1969 by the Hon'BLE Supreme Court. 3. In this Context, the learned Custodian took up the matter and recorded a finding that "there is nothing on record to show that Lai Hand evacuee was ousted by Pr Haman Shah, respondent No.], who later on occupied the land in question per force and continued in possession as such till the partition of the Sub-Continent of India. In the circumstances, plea of adverse possession raised by respondent No.| cannot be accepted". Adverting to the question of section 3 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, he found that "plea of adverse possession having already been repelled, he can only be considered to be a tress-passer. Since his authority to occupy the property was never confirmed by the Custodian, therefore, the property always vested in that Authority". It is this order, dated 19-2-1980 of the Custodian, that is challenged through this petition. 4. It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that upon rejection of the revision petition filed by respondents Nos.2 and 3 by the Custodian, Evacuee Property on 14-6-1960 as time-barred, the order of the Deputy Custodian stood merged into it, which could not thereafter, be subject of any so moth review of revision. It is further contended that it was section 3(1) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y which was applicable and section 3(2)(b) of the Act

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 605 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-03-15): of the Deputy Custodian stood merged into it, which could not thereafter, be subject of any so moth review of revision. It is further contended that it was section 3(1) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y which was applicable and section 3(2)(b) of the Act was not applicable to the mutant case and therefore, the property could not be declared as Evacuee after 1-1-1957. Reliance is placed on Akbar Ali and 9 others v. Cassandras and 2 others (PLD 1985 Karachi 117). Further contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that title had matured in favor of the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners through adverse possession and the view taken by the learned Custodian is incorrect in law. 5. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the contesting respondents submits that Lai Hand was shown as owner of the property in the special Jacaranda for the year 1946-47 and the claim of the petitioners as to adverse possession had no factual and legal basis. According to him section 3(2)(b) of the Act was attracted to a case of this nature and that the Custodian of Evacuee Property rightly declared the same as evacuee Property. Relies on the Custodian, Evacuee Property West Pakistan, Lahore v. Rats Ghazi Muhammad (PLD 1973 SC 537) and Muhammad Kiddie v. Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property, South Zone, Karachi and 5 others (1984 CLC 1932). 6. It is evident from the order of Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, dated 3 1-3-1949 that a petition was filed by Air Haman Shah (late) in respect of 782 Canals and 11 Marla's of land claiming that he was owner of half of the land whereas the other half belonged to Lai Hand an evacuee. His claim was that he had become owner of the land owned by Lai Hand on account of his bag adversely in possession for more than 12 years. Such a declaration was granted by the Deputy Custodian. When the matter came to the notice of the Custodian on a review petition filed by respondents Nos.2 and 3, the same was dismissed by the learned Custodian as time-barred, but simultaneously, took the matter so moth and sent for the record of the case. It was after notice and harem Air Haman Shah that the learned Custodian came to the conclusion that although one half of the land was owned by Air Haman Shah as owner of the property, yet since there was no evidence of ouster of Lai Hand on record, Air Haman Shah's possession of the land could not be considered to be adverse as against Lai Hand, therefore, he could not become owner of Lai Hand half share by reasons of adverse possession". In W.P. No. the order of the Custodian was set aside by this Court vide judgment, dated 9-10-1968 that section 3 of Act XII of 1957 had not been adverted to by the Custodian. On LPA No. filed by the petitioner, their case was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 605 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-03-15): share by reasons of adverse possession". In W.P. No. the order of the Custodian was set aside by this Court vide judgment, dated 9-10-1968 that section 3 of Act XII of 1957 had not been adverted to by the Custodian. On LPA No. filed by the petitioner, their case was that property could not be treated as evacuee after 1-1-1957. In this context, relevant para of the order of the learned LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y LPA Bench need to be kept in view, which is "in the present case the reliance of the appellants is on an order made by the learned Deputy Custodian on 31-3-1949. We have already stated that according to the learned Custodian this order needed confirmation by the Custodian in view of the provisions contained in Rule 7(c) already referred to. We find that this rule lays down in very clear terms that an order passed by a Deputy Custodian in respect of property which is more than Rs.5000 in value shall not become effective and be valid unless confirmed by the Custodian. If} therefore, the value of the property is more than Rs.5,000 as held by the learned Custodian, then the order of the Deputy Custodian would Clearly be valid and ineffective in the eyes of law and no advantage could accrue to the appellants on the basis thereof: The question whether the property was indeed more than Rs.5,000 in value TS again a question of fact and if the appellants dispute the assessment made by the learned Custodian in his order under challenge, then they have an opportunity of establishing the case before the Custodian when he re-examines the matter". As mentioned earlier, petition for leave filed by the petitioners was dismissed by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court on 27-10-1969. It was never their case in the earlier round that with the dismissal of revision petition filed by respondents Nos.2 and 3 as time-barred by the Custodian, the principle of merger was applicable, stopping him from re-opening the case is so moth jurisdiction. Indeed it was their case in that round that applicability of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 had not been examined by the Custodian. It was on these premises that the case was remanded to the Custodian, therefore, besides that the contention is meritless, what was not the stance and plea of the petitioners in the earlier round, cannot be pleaded by them nor a new case can be set up now. 7. The main stance of the petitioners is that Air Haman Shah had become owner of property owned by Lai Hand on account of adverse possession. In his order, dated 16-12-1960, the Custodian of Evacuee Property had on consideration of the material before him came to the conclusion that such a claim was not'supported by the record. Even after remand no such material was placed before the learned Custodian, which could be made basis for recording a finding in favor of the petitioners. In paragraph No.3 of the order, the learned

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 605 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-03-15): material before him came to the conclusion that such a claim was not'supported by the record. Even after remand no such material was placed before the learned Custodian, which could be made basis for recording a finding in favor of the petitioners. In paragraph No.3 of the order, the learned Custodian had to observe that "there is nothing on record to show that Lai Hand evacuee was ousted by Air Haman Shah, respondent No. who later on occupied the land in question per force and continued in possession as such till the petition of the Subcontinent of India. In the circumstances, plea of adverse possession raised by respondent No.| cannot be accepted." This is a finding of fact recorded by the learned Custodian. In Jamal LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Shah and others v. The Custodian and others (PLD 1981 SC 262), it was the case of the appellant that the adverse possession over the land in dispute stood fully matured before the year, 1947 and, therefore, their title as such had been perfected and the evacuee interest of the evacuee owners therein had been lost by prescription. Besides that an adverse finding of the Custodian against the appellants could not be interfered with by the High Court in writ jurisdiction, it was observed that "in order to succeed on such a plea adverse possession should have" all the qualities of adequacy, continuity and exclusiveness" to displace the owners title". Since the appellants had failed to establish their claim, their plea was repelled, and it was held that such a property, which was "hidden evacuee property" could be treated by the Custodian as even after 1-1-1957. In Shafaullah and 13 others v. Safer Rehman and 7 others (PLD 1991 SC 1106), the petitioners had claimed that they were in adverse possession since 1931 which had matured in 1943 and that the same could not be treated as evacuee property, repelling the contention, it was observed that "there were no circumstances in this case to show that for the said period of 12 years in fact and in reality the possession of the petitioners was as hostile, as open and so dishonest as 1s required in cases like the present one. See Mira Ghulam Hussain v. Ch. Iqbal Ahmad (PLD 1991 SC 290)". ITV was further observed that "IFA suit would have been filed before 1947 undoubtedly the petitioners would have lost it. And after the partition the combined reading of all the laws relating to evacuees and evacuee property, had the effect of almost repealing law relating to adverse possession; if not otherwise, at least by intendment". The petition was dismissed accordingly. In the present case as well if the claim of the petitioners was that their adverse possession, dated back to the year, 1933-34, the question arises, why they had not filed a suit, when the evacuees owners had not yet migrated. The findings recorded by the Custodian of Evacuee Property successively against the petitioners rejecting their plea of adverse possession do

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 605 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-03-15): petitioners was that their adverse possession, dated back to the year, 1933-34, the question arises, why they had not filed a suit, when the evacuees owners had not yet migrated. The findings recorded by the Custodian of Evacuee Property successively against the petitioners rejecting their plea of adverse possession do not suffer from any illegality, which could warrant interference by this Court in writ jurisdiction. 8. As to the value of the property in dispute, no attempt has been made before the learned Custodian to show that its value was less than Rs.5000. It is not the case of the petitioners that they were denied of any opportunity by the Custodian. In view of the finding recorded by the Division Bench in its order, dated 20-2-1969 passed in LPA No. the declaration granted by the Deputy Custodian required confirmation by the Custodian of Evacuee Property, which was not done in terms of rule 7(c) of Protection of Evacuee LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y Property Rules, 1948. The declaration so granted by the Deputy Custodian was rightly treated as ineffective and invalid. 9. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that property could not be declared as evacuee by the Custodian after 1-1-1957, in the facts and circumstances of the case has no force and is to be repelled, mas much as the case falls with the ambit of subsection (2)(b) of section 3 of the Act XII of 1957, which is in the nature of an overriding import. The learned Custodian has in post remand proceedings specifically adverted to this aspect of the matter, and rely mg on an unreported judgment by the Supreme Court in Muhammad Islam v. The Custodian of Evacuee Property and others (C.A. No.22 of 1966) held that possession of such an occupant of the land is to be regarded only a trespasser to which subsection, (2)(b) of section 3 of the Act XJI of 1957 would be applicable. The finding recorded by the learned Custodian is that "since his authority to occupy the property was never confirmed by the Custodian, therefore, the property always vested in the Authority". In Jamal Shah and others case (supra) in which the claim of the appellants was based on adverse possession, the applicability of section 3 of Act XII of 1957 came up for consideration and the argument that the land had not been treated or allotted as evacuee property before 1-1-1957, therefore, TT could not have been treated later on was repelled by their lordships. In the case of The Custodian, D Evacuee Property, West Pakistan, Lahore (supra) wherein the exercise of so moth power by the learned Custodian even after 1-1-1957 was recognized, it was observed that "In view of the above lacuna in the sale deed it was not lawfully confirmed and, therefore, the case of the respondent is covered by section 3(2)(b) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. In these circumstances, I would hold that exception to section 3(1) contained in

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2001 YLR 605?
Answer: From case 2001 YLR 605 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2001-03-15): view of the above lacuna in the sale deed it was not lawfully confirmed and, therefore, the case of the respondent is covered by section 3(2)(b) of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act XII of 1957. In these circumstances, I would hold that exception to section 3(1) contained in subsection (2)(b) applied to the present case and Mr. Justice Maud Ahmad was competent to treat this property as evacuee property and could review the order, dated 2nd December, 1953. I would, therefore, set aside the order of the High Court and recall the writ of certiorari issued by it and restore the order of the Custodian, dated 16th October, 1959". In the case of Muhammad Kiddie (supra) the learned Division Bench took the view that where a property is occupied, supervised or managed by a person whose authority or right is not accepted or approved by the Custodian can be declared as ever evacuee property even after 1-1-1957 in view of section 3(2)(b) Act XII of 1957. LR/html_TXT/Y LR/html_TXT/Y 10. Reliance of the learned counsel for the petitioners on Akbar Ali and 9 others case (supra) is inapt inasmuch as the Custodian Authorities had successively declared the predecessor-MN-interest of the respondents their as non-evacuee before 1-1-1957 which orders had been affirmed by the High Court and the matter even had concluded up to the Hon'BLE Supreme Court, but again the matter was sought to be reopened by the Custodian when the notice issued by him was declared as illegal, and it was held that "the action commenced and proceedings taken had come to an end on 12-8-1955, when the’order of the Assistant Custodian was passed. This order declared respondents Nos.| and 2 as non-evacuees and so their properties as nonevacuee, which was not set aside or modified by any authority in the department of Custodian, with the result that the said order still holds the field; which w‘as affirmed and reaffirmed in the proceedings initiated in W.P. No. ". It was in this context that exercise of so moth jurisdiction by the Custodian after 1-1-1957 was declared as illegal The precedent case had the peculiar features, whereas the facts and circumstances of the present case are quite distinct. In view of the above, the findings recorded and the view taken by the learned Custodian that the petitioners had no valid claim to the land in dispute on the basis of adverse possession and that section 3(2)(b) of the Act XII of 1957 was attracted to the facts and circumstances of the case, do not suffer from any illegality or jurisdictional error; rather no interference by this Court in writ jurisdiction is called for with such a finding of fact. The writ petition is dismissed. No order as to costs. Ashraf, Special M.B. A./J-27/L Petition dismissed. LR/html_TXT/Y

Question: What is case 2008 CLC 1245 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 1245 was decided by SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS on 2008-05-13. The case involved MST. KHAIRUN NISAAND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) I4 VERSUS « MUHAMMAD MUSSA (RESPONDENT). The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - SS. AND 42 NORTHERN AREAS COUNCIL LEGAL FRAMEWORK ORDER, 1994 - S. 19-A CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3). The case was heard by ALTAF HUSSAIN AND SYED TAHIR ALI SHAH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 1245?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 1245, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - SS. AND 42 NORTHERN AREAS COUNCIL LEGAL FRAMEWORK ORDER, 1994 - S. 19-A CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN (1973) - ARTICLE 185(3). This case was heard in SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS and decided on 2008-05-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 1245?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 1245 were: JAVED IQBAL FOR APPELLANTS. J 'l*¥ MIRZA ALI FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: ALTAF HUSSAIN AND SYED TAHIR ALI SHAH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 1245?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 1245 were: MST. KHAIRUN NISAAND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) I4 VERSUS « MUHAMMAD MUSSA (RESPONDENT). This case was heard in SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 1245.
Answer: JUDGMENT - p SYED TAHIR ALI SHAH, J.- Through the instant leave petition the order returned by the Chief Court Northern Areas Gil git, dated 14-11-2007, in C.S.A.-, whereby judgment, WW. dated 17-5-2007, passed by Additional District and Sessions Judge, Store was recalled has been called in question. 2. Succinctly stated the facts are that MST. Wherein Nisei the petitioner Hied a declaratory suit cum possession for certain amount of landed property entered in Khelat Nos.28 and 30 MN Store District of Northern Areas for the legacy of her deceased brother. The proceedings of the case before the Civil Judge was at stage of framing of the issues when the plaintiff were lady filed an application before the Additional District and Sessions Judge Store for transfer of the case on the grounds enumerated in such application. 3. The learned Additional District and Sessions Judge, after harem the parties allowed the application on 18-3-2004. This order was challenged in the Chief Court but the impugned order was upheld. After « remand of the case the plaintiff, as record reveals could not make her appearance whereupon. the trial Court proceeding ex parte granted an ex parte decree. The two proceedings were challenged before the first appellate Court after the remedies available in the trial Court got exhausted. The first appellate Court vide his judgment, dated 17-5-2007, dismissed the appeal finding it to be time-barred as well as on the point of non-proof of sufficient cause for condonation of delay. 4. Felt aggrieved with such findings as returned by the Additional District and Sessions Judge the respondent/defendant filed an appeal before the Chief Court which was allowed on 14-11-2007, holding the issue of limitation as a technical post hence the instant leave petition. ' W 5. Mr. Saved Iqbal learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that the Chief Court NA's. While deciding the appeal has K altogether ignored the point of imitation and non-existing of sufficient cause of delay which were the moot points in the subordinate appellate Court. He further contends that the Court below has overlooked the crucial points simply considering it as a technical one and ignored the valuable right accrued to his chest during the proceedings, 6. Conversely to the ports raised by the petitioner the learned counsel for the respondent supported the impugned order on other grounds however, he candidly conceded that the post of limitation is always considered as a substantive one and is not a mere technicality. - not qualify to be termed as a judgment. The IST appellate Court has decided the appeal on the twin points of limitation and condonation. The impugned order as it reads does not carry even slight discussion on the issues involved. It, at the most can be called a short order, the reason whereof to be advanced later on. WW. w 8. An appellate Court must always state its reason for the decision arrived at so that parties be able to determine the line of action and relief and also the higher Courts to determine whether the lower Court has properly understood the' case and also for the reason that justice should not only be done but should appear to be done. Judgments, especially in case of reversal must contain definite findings on the question involved ’ a and its reason for reversal. It should be evident from the judgment that the Judge was conscious of the matter involved, and the judgment has m been pronounced on the basis of record. 9. In the circumstances discussed above, we are not my position to express our view safely regarding the judgment returned with regard to the issues involved in the case unless a judgment is delivered by the lower Court with reasons for the decision under the relevant provisions of law. The order impugned therefore, cannot hold the field. Petition for leave is converted into appeal and accepted. Order passed by the Chief Court, dated 24-11-2007 is therefore, set at naught and case is remitted back to Chief Court to decide the matter treating it as revision petition followed by a well reasoned judgment in the light of the parameters of relevant law and the guidelines highlighted above. Parties are directed to appear before the Chief Court Northern Areas, on 30-5-2008. No order as to costs. File of this Court be consigned to record after completion. H.B.T./9/GLT Case remanded. WW.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1245?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1245 (SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS, 2008-05-13): JUDGMENT - p SYED TAHIR ALI SHAH, J.- Through the instant leave petition the order returned by the Chief Court Northern Areas Gil git, dated 14-11-2007, in C.S.A.-, whereby judgment, WW. dated 17-5-2007, passed by Additional District and Sessions Judge, Store was recalled has been called in question. 2. Succinctly stated the facts are that MST. Wherein Nisei the petitioner Hied a declaratory suit cum possession for certain amount of landed property entered in Khelat Nos.28 and 30 MN Store District of Northern Areas for the legacy of her deceased brother. The proceedings of the case before the Civil Judge was at stage of framing of the issues when the plaintiff were lady filed an application before the Additional District and Sessions Judge Store for transfer of the case on the grounds enumerated in such application. 3. The learned Additional District and Sessions Judge, after harem the parties allowed the application on 18-3-2004. This order was challenged in the Chief Court but the impugned order was upheld. After « remand of the case the plaintiff, as record reveals could not make her appearance whereupon. the trial Court proceeding ex parte granted an ex parte decree. The two proceedings were challenged before the first appellate Court after the remedies available in the trial Court got exhausted. The first appellate Court vide his judgment, dated 17-5-2007, dismissed the appeal finding it to be time-barred as well as on the point of non-proof of sufficient cause for condonation of delay. 4. Felt aggrieved with such findings as returned by the Additional District and Sessions Judge the respondent/defendant filed an appeal before the Chief Court which was allowed on 14-11-2007, holding the issue of limitation as a technical post hence the instant leave petition. ' W 5. Mr. Saved Iqbal learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that the Chief Court NA's. While deciding the appeal has K altogether ignored the point of imitation and non-existing of sufficient cause of delay which were the moot points in the subordinate appellate Court. He further contends that the Court below has overlooked the crucial points simply considering it as a technical one and ignored the valuable right accrued to his chest during the proceedings, 6. Conversely to the ports raised by the petitioner the learned counsel for the respondent supported the impugned order on other grounds however, he candidly conceded that the post of limitation is always considered as a substantive one and is not a mere technicality. - not qualify to be termed as a judgment. The IST appellate Court has decided the appeal on the twin points of limitation and condonation. The impugned order as it reads does not carry even slight discussion on the issues involved. It, at the most can be called a short order, the reason whereof to be advanced later on. WW. w 8. An appellate Court must always state its reason for the decision arrived at so that parties be able to determine the line of action and relief

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1245?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1245 (SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS, 2008-05-13): the issues involved. It, at the most can be called a short order, the reason whereof to be advanced later on. WW. w 8. An appellate Court must always state its reason for the decision arrived at so that parties be able to determine the line of action and relief and also the higher Courts to determine whether the lower Court has properly understood the' case and also for the reason that justice should not only be done but should appear to be done. Judgments, especially in case of reversal must contain definite findings on the question involved ’ a and its reason for reversal. It should be evident from the judgment that the Judge was conscious of the matter involved, and the judgment has m been pronounced on the basis of record. 9. In the circumstances discussed above, we are not my position to express our view safely regarding the judgment returned with regard to the issues involved in the case unless a judgment is delivered by the lower Court with reasons for the decision under the relevant provisions of law. The order impugned therefore, cannot hold the field. Petition for leave is converted into appeal and accepted. Order passed by the Chief Court, dated 24-11-2007 is therefore, set at naught and case is remitted back to Chief Court to decide the matter treating it as revision petition followed by a well reasoned judgment in the light of the parameters of relevant law and the guidelines highlighted above. Parties are directed to appear before the Chief Court Northern Areas, on 30-5-2008. No order as to costs. File of this Court be consigned to record after completion. H.B.T./9/GLT Case remanded. WW.

Question: What is case 2008 CLC 1340 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 1340 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] on 2008-05-13. The case involved ASHFAQ AHMED AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CB. MAQBOOL RAZA AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CONTRACT ACT (LX OF 1872) - S. 31 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S, 12 CONTRACT ACT (IX OF 1872) - 8.20 SUIT FOR SPECIFIC PERFORM ANCE OF AGREEMENT TO SELL-APPLICABILITY CONTRACT ACT, 1872 - 8.20, CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) -S. 11 AND O.VII, RR.LL, 13. The case was heard by GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 1340, the court applied the following statutes: CONTRACT ACT (LX OF 1872) - S. 31 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - S, 12 CONTRACT ACT (IX OF 1872) - 8.20 SUIT FOR SPECIFIC PERFORM ANCE OF AGREEMENT TO SELL-APPLICABILITY CONTRACT ACT, 1872 - 8.20, CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) -S. 11 AND O.VII, RR.LL, 13. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] and decided on 2008-05-13.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 1340 were: ABDUL MAJEED MALIK, MUHAMMAD AZAM KHAN AND CH. REAZ ALAM FOR APPELLANTS. MUHAMMAD REAZ TABASSUM FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 1340 were: ASHFAQ AHMED AND OTHERS (APPELLANTS) VERSUS CB. MAQBOOL RAZA AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)].

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 1340.
Answer: JUDGMENT GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL, J.- Ch. Muhammad Adam k now survived by appellants, herein, brought a suit for - perpetual injunction and specific performance of an agreement-to-sell executed on 8-11-1987, MN respect of house No.-C, Sector C-] Mirror, against _ defendant No.1 (hereinafter shall be referred as vendor) in the Court of District Judge; Mirror on 13-3-1993. The plaint was amended later on 20-9- 2004. After the death of the said plaintiff present appellants have been imp leaded as plaintiffs. It is alleged that House No. FC situated at Sector C/1 Murmur was initially constructed by WAPDA during construction of Manila Dam. The said house was transferred to Government and vendor. Who was a refugee occupied the same with permission of the Government. At a later stage Government decided to allot some other houses, including this,one, to their occupants on payment of Rs. 10,00,000 each as is evident from the letter dated 18-11-1986. After the aforesaid decision, vendor executed an agreement-to-sell for transfer of the said house in favor of Ch. Muhammad Adam, father of the appellants herein on 8-11-1987 for a consideration of Rs. 15,00,000. It was alleged that at the time of execution of agreement Rs. 1,50,000 were received by the vendor as earnest amount. On 29-2-1988, he further received Rs.25,000 and executed another ‘Iqrarnama’ acknowledging receipt of part payment. It was claimed that defendant showed no interest for obtain the proprietary rights from the Government in order to execute the sale-deed as agreed between the parties. On 8-11-1987 whereupon father of the appellants filed a suit for specific performance in the competent Court but plant was rejected for want of cause of action under rule 11 of Order VII, C.P.C. The order was vacated on appeal by this Court but reversed by the apex Court. It was also claimed that the plaintiffs are still prepared to perform their part of the agreement, but it is defendant who has not taken any step for fulfilling his contractual obligations. The plaintiffs also stated that they asked the vendor that if some additional amount is required for obtain the proprietary nights of the house, the same can be provided so that the sale-deed could be got executed, but he did not take demand as serious whereupon the instant suit was filed. w 14. The defendant/vendor firstly filed written statement which was amended later on. He raised several objections regarding the maintainability of the suit. He pleaded that plaintiffs earlier filed a suit for specific performance of above agreement-to-sell on 22-2-1989, which was rejected by the trial Court on 29-11-1992, and the judgment was upheld by the apex Court, thus, the matter stood finally concluded, and present suit is barred by principle of res judicata as well as Order II, rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It was also pleaded that the suit is also time-barred and is not maintainable as at the relevant time answering defendant was not owner of the house, hence, legally cannot execute an agreement.-to-sell. It was also claimed that the suit is premature, hence, decree for specific performance cannot be granted and the plaintiffs at the most can file a suit for damages. In parawise reply defendant has admitted the possession of the house, however, he submitted that his sister MST. Medina Begum and brother Afar Ahmed Inhalant are also in possession of the house and claiming title in house due to this dispute proprietary rights could not be obtained. Moreover it was stated that 4- defendant is owner of I/3rd in the disputed house. In para. No.4 of the written statement execution of agreements and receipt of part payment, was admitted, however, it was repeated that agreement was not legal as the defendant was not owner of the land at the relevant time and in case of grant of proprietary rights he would be owner up to I/3rd and to that extent he is ready to execute sale deed. I The learned trial Court framed issues in light of the respective pleadings of the parties. After providing an opportunity of leading evidence the suit was dismissed vide its judgment dated 30-6-2007. Appellants, herein, felt aggrieved from the impugned judgment of the trial Court have filed this first appeal. T Messes Abdul Marked Malik, Muhammad Adam Khan and Ch. Real Adam, the learned Advocates for the appellants made following submissions:- (1) That the agreement-to-sell dated 8-11-1987 was a contingent contract and specific performance whereof was dependent upon the grant of proprietary rights of the house to defendant who acquired the same vide Notification dated 14-6-2001. After obtaining the proprietary rights it was enjoined upon him to fulfil his contractual obligation by executing sale deed in favor of the appellants, but he transferred the house to his cousin MN order to frustrate the agreement. (2) That findings of the learned District Judge on issue No.2 are illegal, erroneous and against the record. The execution of the agreement and conditions stipulated therein were admitted by the vendor and the stand taken by him in the Court statement was against his pleadings, hence, was liable to be ignored, and the learned District Judge was bound to grant the decree for specific performance of the contract. (3) That the learned District Judge also fell in error in holding that the subsequent transferees were necessary party. As the house was transferred during pendency of the suit and in presence of a prohibitory order of the Court, therefore, subsequent transferees. were neither necessary nor proper party for decision of this case. (4) That Section 20 of the Contract Act was not attracted in the present case as both the parties have executed, the contract with open eyes after agree mg to its terms and conditions. Similarly Section 21 or Section 28 of the said Act was also not placing any restriction on the grant of decree for specific performance of the contract. (5) That the impugned judgment badly suffers from misreading and non-reading of the record and conclusion reached at by the learned District Judge TS erroneous. (6) That the learned District Judge has illegally struck down the remaining issues which were necessary for disposal of the appeal. In support of their submissions the learned Advocates placed [dance on the following cases:- °. (1) Shivshankareppa Mahadevappa Parakanhatti v. Shiva Harappa Karate and others AIR 143 BOM. 27, (#1) Gourd Duty Maharaja v. Sukkur Muhammad and others AIR 1948 PC 147, (1) Muhammad Mubeen v. Messes Long Life Builders and others PLD 2006 Keir. 278, (iv) Muhammad Amin v. Muhammad Yunus 1994 SCR 162, (v) Muhammad Sharif v. Muhammad Ilyas and 23 others 2000 MLD 1633, (vi) The Pan Islamic Steamship Co. Ltd. v. Messes General Imports and Exports Ltd. PLD 1959 Keir. 750, (vi) Muhammad Amin v. Muhammad Hammed and 2 others 2001 MLD 525, (vii) AJK Government and others v. Messes Spite Limited 1998 PTD 3200, (ix) Ch. Abdul Karim and 5 others v. Raja Muhammad Isar and others 1999 PLC (C.S.) 624. Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned counsel for the respondents, controverted the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants and made the following submissions:- (1) That agreement has not been proved in accordance with law as not a single marginal witness has been produced by the plaintiffs, therefore, no specific performance of contract can be granted. (2) That at the time of agreement the property was in ownership of the Government and vendor was not in possession of any transferable interest, hence, was not entitled to execute the agreement. Q (3) That the suit is barred by res judicata as well under Order IJ, rule 2 of the C.P.C. because the earlier suit in respect of the same cause of action was dismissed by the trial Court and the judgment was approved by the apex Court, therefore, on the same cause of action, subsequent suit could not be filed. (4). That the suit was premature as even otherwise the same could have been filed after the grant of proprietary rights m favor of the vendor, thus, no decree could be passed in such a suit. (5) That the disputed house has been transferred to different persons. who have not been imp leaded in the line of defendants, therefore, no suit could be decreed in their absence. A P (6) That it has been proved through cogent evidence that the I. predecessor of appellants refused to purchase the house, r therefore, no question arises for performance of the agreement. In support of his submissions the learned Advocate placed reliance on the following cases:- '' (1) Fair Muhammad and others v. Abdul Mommy and others. PLD 2003 SC 594, (i) Her Muhammad (deceased) through Legal heirs v. Ghulam Muhammad arid others 2004 CLC 1217, (I'm) Ravi Glass Mills Ltd.v. I.C.I. Pakistan Power gen Ltd. 2004 YLR 2503, (TV) Salem Allah Farid and 8 others v. Ahead Sharif Nazi and 7 others 2003 YLR 1112, (v) Humayun Mira v. Mrs. Shahid A. Rajput and another PLD 2007 LAH. 449, (vi) Sh. Muhammad Shaft and 2 others v; Sheikh All-ud-Dm and others PLD 2005 SC 455, (VM) MST. Amina Bibi v. Macassar Aziz PLD 2003 SC 430, (VM) Ghulam Nazi and others v. Seth Muhammad Aqua and others PLD 1983 SC 344, (ix) MST. Amina (deceased) through Legal Heirs and others v. MST. Pamela Begum and 3 others 2006 YLR 870, (x) Ghulam Muhammad and 20 others, v. MST. Bag Bari and 11 others 1994 SCMR 1610 (xi) Malaya Khan and another v. Muhammad. Razz and others Civil Appeal No.89 of 1998, decided by the Supreme Court on 23-4-1999, I have heard the learned Advocates for the parties and have given my anxious thought to the record of the case and precedents referred to and relied upon by them. The first question which needs resolution TS whether the agreement dated 8-11-1987 was a contingent contract, as has been claimed by the learned Advocates for the appellants? The contingent contract has been defined MN section 31 of the Contract Act, 1872 as follows:. “31. A contingent contract is a contract to do or not to do something, if some event, collateral to such contract does or does not happen.” Illustration appended to the above section clarifies the scope of the contract as under:- * “A” contracts to pay “B” Rs. 10,000 if “B’s” house is burnt. This is a contingent contract. ” v In The Contract Act, 1872 (Edition 1973) Professor Dr. M.A. Manna, while explaining the scope of ‘contingent’ contract says that:- “A contingent, or a conditional promise differs from an absolute promise in This that in the case of contingent contracts the performance of the contract becomes due only on the happening » P of a condition or contingency, so it is not due immediately on the making of the contract. A contingent agreement is not enforcible till the event on which it was to depend has arisen; but when that event has occurred, the contract, for all purposes, rests on the same footing if it had been made positively and without reference to any contingency. If the event do not happen, no contract arises, so no liability can accrue to either party.” ' Again at page 30S, under the heading of “condition precedent and condition subsequent” the learned author says that: ' “. A distinction'is drawn in law between a condition precedent and.a condition subsequent. Where a certain act has to be performed, or a certain event is to happen before the contractual obligation can be fixed, this act or event is a condition precedent. Such is an undertaking in a contract of lease that the lessor shall build a new warehouse and put an old warehouse in repair. So, where a railway company purchases land for the proposed railroad, there may be a condition precedent that the railway shall be made: Where, on the other hand, a valid contract is formed in the first instance, but it is stipulated that the contract shall be annulled if a certain act be not performed or w a certain event do not happen, that is a condition subsequent, the non- fulfillment of which discharges the contract. ” r Now I would like to refer some case law on the subject. In a case titled Mrs. Channel Idea Vat Madden v. Dr. C.L. Katia and others AIR. 1964 SC 978 the plaintiffs therein entered into contract of sale of a house belonging to the defendant on the plot granted by the Government. One of the terms of the contract was that the vendor shall obtain necessary permission of the Government for the sale within 2 months of the agreement and if the needful was not done within the stipulated period a right was given to the vendees to extend the date’ or treat the agreement as cancelled. The vendor applied for permission but later on. request was withdrawn. The vendees filed suit for specific performance of the contract. Similar plea was raised by the defendants/vendors but the same was repelled on the ground that the A contract was not contingent contract and the parties had agreed to bind themselves by the terms of- the document executed between them. Relevant observation of the apex Court of India is recorded in paras. Nos.4 and 5 of the report which are as under: - “(4) The ma'am ground of attack on this appeal is that the contract is not enforceable being of a contingent nature and the contingency not having been fulfilled. In our opinion there is no substance in this contention. So far as the parties to the contract are concerned, they have agreed to bind themselves by the terms of1. the document executed between them. Under that document it was for-the defendant vendor to make the necessary application for the permission to the. Chief Commissioner. She had as a matter of fact made such an application but for reasons of her’. own decided to withdraw the same. On the findings that the plaintiffs have always been ready and willing to perform their part of the contract and that it was the defendant who willful|T refused to perform her part of the contract, and. that time was not of the essence of the contract, the Court has got to enforce the terms of the contract and to enjoin upon the defendant appellant, to make the necessary application to the Chief Commissioner. It will be for the Chief Commissioner to decide whether to grant the necessary sanction. (5) In this view of the matter, Lehigh Court was entirely correct in decreeing the suit for specific performance of the contract. The High Court should have further directed defendant to make the necessary application for permission to the Chief Commissioner, which was implied in the contract between the parties. As the defendant vendor, without any sufficient reasons, withdrew the application already made to the Chief Commissioner, the decree to be prepared by this Court will add the clause that the defendant, within one month from today shall make the necessary application to the Chief Commissioner or to such other competent authority as may have been empowered TP grant the necessary sanction to transfers like the one in question, and further that within one month of the receipt of that sanction she shall convey to the plaintiffs the property in suit. In the event of the sanction being refused, the plaintiffs shall be entitled to the damages as decreed by the High Court. The appellant sought to raise certain other pleas which had not been raised in the High Court; for example that this was not a fit case m which specific performance of the contract should be enforced by the Court. This plea was not specifically raised in the High Court and the necessary facts were not pleaded in the pleadings. It is manifest V that this Court should not allow such a plea to be raised here for the first time.” ¥ Same view was taken by Dacca High Court in Muhammad Sama Monday’s case PLD 1963 Dacca 816. In that case agreement to execute a deed for sale of the land was executed between the parties and one of the conditions was that deed for sale would be executed after securing permission from the Collector. It was conclude'd by the learned Court that the condition of securing permission from the Collector, is not collateral to the agreement but is a part of the consideration of the contract. Relevant observation is recorded MN para No. 11 which is as under:- “11. As to the first point, the contention of the learned Advocate for appellant is that according to the terms of the agreement, the execution of the document was dependent on the permission from the Collector and that as permission was not obtained, the contract cannot be enforced. Section 31 of the Contract Act which defines contingent contract is as follows:- “A ‘contingent contract’ is a contract to do or not to do something if some event, collateral to such contract, does or does not happen. ” _ 1A contingent contract is not enforcible till the event on which it depends has occurred. But the uncertain event on the happening of which the contract is conditional must be collateral to the contract. This means that it must not form part of the consideration of the contract but must be independent of p it. The illustration to section 31 of the Contract Act is as ' follows:- K “A” contracts to pay “B” Rs. 10,000 if “B’s” house is burnt. This is a contingent contract.”’. -The consideration of the promise to pay Rs. 10,000 is the ' payment by “B”, but the contract to pay Rs. 10,000 will be enforcible only on the happening of an uncertain event, namely B’s house being burnt down, an event which is independent of the consideration, in the present case, the term in the deed of agreement is to the effect that on registration of the document after taking permission, the defendants would take the balance Rs. 1,300 from the plaintiffs and that plaintiffs would pay this amount at that time. So the condition to take permission is not collateral to the contract, but forms part of the consideration of the contract. In the present case, the contract cannot be regarded as a contingent one. ”'Hail’ t' I After perusal of section 31 of the Contract Act, in light of the above precedents, I am of the considered view that the test to,determine whether a contract 1s ‘contingent’ or ‘absolute* is that if there is mere stipulation in the agreement-to-sell that the sale-deed would be executed after obtain mg permission from any public functionary then such a condition is not collateral to the contract and the contract, cannot be construed as a ‘contingent’ contract because the condition was forming the part of the consideration. However, where vendor is not in possession of the absolute title and execution of the sale-deed depends upon the grant of proprietary rights by the Government then such a contract could be declared as ‘conditional’ or ‘contingent’, as has been opined MN the Tribunal Parkas NASCAR v. The Union of India AIR 1970 SC 540. In the case in hand the agreement was executed between the parties on 8-11-1987 and its execution was dependant upon the condition that the vendor will execute the sale-deed after obtain the proprietary rights. Had the proprietary nights would have not been granted to him by the Government for failure to deposit the sale price mentioned MN letter dated 18-11-1986 or for any other reason only in that eventuality it could have been said that the agreement stood frustrated m and its execution has become impossible. As stated above, during the pendency of the suit for specific performance of the contract, vendor/defendant herein acquired proprietary rights vide Notification dated 14-6-2001. Thus, the contract is absolute and has become enforceable. Findings of the learned District Judge that the parties were under some mistake and the contract was liable to be ignored under section 20 of the Contract Act, could not be approved because Section 20 is not attracted in the present case. Section 20 of the said Act comes into play only when both the parties to an agreement are under a mistake as to a matter of fact essential to the agreement only in that case the agreement becomes void. The explanation appended to Section makes it further clear that an erroneous option AS to the value of the thing which forms the subject-matter of the 9agreement is- not to be deemed a mistake as to a matter of fact. In the present case the Government has decided to sell the house to the plaintiff and decision was conveyed to the occupants vide letter dated 18-11-1986. Mere fact that the Government sold the house later on at a higher, price cannot frustrate the agreement. Similarly observation of the learned District Judge that agreement is not specifically enforceable in view of Section 28 of the Contract Act was also erroneous, baseless and has no nexus with the record of the case. The next contention of the learned Advocates for the appellants that execution of the agreement was admitted by vendor, therefore, performance of the same could not be refused has a substance. In para No.4 of the plant the appellants have taken a categoric stand that defendant executed an agreement on 8-11-1987. They also pleaded in the same para that another agreement was executed in the shape of receipt on 29-2-1988. The defendant in his written statement has admitted the execution of these documents, therefore, requirement of further proof of these documents hardly arise. There is no substance in the argument of Mr. Real Tabasco, the learned Advocate for the vendor, that even then appellants were bound to produce at least two marginal witnesses of the agreement. By now it is well settled that an admitted fact needs not to be proved. In his Court statement the vendor though has made some deviation from his earlier stand, but the same is. An afterthought and is a deliberate attempt to get rid of from his contractual obligations. There is force in the contention of the learned Advocates for the appellants that subsequent transferees were not necessary party because the disputed property has been transferred during pendency of the suit and prohibitory order of the Court, is correct. The objection of Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned Advocate for the respondents, that subsequent transferees were necessary party because no decree can be passed without providing them a right of hearing in presence of the settled position of law has no substance. In order to meet the objections an application for amendment has also been made by the appellants during the course of arguments, but I am of the considered view that subsequent transferees are not in any manner necessary party for the purpose of the decision of the appeal or the suit out of which the instant appeal has arisen. Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, prohibits the transfer of the property during pendency of the. proceedings in order to save the parties from multiplicity of the proceedings. Scope of section 52 came under consideration before this Court in a case titled Abdul Karim v. Kala Khan and another PLD 1987 AJ&K 139. Facts of the case were that a suit for preemption was filed by Kala Khan against Abdul Karim. At some stage, the suit was dismissed for nonrprosecution. An application for restoration was filed and during pendency of this application the suit land was transferred. It was concluded that as the transfer has been effected during pendency of the proceedings, therefore, is void. Relevant observation is recorded in para. No.6 which TS as under:. “6. Provisions of section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act constitute a rule resting on the split of principles of equity, justice and good conscience. The object is to prevent the course of de novo trial resulting in multiplicity of litigation due to subsequent transactions of immovable property, the subject to dispute; and to protect the right of party to the suit or proceeding likely to. be eroded by subsequent transaction. The. legislature quite wisely produced the provisions, otherwise, in absence of these provisions, a defendant apprehending defect Ina case, could easily defeat his rival plaintiff by transferring the I I ’ property to a second person, and chain, of such transactions during pendency of a suit or proceeding would not be brought to an end. It is, therefore, rightly laid down to control the action of a defendant from alienating property to a third party during pendency of suit or proceeding. The rule is applicable even in preemption cases. A Vendée, after institution of suit for preemption, is, therefore, stopped from transferring or alienating the immovable, property, the subject of dispute, to a third party.” I The question as to whether the subsequent transferees can be regarded as necessary party was also considered by the apex Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir in Muhammad Sharif’s case, referred to and relied upon by the learned Advocates for the appellants. The Lordships observed that a transferee during pendency of the'suit cannot be regarded as a necessary party and decree passed against the transferor can be executed without imp leading such transferee a party to the proceedings. The contention of Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned ft Advocate for the* respondents, that at the time of agreement-to-sell the vendor was not owner of the disputed house, hence, cannot execute the agreement-to-sell, is devoid of any force. The vendor was admittedly occupying the house. The Government decided to transfer the disputed house and similar other houses to their occupants, as is evident from letter dated 18-11-1986. Therefore, it is concluded that the defendant has transferable interest in the house at the time of execution of the agreement-to-sell. Be that as it may admit position is that during pendency of the proceedings defendant acquired proprietary rights of the disputed house on 14-6-2001 and thereafter transferred the same to his cousin r which has further been transferred'to somebody else. Thus, where a title is acquired during pendency of the proceedings the specific performance of contract executed in respect of the said property cannot be avoided nor after the execution of the contract an executant can come with Volta face that he was not competent to enter into a contract. Raja Muhammad GUL v. Muhammad Ashraf and 6 others 2000 YLR 1805 and Manuela’s case 2003 MLD 1142, can be referred in support of the proposition. It had been observed in the above cases that where a vendor who did not have title in the property agrees to sell the property through an agreement-to-sell acquired title in the said property subsequently he would be bound to perform his contractual obligations and cannot avoid the contract on the ground that at the time of execution of an agreement-to-sell he was not in possession of lawful title. * The contention of Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned counsel for the respondents, that the suit is barred by res judicata as well as Order II, rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, is also devoid of any force. Admittedly the suit of the appellants was rejected under rule 11 of Order VII, C.P.C. for want of cause of action. It is also a settled proposition of law that where a plaint is rejected under rule 11 of Order VII, C.P.C. on any ground enumerated under the said rule, a fresh plant on the same cause of action is not barred under rule 13 of Order VII of the C.P.C. which: says that the rejection of the plant on any of the grounds hereinbefore mentioned shall not of its own force preclude the plaintiff from presenting a fresh plaint in respect of the same cause of action. The rejection of the plaint cannot operate res judicata because the same is not.a decision on merits. The next argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that the suit was premature and should have been filed after the grant of proprietary rights either in 2001, in the circumstances of this? case, is also misconceived. It is on the record that the agreement-to-sell was executed on 8-11-1987. The defendant took no steps for obtain the proprietary rights for a pretty long period. Apprehending the frustration of the contract, the appellants herein, filed a suit for perpetual injunction and sought a direction to the defendant/vendor for obtaining Thai proprietary rights. They also seek relief of specific performance of the contract. In view of the conduct of the defendant it cannot be said that the present suit was premature nor the appellants could split the: cause of action. J am also not impressed by the arguments of the learned Advocate for the respondents that the performance of the contract was refused by Ch. Muhammad Adam, predecessor of the appellants. No cogent evidence is on the record in support of the aforesaid assertion of the learned Advocate for the vendor. The authorities referred to and relied upon by the learned Advocate for the respondents have distinguishable facts; therefore, need not be discussed separately. The learned District Judge has also JPEG that suit was time-barred. In my view this conclusion.is also erroneous and against the law. A perusal of the agreement reveals that sale-deed would be executed after obtain proprietary rights from the Government which were admittedly granted to the. vendor on 14-6-2001. At that time the suit for specific performance of the contract was pending. Earlier the suit filed on behalf of the plaintiffs was rejected by the apex Court on the ground that the cause of action, if any, will accrue after grant of the proprietary rights in favor of the defendant. As the defendant was not vigilant in obtaining the proprietary rights, therefore, the plaintiffs rightly filed the suit for perpetual injunction as well as specific performance. By no stretch of imagination it can be said that the suit was time-barred. In Muhammad Hussain’s case PLD 1995. Push. 98 Ina suit for specific performance of the contract, the bar of limitation was raised almost in the similar circumstances. One of the terms of the agreement in that. Case was defendant there would execute the sale-deed in favor of the plaintiffs therein after getting P.T.D. in his favor. The suit was filed within 3 years after issuing the P.T.D. and it was held that the same is within prescribed period of limitation. Now coming to the prayer of the plaintiffs I am of the view that there is no need of passing the decree of perpetual junction because the proprietary rights have already been granted. So far as the relief of specific performance of the contract is concerned, that has been proved by the plaintiffs. However, the defendant, in his Court statement, has mentioned various sales of the houses on a higher price though it cannot be a ground for enhancement of the consideration money that too, considering the conduct of the vendor herein, but the fact remains that the plaintiffs/appellants have not challenged the statement I'm cross-examination which means that they admitted his statement to that extent. Mr. Muhammad Adam Khan, the learned Advocate for the appellants, also halfheartedly admitted the increase in the price of the. property, therefore I am of the view that the interest of justice would be served if the consideration money is enhanced to Rs.30,00,000. order accordingly. This view lends support! from a case titled Muhammad Kiddie v. Muhammad Abram 2000 SCMR 533. In view of above, accepting the appeal, it is directed that 'the appellants will deposit the balance/remaining amount in the Court of District Judge, Mirror, within a period of two months. The defendant TS directed to execute the sale-deed in favor of the plaintiff failing which the learned District Judge, Mirror, shall arrange the execution of the sale-deed in favor of the plaintiffs in accordance with law. If the amount is not deposited within the stipulated period then the suit shall stand dismissed. ' Appeal accepted. H.B.T/9/H.C ( AJ OK)

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): JUDGMENT GHULAM MUSTAFA MUGHAL, J.- Ch. Muhammad Adam k now survived by appellants, herein, brought a suit for - perpetual injunction and specific performance of an agreement-to-sell executed on 8-11-1987, MN respect of house No.-C, Sector C-] Mirror, against _ defendant No.1 (hereinafter shall be referred as vendor) in the Court of District Judge; Mirror on 13-3-1993. The plaint was amended later on 20-9- 2004. After the death of the said plaintiff present appellants have been imp leaded as plaintiffs. It is alleged that House No. FC situated at Sector C/1 Murmur was initially constructed by WAPDA during construction of Manila Dam. The said house was transferred to Government and vendor. Who was a refugee occupied the same with permission of the Government. At a later stage Government decided to allot some other houses, including this,one, to their occupants on payment of Rs. 10,00,000 each as is evident from the letter dated 18-11-1986. After the aforesaid decision, vendor executed an agreement-to-sell for transfer of the said house in favor of Ch. Muhammad Adam, father of the appellants herein on 8-11-1987 for a consideration of Rs. 15,00,000. It was alleged that at the time of execution of agreement Rs. 1,50,000 were received by the vendor as earnest amount. On 29-2-1988, he further received Rs.25,000 and executed another ‘Iqrarnama’ acknowledging receipt of part payment. It was claimed that defendant showed no interest for obtain the proprietary rights from the Government in order to execute the sale-deed as agreed between the parties. On 8-11-1987 whereupon father of the appellants filed a suit for specific performance in the competent Court but plant was rejected for want of cause of action under rule 11 of Order VII, C.P.C. The order was vacated on appeal by this Court but reversed by the apex Court. It was also claimed that the plaintiffs are still prepared to perform their part of the agreement, but it is defendant who has not taken any step for fulfilling his contractual obligations. The plaintiffs also stated that they asked the vendor that if some additional amount is required for obtain the proprietary nights of the house, the same can be provided so that the sale-deed could be got executed, but he did not take demand as serious whereupon the instant suit was filed. w 14. The defendant/vendor firstly filed written statement which was amended later on. He raised several objections regarding the maintainability of the suit. He pleaded that plaintiffs earlier filed a suit for specific performance of above agreement-to-sell on 22-2-1989, which was rejected by the trial Court on 29-11-1992, and the judgment was upheld by the apex Court, thus, the matter stood finally concluded, and present suit is barred by principle of res judicata as well as Order II, rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It was also pleaded that the suit is also time-barred and is not maintainable as at the relevant time answering defendant was not owner of the house, hence, legally cannot execute an agreement.-to-sell.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): principle of res judicata as well as Order II, rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It was also pleaded that the suit is also time-barred and is not maintainable as at the relevant time answering defendant was not owner of the house, hence, legally cannot execute an agreement.-to-sell. It was also claimed that the suit is premature, hence, decree for specific performance cannot be granted and the plaintiffs at the most can file a suit for damages. In parawise reply defendant has admitted the possession of the house, however, he submitted that his sister MST. Medina Begum and brother Afar Ahmed Inhalant are also in possession of the house and claiming title in house due to this dispute proprietary rights could not be obtained. Moreover it was stated that 4- defendant is owner of I/3rd in the disputed house. In para. No.4 of the written statement execution of agreements and receipt of part payment, was admitted, however, it was repeated that agreement was not legal as the defendant was not owner of the land at the relevant time and in case of grant of proprietary rights he would be owner up to I/3rd and to that extent he is ready to execute sale deed. I The learned trial Court framed issues in light of the respective pleadings of the parties. After providing an opportunity of leading evidence the suit was dismissed vide its judgment dated 30-6-2007. Appellants, herein, felt aggrieved from the impugned judgment of the trial Court have filed this first appeal. T Messes Abdul Marked Malik, Muhammad Adam Khan and Ch. Real Adam, the learned Advocates for the appellants made following submissions:- (1) That the agreement-to-sell dated 8-11-1987 was a contingent contract and specific performance whereof was dependent upon the grant of proprietary rights of the house to defendant who acquired the same vide Notification dated 14-6-2001. After obtaining the proprietary rights it was enjoined upon him to fulfil his contractual obligation by executing sale deed in favor of the appellants, but he transferred the house to his cousin MN order to frustrate the agreement. (2) That findings of the learned District Judge on issue No.2 are illegal, erroneous and against the record. The execution of the agreement and conditions stipulated therein were admitted by the vendor and the stand taken by him in the Court statement was against his pleadings, hence, was liable to be ignored, and the learned District Judge was bound to grant the decree for specific performance of the contract. (3) That the learned District Judge also fell in error in holding that the subsequent transferees were necessary party. As the house was transferred during pendency of the suit and in presence of a prohibitory order of the Court, therefore, subsequent transferees. were neither necessary nor proper party for decision of this case. (4) That Section 20 of the Contract Act was not attracted in the present case as both the parties have executed, the contract with open eyes after agree mg

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): of a prohibitory order of the Court, therefore, subsequent transferees. were neither necessary nor proper party for decision of this case. (4) That Section 20 of the Contract Act was not attracted in the present case as both the parties have executed, the contract with open eyes after agree mg to its terms and conditions. Similarly Section 21 or Section 28 of the said Act was also not placing any restriction on the grant of decree for specific performance of the contract. (5) That the impugned judgment badly suffers from misreading and non-reading of the record and conclusion reached at by the learned District Judge TS erroneous. (6) That the learned District Judge has illegally struck down the remaining issues which were necessary for disposal of the appeal. In support of their submissions the learned Advocates placed [dance on the following cases:- °. (1) Shivshankareppa Mahadevappa Parakanhatti v. Shiva Harappa Karate and others AIR 143 BOM. 27, (#1) Gourd Duty Maharaja v. Sukkur Muhammad and others AIR 1948 PC 147, (1) Muhammad Mubeen v. Messes Long Life Builders and others PLD 2006 Keir. 278, (iv) Muhammad Amin v. Muhammad Yunus 1994 SCR 162, (v) Muhammad Sharif v. Muhammad Ilyas and 23 others 2000 MLD 1633, (vi) The Pan Islamic Steamship Co. Ltd. v. Messes General Imports and Exports Ltd. PLD 1959 Keir. 750, (vi) Muhammad Amin v. Muhammad Hammed and 2 others 2001 MLD 525, (vii) AJK Government and others v. Messes Spite Limited 1998 PTD 3200, (ix) Ch. Abdul Karim and 5 others v. Raja Muhammad Isar and others 1999 PLC (C.S.) 624. Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned counsel for the respondents, controverted the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants and made the following submissions:- (1) That agreement has not been proved in accordance with law as not a single marginal witness has been produced by the plaintiffs, therefore, no specific performance of contract can be granted. (2) That at the time of agreement the property was in ownership of the Government and vendor was not in possession of any transferable interest, hence, was not entitled to execute the agreement. Q (3) That the suit is barred by res judicata as well under Order IJ, rule 2 of the C.P.C. because the earlier suit in respect of the same cause of action was dismissed by the trial Court and the judgment was approved by the apex Court, therefore, on the same cause of action, subsequent suit could not be filed. (4). That the suit was premature as even otherwise the same could have been filed after the grant of proprietary rights m favor of the vendor, thus, no decree could be passed in such a suit. (5) That the disputed house has been transferred to different persons. who have not been imp leaded in the line of defendants, therefore, no suit could be decreed in their absence. A P (6) That it has been proved through cogent evidence that the I. predecessor of appellants refused to purchase

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): That the disputed house has been transferred to different persons. who have not been imp leaded in the line of defendants, therefore, no suit could be decreed in their absence. A P (6) That it has been proved through cogent evidence that the I. predecessor of appellants refused to purchase the house, r therefore, no question arises for performance of the agreement. In support of his submissions the learned Advocate placed reliance on the following cases:- '' (1) Fair Muhammad and others v. Abdul Mommy and others. PLD 2003 SC 594, (i) Her Muhammad (deceased) through Legal heirs v. Ghulam Muhammad arid others 2004 CLC 1217, (I'm) Ravi Glass Mills Ltd.v. I.C.I. Pakistan Power gen Ltd. 2004 YLR 2503, (TV) Salem Allah Farid and 8 others v. Ahead Sharif Nazi and 7 others 2003 YLR 1112, (v) Humayun Mira v. Mrs. Shahid A. Rajput and another PLD 2007 LAH. 449, (vi) Sh. Muhammad Shaft and 2 others v; Sheikh All-ud-Dm and others PLD 2005 SC 455, (VM) MST. Amina Bibi v. Macassar Aziz PLD 2003 SC 430, (VM) Ghulam Nazi and others v. Seth Muhammad Aqua and others PLD 1983 SC 344, (ix) MST. Amina (deceased) through Legal Heirs and others v. MST. Pamela Begum and 3 others 2006 YLR 870, (x) Ghulam Muhammad and 20 others, v. MST. Bag Bari and 11 others 1994 SCMR 1610 (xi) Malaya Khan and another v. Muhammad. Razz and others Civil Appeal No.89 of 1998, decided by the Supreme Court on 23-4-1999, I have heard the learned Advocates for the parties and have given my anxious thought to the record of the case and precedents referred to and relied upon by them. The first question which needs resolution TS whether the agreement dated 8-11-1987 was a contingent contract, as has been claimed by the learned Advocates for the appellants? The contingent contract has been defined MN section 31 of the Contract Act, 1872 as follows:. “31. A contingent contract is a contract to do or not to do something, if some event, collateral to such contract does or does not happen.” Illustration appended to the above section clarifies the scope of the contract as under:- * “A” contracts to pay “B” Rs. 10,000 if “B’s” house is burnt. This is a contingent contract. ” v In The Contract Act, 1872 (Edition 1973) Professor Dr. M.A. Manna, while explaining the scope of ‘contingent’ contract says that:- “A contingent, or a conditional promise differs from an absolute promise in This that in the case of contingent contracts the performance of the contract becomes due only on the happening » P of a condition or contingency, so it is not due immediately on the making of the contract. A contingent agreement is not enforcible till the event on which it was to depend has arisen; but when that event has occurred, the contract, for all purposes, rests on the same footing if it had been made positively and without reference to any contingency. If the event

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): the contract. A contingent agreement is not enforcible till the event on which it was to depend has arisen; but when that event has occurred, the contract, for all purposes, rests on the same footing if it had been made positively and without reference to any contingency. If the event do not happen, no contract arises, so no liability can accrue to either party.” ' Again at page 30S, under the heading of “condition precedent and condition subsequent” the learned author says that: ' “. A distinction'is drawn in law between a condition precedent and.a condition subsequent. Where a certain act has to be performed, or a certain event is to happen before the contractual obligation can be fixed, this act or event is a condition precedent. Such is an undertaking in a contract of lease that the lessor shall build a new warehouse and put an old warehouse in repair. So, where a railway company purchases land for the proposed railroad, there may be a condition precedent that the railway shall be made: Where, on the other hand, a valid contract is formed in the first instance, but it is stipulated that the contract shall be annulled if a certain act be not performed or w a certain event do not happen, that is a condition subsequent, the non- fulfillment of which discharges the contract. ” r Now I would like to refer some case law on the subject. In a case titled Mrs. Channel Idea Vat Madden v. Dr. C.L. Katia and others AIR. 1964 SC 978 the plaintiffs therein entered into contract of sale of a house belonging to the defendant on the plot granted by the Government. One of the terms of the contract was that the vendor shall obtain necessary permission of the Government for the sale within 2 months of the agreement and if the needful was not done within the stipulated period a right was given to the vendees to extend the date’ or treat the agreement as cancelled. The vendor applied for permission but later on. request was withdrawn. The vendees filed suit for specific performance of the contract. Similar plea was raised by the defendants/vendors but the same was repelled on the ground that the A contract was not contingent contract and the parties had agreed to bind themselves by the terms of- the document executed between them. Relevant observation of the apex Court of India is recorded in paras. Nos.4 and 5 of the report which are as under: - “(4) The ma'am ground of attack on this appeal is that the contract is not enforceable being of a contingent nature and the contingency not having been fulfilled. In our opinion there is no substance in this contention. So far as the parties to the contract are concerned, they have agreed to bind themselves by the terms of1. the document executed between them. Under that document it was for-the defendant vendor to make the necessary application for the permission to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): opinion there is no substance in this contention. So far as the parties to the contract are concerned, they have agreed to bind themselves by the terms of1. the document executed between them. Under that document it was for-the defendant vendor to make the necessary application for the permission to the. Chief Commissioner. She had as a matter of fact made such an application but for reasons of her’. own decided to withdraw the same. On the findings that the plaintiffs have always been ready and willing to perform their part of the contract and that it was the defendant who willful|T refused to perform her part of the contract, and. that time was not of the essence of the contract, the Court has got to enforce the terms of the contract and to enjoin upon the defendant appellant, to make the necessary application to the Chief Commissioner. It will be for the Chief Commissioner to decide whether to grant the necessary sanction. (5) In this view of the matter, Lehigh Court was entirely correct in decreeing the suit for specific performance of the contract. The High Court should have further directed defendant to make the necessary application for permission to the Chief Commissioner, which was implied in the contract between the parties. As the defendant vendor, without any sufficient reasons, withdrew the application already made to the Chief Commissioner, the decree to be prepared by this Court will add the clause that the defendant, within one month from today shall make the necessary application to the Chief Commissioner or to such other competent authority as may have been empowered TP grant the necessary sanction to transfers like the one in question, and further that within one month of the receipt of that sanction she shall convey to the plaintiffs the property in suit. In the event of the sanction being refused, the plaintiffs shall be entitled to the damages as decreed by the High Court. The appellant sought to raise certain other pleas which had not been raised in the High Court; for example that this was not a fit case m which specific performance of the contract should be enforced by the Court. This plea was not specifically raised in the High Court and the necessary facts were not pleaded in the pleadings. It is manifest V that this Court should not allow such a plea to be raised here for the first time.” ¥ Same view was taken by Dacca High Court in Muhammad Sama Monday’s case PLD 1963 Dacca 816. In that case agreement to execute a deed for sale of the land was executed between the parties and one of the conditions was that deed for sale would be executed after securing permission from the Collector. It was conclude'd by the learned Court that the condition of securing permission from the Collector, is not collateral to the agreement but is a part of the consideration of the contract. Relevant observation is recorded MN para No.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): for sale would be executed after securing permission from the Collector. It was conclude'd by the learned Court that the condition of securing permission from the Collector, is not collateral to the agreement but is a part of the consideration of the contract. Relevant observation is recorded MN para No. 11 which is as under:- “11. As to the first point, the contention of the learned Advocate for appellant is that according to the terms of the agreement, the execution of the document was dependent on the permission from the Collector and that as permission was not obtained, the contract cannot be enforced. Section 31 of the Contract Act which defines contingent contract is as follows:- “A ‘contingent contract’ is a contract to do or not to do something if some event, collateral to such contract, does or does not happen. ” _ 1A contingent contract is not enforcible till the event on which it depends has occurred. But the uncertain event on the happening of which the contract is conditional must be collateral to the contract. This means that it must not form part of the consideration of the contract but must be independent of p it. The illustration to section 31 of the Contract Act is as ' follows:- K “A” contracts to pay “B” Rs. 10,000 if “B’s” house is burnt. This is a contingent contract.”’. -The consideration of the promise to pay Rs. 10,000 is the ' payment by “B”, but the contract to pay Rs. 10,000 will be enforcible only on the happening of an uncertain event, namely B’s house being burnt down, an event which is independent of the consideration, in the present case, the term in the deed of agreement is to the effect that on registration of the document after taking permission, the defendants would take the balance Rs. 1,300 from the plaintiffs and that plaintiffs would pay this amount at that time. So the condition to take permission is not collateral to the contract, but forms part of the consideration of the contract. In the present case, the contract cannot be regarded as a contingent one. ”'Hail’ t' I After perusal of section 31 of the Contract Act, in light of the above precedents, I am of the considered view that the test to,determine whether a contract 1s ‘contingent’ or ‘absolute* is that if there is mere stipulation in the agreement-to-sell that the sale-deed would be executed after obtain mg permission from any public functionary then such a condition is not collateral to the contract and the contract, cannot be construed as a ‘contingent’ contract because the condition was forming the part of the consideration. However, where vendor is not in possession of the absolute title and execution of the sale-deed depends upon the grant of proprietary rights by the Government then such a contract could be declared as ‘conditional’ or ‘contingent’, as has been opined MN the Tribunal Parkas NASCAR v. The Union of India AIR 1970 SC 540. In

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): possession of the absolute title and execution of the sale-deed depends upon the grant of proprietary rights by the Government then such a contract could be declared as ‘conditional’ or ‘contingent’, as has been opined MN the Tribunal Parkas NASCAR v. The Union of India AIR 1970 SC 540. In the case in hand the agreement was executed between the parties on 8-11-1987 and its execution was dependant upon the condition that the vendor will execute the sale-deed after obtain the proprietary rights. Had the proprietary nights would have not been granted to him by the Government for failure to deposit the sale price mentioned MN letter dated 18-11-1986 or for any other reason only in that eventuality it could have been said that the agreement stood frustrated m and its execution has become impossible. As stated above, during the pendency of the suit for specific performance of the contract, vendor/defendant herein acquired proprietary rights vide Notification dated 14-6-2001. Thus, the contract is absolute and has become enforceable. Findings of the learned District Judge that the parties were under some mistake and the contract was liable to be ignored under section 20 of the Contract Act, could not be approved because Section 20 is not attracted in the present case. Section 20 of the said Act comes into play only when both the parties to an agreement are under a mistake as to a matter of fact essential to the agreement only in that case the agreement becomes void. The explanation appended to Section makes it further clear that an erroneous option AS to the value of the thing which forms the subject-matter of the 9agreement is- not to be deemed a mistake as to a matter of fact. In the present case the Government has decided to sell the house to the plaintiff and decision was conveyed to the occupants vide letter dated 18-11-1986. Mere fact that the Government sold the house later on at a higher, price cannot frustrate the agreement. Similarly observation of the learned District Judge that agreement is not specifically enforceable in view of Section 28 of the Contract Act was also erroneous, baseless and has no nexus with the record of the case. The next contention of the learned Advocates for the appellants that execution of the agreement was admitted by vendor, therefore, performance of the same could not be refused has a substance. In para No.4 of the plant the appellants have taken a categoric stand that defendant executed an agreement on 8-11-1987. They also pleaded in the same para that another agreement was executed in the shape of receipt on 29-2-1988. The defendant in his written statement has admitted the execution of these documents, therefore, requirement of further proof of these documents hardly arise. There is no substance in the argument of Mr. Real Tabasco, the learned Advocate for the vendor, that even then appellants were bound to produce at least two marginal witnesses of the agreement. By now it is well

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): these documents, therefore, requirement of further proof of these documents hardly arise. There is no substance in the argument of Mr. Real Tabasco, the learned Advocate for the vendor, that even then appellants were bound to produce at least two marginal witnesses of the agreement. By now it is well settled that an admitted fact needs not to be proved. In his Court statement the vendor though has made some deviation from his earlier stand, but the same is. An afterthought and is a deliberate attempt to get rid of from his contractual obligations. There is force in the contention of the learned Advocates for the appellants that subsequent transferees were not necessary party because the disputed property has been transferred during pendency of the suit and prohibitory order of the Court, is correct. The objection of Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned Advocate for the respondents, that subsequent transferees were necessary party because no decree can be passed without providing them a right of hearing in presence of the settled position of law has no substance. In order to meet the objections an application for amendment has also been made by the appellants during the course of arguments, but I am of the considered view that subsequent transferees are not in any manner necessary party for the purpose of the decision of the appeal or the suit out of which the instant appeal has arisen. Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, prohibits the transfer of the property during pendency of the. proceedings in order to save the parties from multiplicity of the proceedings. Scope of section 52 came under consideration before this Court in a case titled Abdul Karim v. Kala Khan and another PLD 1987 AJ&K 139. Facts of the case were that a suit for preemption was filed by Kala Khan against Abdul Karim. At some stage, the suit was dismissed for nonrprosecution. An application for restoration was filed and during pendency of this application the suit land was transferred. It was concluded that as the transfer has been effected during pendency of the proceedings, therefore, is void. Relevant observation is recorded in para. No.6 which TS as under:. “6. Provisions of section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act constitute a rule resting on the split of principles of equity, justice and good conscience. The object is to prevent the course of de novo trial resulting in multiplicity of litigation due to subsequent transactions of immovable property, the subject to dispute; and to protect the right of party to the suit or proceeding likely to. be eroded by subsequent transaction. The. legislature quite wisely produced the provisions, otherwise, in absence of these provisions, a defendant apprehending defect Ina case, could easily defeat his rival plaintiff by transferring the I I ’ property to a second person, and chain, of such transactions during pendency of a suit or proceeding would not be brought to an end. It is, therefore, rightly laid down to control the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): defendant apprehending defect Ina case, could easily defeat his rival plaintiff by transferring the I I ’ property to a second person, and chain, of such transactions during pendency of a suit or proceeding would not be brought to an end. It is, therefore, rightly laid down to control the action of a defendant from alienating property to a third party during pendency of suit or proceeding. The rule is applicable even in preemption cases. A Vendée, after institution of suit for preemption, is, therefore, stopped from transferring or alienating the immovable, property, the subject of dispute, to a third party.” I The question as to whether the subsequent transferees can be regarded as necessary party was also considered by the apex Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir in Muhammad Sharif’s case, referred to and relied upon by the learned Advocates for the appellants. The Lordships observed that a transferee during pendency of the'suit cannot be regarded as a necessary party and decree passed against the transferor can be executed without imp leading such transferee a party to the proceedings. The contention of Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned ft Advocate for the* respondents, that at the time of agreement-to-sell the vendor was not owner of the disputed house, hence, cannot execute the agreement-to-sell, is devoid of any force. The vendor was admittedly occupying the house. The Government decided to transfer the disputed house and similar other houses to their occupants, as is evident from letter dated 18-11-1986. Therefore, it is concluded that the defendant has transferable interest in the house at the time of execution of the agreement-to-sell. Be that as it may admit position is that during pendency of the proceedings defendant acquired proprietary rights of the disputed house on 14-6-2001 and thereafter transferred the same to his cousin r which has further been transferred'to somebody else. Thus, where a title is acquired during pendency of the proceedings the specific performance of contract executed in respect of the said property cannot be avoided nor after the execution of the contract an executant can come with Volta face that he was not competent to enter into a contract. Raja Muhammad GUL v. Muhammad Ashraf and 6 others 2000 YLR 1805 and Manuela’s case 2003 MLD 1142, can be referred in support of the proposition. It had been observed in the above cases that where a vendor who did not have title in the property agrees to sell the property through an agreement-to-sell acquired title in the said property subsequently he would be bound to perform his contractual obligations and cannot avoid the contract on the ground that at the time of execution of an agreement-to-sell he was not in possession of lawful title. * The contention of Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned counsel for the respondents, that the suit is barred by res judicata as well as Order II, rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, is also devoid of any force. Admittedly the suit of the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): possession of lawful title. * The contention of Mr. Muhammad Real Tabasco, the learned counsel for the respondents, that the suit is barred by res judicata as well as Order II, rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, is also devoid of any force. Admittedly the suit of the appellants was rejected under rule 11 of Order VII, C.P.C. for want of cause of action. It is also a settled proposition of law that where a plaint is rejected under rule 11 of Order VII, C.P.C. on any ground enumerated under the said rule, a fresh plant on the same cause of action is not barred under rule 13 of Order VII of the C.P.C. which: says that the rejection of the plant on any of the grounds hereinbefore mentioned shall not of its own force preclude the plaintiff from presenting a fresh plaint in respect of the same cause of action. The rejection of the plaint cannot operate res judicata because the same is not.a decision on merits. The next argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that the suit was premature and should have been filed after the grant of proprietary rights either in 2001, in the circumstances of this? case, is also misconceived. It is on the record that the agreement-to-sell was executed on 8-11-1987. The defendant took no steps for obtain the proprietary rights for a pretty long period. Apprehending the frustration of the contract, the appellants herein, filed a suit for perpetual injunction and sought a direction to the defendant/vendor for obtaining Thai proprietary rights. They also seek relief of specific performance of the contract. In view of the conduct of the defendant it cannot be said that the present suit was premature nor the appellants could split the: cause of action. J am also not impressed by the arguments of the learned Advocate for the respondents that the performance of the contract was refused by Ch. Muhammad Adam, predecessor of the appellants. No cogent evidence is on the record in support of the aforesaid assertion of the learned Advocate for the vendor. The authorities referred to and relied upon by the learned Advocate for the respondents have distinguishable facts; therefore, need not be discussed separately. The learned District Judge has also JPEG that suit was time-barred. In my view this conclusion.is also erroneous and against the law. A perusal of the agreement reveals that sale-deed would be executed after obtain proprietary rights from the Government which were admittedly granted to the. vendor on 14-6-2001. At that time the suit for specific performance of the contract was pending. Earlier the suit filed on behalf of the plaintiffs was rejected by the apex Court on the ground that the cause of action, if any, will accrue after grant of the proprietary rights in favor of the defendant. As the defendant was not vigilant in obtaining the proprietary rights, therefore, the plaintiffs rightly filed the suit for perpetual injunction as well as specific performance. By

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1340?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1340 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-05-13): on the ground that the cause of action, if any, will accrue after grant of the proprietary rights in favor of the defendant. As the defendant was not vigilant in obtaining the proprietary rights, therefore, the plaintiffs rightly filed the suit for perpetual injunction as well as specific performance. By no stretch of imagination it can be said that the suit was time-barred. In Muhammad Hussain’s case PLD 1995. Push. 98 Ina suit for specific performance of the contract, the bar of limitation was raised almost in the similar circumstances. One of the terms of the agreement in that. Case was defendant there would execute the sale-deed in favor of the plaintiffs therein after getting P.T.D. in his favor. The suit was filed within 3 years after issuing the P.T.D. and it was held that the same is within prescribed period of limitation. Now coming to the prayer of the plaintiffs I am of the view that there is no need of passing the decree of perpetual junction because the proprietary rights have already been granted. So far as the relief of specific performance of the contract is concerned, that has been proved by the plaintiffs. However, the defendant, in his Court statement, has mentioned various sales of the houses on a higher price though it cannot be a ground for enhancement of the consideration money that too, considering the conduct of the vendor herein, but the fact remains that the plaintiffs/appellants have not challenged the statement I'm cross-examination which means that they admitted his statement to that extent. Mr. Muhammad Adam Khan, the learned Advocate for the appellants, also halfheartedly admitted the increase in the price of the. property, therefore I am of the view that the interest of justice would be served if the consideration money is enhanced to Rs.30,00,000. order accordingly. This view lends support! from a case titled Muhammad Kiddie v. Muhammad Abram 2000 SCMR 533. In view of above, accepting the appeal, it is directed that 'the appellants will deposit the balance/remaining amount in the Court of District Judge, Mirror, within a period of two months. The defendant TS directed to execute the sale-deed in favor of the plaintiff failing which the learned District Judge, Mirror, shall arrange the execution of the sale-deed in favor of the plaintiffs in accordance with law. If the amount is not deposited within the stipulated period then the suit shall stand dismissed. ' Appeal accepted. H.B.T/9/H.C ( AJ OK)

Question: What is case 2008 CLC 131 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 131 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K) on 2007-08-06. The case involved MUHAMMAD SHARIF KHAN (APPELLANT) VERSUS MUHAMMAD AZIZ KHAN AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - S. 122 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - 8.42. The case was heard by RAFIULLAH SULTANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 131?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 131, the court applied the following statutes: TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT (IV OF 1882) - S. 122 SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - 8.42. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K) and decided on 2007-08-06.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 131?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 131 were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD EJAZ KHAN FOR APPELLANT. SARDAR MUHAMMAD SULEMAN KHAN FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: RAFIULLAH SULTANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 131?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 131 were: MUHAMMAD SHARIF KHAN (APPELLANT) VERSUS MUHAMMAD AZIZ KHAN AND ANOTHER RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 131.
Answer: RAFIULLAH SULTANI, J.- This appeal was directed against the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Rawalakot, dated 30-6-2004, whereby the judgment and decree of Sub-Judge, Thorax dated 25-9-1998 was partly accepted. Brief facts of the case are that Miramar Khan had four sons w namely Muhammad Enact, Muhammad Ashraf, Muhammad Sharif and Muhammad Aziz. Miramar Khan, vide a registered gift-deed dated 25-3-1984, transferred his total share measuring 33 Canals, bear mg Survey Nos. 1739, 1743, 1018, 710, 1090, 1067, 1010, 1051, 1498, 1000, 4488, 7789, 4489 and 4490, situated at Village Thorax in the name of one of his sons Muhammad Sharif. Feeling aggrieved by the above-mentioned gift-deed, rest of three sons of Miramar Khan namely Muhammad Aziz, Muhammad. Enact Khan and Muhammad Ashraf Khan filed a declaratory suit against their brother and father challenging the gift-deed executed in favor of Muhammad Sharif} dated 25-3-1985 in the Court of Sub-Judge, Thorax. It was alleged in the plant that the gift-deed is against the law and is inoperative against the rights of the plaintiffs to the extent of and gift-deed is not valid due to. nondelivery of possession. It was also alleged that a private arrangement had been made by their father his said land according to equal shares among his sons and all the sons are in enjoyment of their respective shares of the said land and effected improvement on it in shape of construction of house. The said gift-deed is being without possession to the extent of gifted land be repudiated. The record was destroyed on account of fire and suit was reconstructed on 1-11-1990. J The suit was contested, and the parties led their evidence according to their respective claims for and against. After harem the parties, Sub-Judge, Thorax passed the judgment and decree, dated 25-9-1998 against the appellant Muhammad Sharif and struck down the gift-deed dated 25-3-1984. Feeling aggrieved from the judgment and decree of Sub- Judge, Thorax, dated 25-9-1998, appellant filed appeal before Additional District Judge, Rawalakot on 1-11-1998, whereby the appeal was partly accepted and the gift-deed was remained intact according to the possession of the appellant. The appellant has challenged the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Rawalakot before this Court. During pendency of the suit before SubJudge, Thorax, the plaintiffs Muhammad Enact and Muhammad Ashraf both died, and they were substituted by their widows. r The Earned counsel for the. Appellant argued following submissions (1) that respondents’ suit was time-barred and both the Courts below over sought this legal aspect; (2) that the application for reconstruction of record has not been moved by the respondents; (3) that respondents have not proved the plea of non-delivery of possession; (4) that both the Courts have given their judgments without reading the evidence, and it 1s. the case of misreading and non-reading of evidence; (5) that Fatima Jan (widow of Enact Khan) has abandoned the suit to her extent, and she has admitted the night of appellant; (6) that proper issues were not framed according to the pleadings of the parties and the issues which were framed by the trial Court were not adjudicated in legal manner; (7) that the documentary evidence have not been produced by the respondents in support of their submission;'(8) that the suit was not competent in the eye of law. The learned counsel for the appellants placed reliance on the following precedents:- An unreported case titled Muhammad Salique v. Fakir Hussain, decided on 17-11-1997 by the High Court of Azad Kashmrr, PLD 1987 LAH. 654, 2004 YLR 512, 2003. CLC 301.and 2003 MLD 67. On the other side, the learned counsel for the respondents made following submissions:- (1) that the suit is competent in the eye of law; (2) that the suit is not barred by Imitation. Article 91 of Limitation Act shall not apply because the original suit was filed firstly in the trial Court on 19-2-1985; (3) that under section 100, C.P.C. question of fact should not be disturbed as it is held by both the courts below; (4) that the gift-deed is not valid under sections 52, 58 and 63 of Registration Act; that the suit has been withdrawn to the extent of Fatima Jan. In support of his submissions, the learned counsel for the respondents has placed reliance on the following precedents:- 1997 MLD 2867, 2001 CLC 1115 and PLD 2007 LAH. 83. The defendants have produced the witnesses namely Music Khan, Fate Gang and Vardar Muhammad Aziz, Advocate. Muhammad Sharif Khan defendant himself recorded his statement on 18-2-1996. All the witnesses from both the sides have admitted that the plaintiffs and defendants are brothers, and they are in possession of the suit-land from 1951-1952, and they are residing on the suit-land after constructing their houses. Even defendant Muhammad Sharif appellant herein, has stated in cross-examination that all the brothers were in possession of the suit-land in lifetime of their father. It is admitted by the appellant through his statement that the suit had been privately arranged by their father and from that period, all the brothers are residing on the suit-land after constructing their houses. In gift-deed, at the time5 of registration, a note has been endorsed by the Sub-Registrar. I reproduce the wording of said note:- According to section 63 of Registration Act, above cited note carries presumption of truth and this note indicates the intention of the donor that he has alienated except the shares of plaintiffs. I reproduce section 63 subsections (2) and (3) of Registration Act:- Power to administer oaths and record of substance of statements.- (1) Every Registering Officer may at his discretion adm mister an oath to any person examined by him under the provisions of this Act. (2) Every such officer may also at his discretion record a note of the substance of the statement made by each such person, and such. statement shall be read over, or (if made m a language with which such person is not acquainted) interpreted to him in a language with which he is acquainted, and, if he admits the correctness of such note, it shall be signed by the Registration Officer. (3) Every such note so signed shall be admissible for the purpose of proving that the statements therein recorded were made by the persons and the circumstances therein stated. It is also clear from the statement of defendant Muhammad Sharif that he is not in possession of the suit-land and nor he is MN position to narrate the matter that how much land is in his possession. I reproduce portion of his statement, which his on backside of page 53 of the Civil Judge’s file:- I also want to reproduce sections 149 to 150 of Muhammadan i Law:--. Sections 149 and 150 of Dahomeyan Law:- The other important post is that either the suit was competent in the eye of law or not during the Life time of their father? It is admitted on the record that gift-deed, which is disputed, executed on 29-O(sic)-1984 and the suit was filed on 19-3-1985 in the Court of Sub-Judge, Thorax and father of the parties Miramar Khan died in 1989. The suit was filed before Sub-Judge, Thorax after burning of record on 1-11-1990. The objection that plaintiffs could not institute the suit during the lifetime of their father Miramar Khan, this objection has disappeared on his death in 1989 during pendency of the suit. In this view of matter the suit became' perfectly instituted as from the date of 19-3- 1985, and thereafter, the suit already instituted could proceed unhampered without requiring the plaintiff to file a fresh suit for the same relief. This view gets support from case-laws:- AIR 1922 LAH. 295, AIR 1927 BOM. 384 and AIR 1926 Mad. 6. Article 91 shall not apply on this case as already been mentioned above that this suit was filed on 19-3-1985 and the gift-deed was executed in 1984. The suit is not barred by limitation. The objection of the non-reconstruction of record, both the Courts have ignored this objection and impliedly admitted the reconstruction of record. Legally the findings of both the Courts below need no interference. There is no need to discuss points which are involved in this case. For the reasons listed above, the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Rawalakot TS according to law and requires no legal interference. Appeal is dismissed. H.B.T./16/HC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 131?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 131 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-08-06): RAFIULLAH SULTANI, J.- This appeal was directed against the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Rawalakot, dated 30-6-2004, whereby the judgment and decree of Sub-Judge, Thorax dated 25-9-1998 was partly accepted. Brief facts of the case are that Miramar Khan had four sons w namely Muhammad Enact, Muhammad Ashraf, Muhammad Sharif and Muhammad Aziz. Miramar Khan, vide a registered gift-deed dated 25-3-1984, transferred his total share measuring 33 Canals, bear mg Survey Nos. 1739, 1743, 1018, 710, 1090, 1067, 1010, 1051, 1498, 1000, 4488, 7789, 4489 and 4490, situated at Village Thorax in the name of one of his sons Muhammad Sharif. Feeling aggrieved by the above-mentioned gift-deed, rest of three sons of Miramar Khan namely Muhammad Aziz, Muhammad. Enact Khan and Muhammad Ashraf Khan filed a declaratory suit against their brother and father challenging the gift-deed executed in favor of Muhammad Sharif} dated 25-3-1985 in the Court of Sub-Judge, Thorax. It was alleged in the plant that the gift-deed is against the law and is inoperative against the rights of the plaintiffs to the extent of and gift-deed is not valid due to. nondelivery of possession. It was also alleged that a private arrangement had been made by their father his said land according to equal shares among his sons and all the sons are in enjoyment of their respective shares of the said land and effected improvement on it in shape of construction of house. The said gift-deed is being without possession to the extent of gifted land be repudiated. The record was destroyed on account of fire and suit was reconstructed on 1-11-1990. J The suit was contested, and the parties led their evidence according to their respective claims for and against. After harem the parties, Sub-Judge, Thorax passed the judgment and decree, dated 25-9-1998 against the appellant Muhammad Sharif and struck down the gift-deed dated 25-3-1984. Feeling aggrieved from the judgment and decree of Sub- Judge, Thorax, dated 25-9-1998, appellant filed appeal before Additional District Judge, Rawalakot on 1-11-1998, whereby the appeal was partly accepted and the gift-deed was remained intact according to the possession of the appellant. The appellant has challenged the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Rawalakot before this Court. During pendency of the suit before SubJudge, Thorax, the plaintiffs Muhammad Enact and Muhammad Ashraf both died, and they were substituted by their widows. r The Earned counsel for the. Appellant argued following submissions (1) that respondents’ suit was time-barred and both the Courts below over sought this legal aspect; (2) that the application for reconstruction of record has not been moved by the respondents; (3) that respondents have not proved the plea of non-delivery of possession; (4) that both the Courts have given their judgments without reading the evidence, and it 1s. the case of misreading and non-reading of evidence; (5) that Fatima Jan (widow of Enact Khan) has abandoned the suit to her extent, and she has admitted the night of appellant; (6) that proper issues were not framed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 131?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 131 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-08-06): Courts have given their judgments without reading the evidence, and it 1s. the case of misreading and non-reading of evidence; (5) that Fatima Jan (widow of Enact Khan) has abandoned the suit to her extent, and she has admitted the night of appellant; (6) that proper issues were not framed according to the pleadings of the parties and the issues which were framed by the trial Court were not adjudicated in legal manner; (7) that the documentary evidence have not been produced by the respondents in support of their submission;'(8) that the suit was not competent in the eye of law. The learned counsel for the appellants placed reliance on the following precedents:- An unreported case titled Muhammad Salique v. Fakir Hussain, decided on 17-11-1997 by the High Court of Azad Kashmrr, PLD 1987 LAH. 654, 2004 YLR 512, 2003. CLC 301.and 2003 MLD 67. On the other side, the learned counsel for the respondents made following submissions:- (1) that the suit is competent in the eye of law; (2) that the suit is not barred by Imitation. Article 91 of Limitation Act shall not apply because the original suit was filed firstly in the trial Court on 19-2-1985; (3) that under section 100, C.P.C. question of fact should not be disturbed as it is held by both the courts below; (4) that the gift-deed is not valid under sections 52, 58 and 63 of Registration Act; that the suit has been withdrawn to the extent of Fatima Jan. In support of his submissions, the learned counsel for the respondents has placed reliance on the following precedents:- 1997 MLD 2867, 2001 CLC 1115 and PLD 2007 LAH. 83. The defendants have produced the witnesses namely Music Khan, Fate Gang and Vardar Muhammad Aziz, Advocate. Muhammad Sharif Khan defendant himself recorded his statement on 18-2-1996. All the witnesses from both the sides have admitted that the plaintiffs and defendants are brothers, and they are in possession of the suit-land from 1951-1952, and they are residing on the suit-land after constructing their houses. Even defendant Muhammad Sharif appellant herein, has stated in cross-examination that all the brothers were in possession of the suit-land in lifetime of their father. It is admitted by the appellant through his statement that the suit had been privately arranged by their father and from that period, all the brothers are residing on the suit-land after constructing their houses. In gift-deed, at the time5 of registration, a note has been endorsed by the Sub-Registrar. I reproduce the wording of said note:- According to section 63 of Registration Act, above cited note carries presumption of truth and this note indicates the intention of the donor that he has alienated except the shares of plaintiffs. I reproduce section 63 subsections (2) and (3) of Registration Act:- Power to administer oaths and record of substance of statements.- (1) Every Registering Officer may at his discretion adm mister an oath to any person examined by him under the provisions of this Act.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 131?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 131 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-08-06): except the shares of plaintiffs. I reproduce section 63 subsections (2) and (3) of Registration Act:- Power to administer oaths and record of substance of statements.- (1) Every Registering Officer may at his discretion adm mister an oath to any person examined by him under the provisions of this Act. (2) Every such officer may also at his discretion record a note of the substance of the statement made by each such person, and such. statement shall be read over, or (if made m a language with which such person is not acquainted) interpreted to him in a language with which he is acquainted, and, if he admits the correctness of such note, it shall be signed by the Registration Officer. (3) Every such note so signed shall be admissible for the purpose of proving that the statements therein recorded were made by the persons and the circumstances therein stated. It is also clear from the statement of defendant Muhammad Sharif that he is not in possession of the suit-land and nor he is MN position to narrate the matter that how much land is in his possession. I reproduce portion of his statement, which his on backside of page 53 of the Civil Judge’s file:- I also want to reproduce sections 149 to 150 of Muhammadan i Law:--. Sections 149 and 150 of Dahomeyan Law:- The other important post is that either the suit was competent in the eye of law or not during the Life time of their father? It is admitted on the record that gift-deed, which is disputed, executed on 29-O(sic)-1984 and the suit was filed on 19-3-1985 in the Court of Sub-Judge, Thorax and father of the parties Miramar Khan died in 1989. The suit was filed before Sub-Judge, Thorax after burning of record on 1-11-1990. The objection that plaintiffs could not institute the suit during the lifetime of their father Miramar Khan, this objection has disappeared on his death in 1989 during pendency of the suit. In this view of matter the suit became' perfectly instituted as from the date of 19-3- 1985, and thereafter, the suit already instituted could proceed unhampered without requiring the plaintiff to file a fresh suit for the same relief. This view gets support from case-laws:- AIR 1922 LAH. 295, AIR 1927 BOM. 384 and AIR 1926 Mad. 6. Article 91 shall not apply on this case as already been mentioned above that this suit was filed on 19-3-1985 and the gift-deed was executed in 1984. The suit is not barred by limitation. The objection of the non-reconstruction of record, both the Courts have ignored this objection and impliedly admitted the reconstruction of record. Legally the findings of both the Courts below need no interference. There is no need to discuss points which are involved in this case. For the reasons listed above, the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Rawalakot TS according to law and requires no legal interference. Appeal is dismissed. H.B.T./16/HC(AJ&K) Appeal dismissed.

Question: What is case 2008 CLC 412 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 412 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K on 2008-01-18. The case involved ZULQARNAIN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAJ&K MUZAFFARABAD AND 73 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 14 SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF, LIMITATION ACT, 1908 - S. 14 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43-A LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 14. The case was heard by RAFIULLAH SULTANI AND MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 412, the court applied the following statutes: LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 14 SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF, LIMITATION ACT, 1908 - S. 14 PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43-A LIMITATION ACT (IX OF 1908) - S. 14. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K and decided on 2008-01-18.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 412 were: HAJI MUHAMMAD AFZAL FOR PETITIONERS. CH. MUHAMMAD TAJ FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: RAFIULLAH SULTANI AND MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 412 were: ZULQARNAIN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTYAJ&K MUZAFFARABAD AND 73 OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 412.
Answer: . JUDGMENT MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR, J.- The above captioned revision petition is filed under section 43(A) of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee. Property) Act, 1957 against the judgments of learned Custodian dated 9-5-2000 and 18-10-2001 passed in its appellate and review jurisdiction. ] 2. Along with the revision petition, a separate application under t section 14 of the Limitation Act for exclusion of time spent in the High Court and Supreme Court was moved by the petitioners herein. V H 3. Brief facts of the case are that land measuring 64 Canals comprising Survey Nos.201, 325, 360, 373, 165, 349, 371, 407, 372 and 54 situated in Village Nagpur, Thesis Chamber, District Mirror (now Thesis Barnsley District Chamber) was allotted in the name of Abdul Aziz son of Shalwar (deceased), the husband of petitioner No.4 and father of others petitioners. The respondents herein filed different suits on 1-4- 1980 before the Deputy Custodian, Chamber for redemption of land in dispute. The petitioners defendants resisted the suits by filing their written statement. After trial of the suits, the Deputy Custodian decreed all the suits side judgment, dated 30-10-1991. An appeal, was preferred by the petitioners before the Custodian. The *r learned Custodian upheld. The judgment recorded by the Deputy Custodian vide its judgment dated 9-5-2000. Feeling aggrieved from the above-mentioned judgment, the present petitioners filed a review petition before the Custodian. The learned Custodian dismissed the same vide his judgment dated 18-11-2001. The petitioners challenged the said order. through a writ petition on 26-4-2002 and the same. was dismissed vide order dated 25- 10-2000 by this Court in view of decision of the apex Court rendered in Appeal No.54 of 2004. The other petition titled 1. ‘ Muhammad Real and others v. Pervier Mehdi and others: was contested by the petitioners and. pro forma respondents, which was r ultimately disallowed on the ground that an alternate* efficacious remedy was available to the. petitioners in the shape of section 43-A of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. Beng dissatisfied with the above-mentioned judgment of the High Court, the petitioners filed an appeal before the apex Court. The Honorable Supreme Court dismissed ® the appeal vide its judgment dated 6-5-2005. This judgment was also assailed in a review petition, but the apex Court dismissed the same in line on 25-11-2005. - 4, After completion of first round of litigation, the petitioners herein filed a* revision under section 43-A of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 before this Court. Both the learned counsel for the parties are in agreement that the application under section 14 of Limitation Act may be taken first. In view of the agreement of the learned Advocates, arguments have been heard on this application. 5. Heidi Muhammad Axial, the learned counsel representing the petitioners vehemently argued that the petitioners invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of High Court bona-fide and prosecuted that same in a good faith. The petitioners are, therefore, entitled to seek the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act. The learned counsel further contended that the period spent in the aforesaid cause may kindly be condoned and the revision petition under section 43-A may also be treated to have been filed within limitation. The learned counsel maintained that the petitioners fulfilled the required conditions for exclusion of the time spent in a wrong forum as is visualized by section }4 of Limitation Act. The learned counsel further maintained that the case of the petitioner is also covered’ by section 5 of Limitation Act, because no. limitation runs against a void order. According to the learned counsel, the exclusion of full period in the instant case is requirement of the justice. 6. Ch. Muhammad TAJ, the learned counsel for the respondents controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for. petitioners. The learned counsel argued that no sufficient cause has been N shown by the petitioners. The learned counsel contended that the w petitioner call in question the validity of judgment of learned Custodian in a writ petition before this Court, but subsequently, this wrt was dismissed on the request of petitioners. The learned counsel maintained that in Writ Petition No.2'9 of 2002, the High Court given a direction, that the petitioners may seek the remedy by invoking the revisional jurisdiction under section 43-A of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel maintained that in the presence of clear-cut direction, the petitioners did not avail the proper remedy, but with the connivance of pro forma respondents filed an appeal before the Apex. Court. The learned counsel also submitted that after the dismissal of appeal and thereafter review petition, the petitioners were not legally entitled to file the instant revision petition. According to the learned counsel, the petitioners do not deserve any leniency due to their own conduct. The learned counsel further argued that section 14 of Limitation Act does not apply in the case in hand. This section is confined to only suits, not to appeals or revisions. The learned counsel placed reliance on a case titled Mascot Ahmed and others v. United Bank Limited and others 1992 SCR 98 and Abdul Gianni v. Ghulam Salwar -PLD 1997(?) SC 102. The learned counsel for respondents further controverted that the revision petition was filed beyond the period of limitation and is hopelessly time-barred. Therefore, he prayed that by rejecting the application under section 14 the revision petition may also be dismissed. 17. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record made available with care and also perused the case- m law cited at bar. It is settled principle of law, that the benefit of section 14 would be available to a party who has diligently and with good faith prosecuted his case in a wrong forum. In other words, the benefit of section 14 can only be extended, if the'following conditions are fulfilled:- “(a) That the plaintiffs been prosecuting another civil proceedings against the defendant; ’ _ (b) that he has been prosecuting it with due diligence; (c) that this proceeding is founded upon the same cause of action; (d) that it is prosecuted in good faith; and that, it does not bear fruit because that Court is unable to entertain it due to the defect of jurisdiction or other, cause of alike nature. (f) that both the proceedings are in a Court." 1 8. In the. Present case, the circumstances are altogether different. Admittedly the order of learned Custodian was challenged in a writ petition before this Court. The writ petition was dismissed by this Court vide order, dated 25-10-2005 on the request of the petitioners, in the light of decision of apex Court NBA Civil Appeal No.54 of 2004 decided on 6-5-2005. After dismissal of writ petition, the petitioners herein filed a revision petition before this Court on 22- 2-2006. Whereas revision petition under section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act can be filed within three months of such declaration given by the Custodian. 9. It would be useful to reproduce section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 as under:- '"43-A. Revision by High Court.- If in any case in which a Custodian has, on or after the first day of January, 1953, declared any evacuee or any EVACUEE property to be a nonevacuee or, as the case may be, non-evacuee property, the Central Government or the Government of West Pakistan considers it necessary so to do, it may, notwithstanding anything in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force send, within STX months of the commencement of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee property) (Amendment) Act, 1958, or within three months of such declaration, whichever be later, the record of the case to the High Court for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or proprietary of the order passed by the Custodian, and the High Court may pass such order in the case as it may deem fit”. Careful perusal of the provision shows that when the custodian declared any evacuee property to be non-evacuee then only remedy is available to a party to file a revision petition before this Court within » prescribed limit, but needful was not done by the petitioners. It is to be noted that no plausible explanation has been shown I'm the revision petition as well as in the application under section 14 of Limitation Act, that why the petitioners have filed the instant revision petition at such a belated stage. No reasonable grounds have been given by the petitioner for exclusion of time in the application. Especially when this Court has observed its judgment, dated 22-1-2004 that in a case in which the Custodian has declared any property to be non-evacuee, the remedy in shape of revision under section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act was available to the petitioners, it was essential for the petitioners to file revision petition before this Court under the relevant provision of law immediately but needful was not done by them. 10. We agree with the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that section 14 of Limitation Act deals with the time spent in suits not in appeals in wrong forum. 11. On the. Proposition in hand, the Apex Court has already observed in Mascot Ahmed's case 1992 SCR 98, as under:- "We may however observe that this section has nothing to do with appeals and its application is confined to suits. In this provision of law TT is laid down that in computing the period of m limitation prescribed for a suit, the time spent by the plaintiff in prosecuting, with due diligence, another civil proceeding shall be excluded." 12. In Abdul Gianni's case reported as PLD 1997 SC 102, the Supreme Court of Pakistan has held that:-- "prosecuted in good faith" therefore, in order to make out sufficient cause under section 5 an appellant must prove that he had acted in good faith in presenting his appeal in the wrong f Court. Good faith has been defined in clause (7) of section 2 of - the Limitation Act as: “good faith’, nothing shall be deemed to be done in good faith which is not done with due care and attention:" y k 13. From the perusal of the record and after consider mg the case-law, referred to hereinabove, we are of the view that in the N circumstances of the case, benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act M cannot be extended to the petitioners. The principle of coral- non-judicial is not applicable in the petitioner’s case. Same proposition has already been resolved by the apex Court in a Civil Appeal No.54 of 2004 decided on 6-5-2005. The apex Court has observed at page 14 of the "# judgment as under:---. "The myth of coral-non-judice is not acceptable in the case in hand because Custodian had the power to make any declaration under section 22, whether declaration is with authority or, without authority in view of section 3-A does not make the order crampon- juice."’ 11 11f£*, * 14. As the next contention of the learned Advocate that petitioner's case is covered by section 5 is also devoid of any force, because.’ period of Imitation for film the revision petition is provided by the special law and section 5 of the Limitation Act is not made applicable to the proceedings before the Custodian. This view finds support from a judgment, reported as PLD 1970Xah. 6.'j’T* krJi15. Even otherwise, no sufficient cause or reasons have been shown by the petitioners in their revision petition or in the application under section 14 of Limitation Act. 16. A contemplate perusal of the record shows that a gross negligence was committed by the petitioners themselves, by not availing proper remedy within reasonable time. It is not a.case of,good faith rather is of gross negligence. - 4–1*7 The- upshot of the above discussion is that finding no force in any application, it is hereby, rejected, consequently, the revision petition is declared time-barred and is hereby dismissed. Vs?

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): . JUDGMENT MUHAMMAD YOUNAS TAHIR, J.- The above captioned revision petition is filed under section 43(A) of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee. Property) Act, 1957 against the judgments of learned Custodian dated 9-5-2000 and 18-10-2001 passed in its appellate and review jurisdiction. ] 2. Along with the revision petition, a separate application under t section 14 of the Limitation Act for exclusion of time spent in the High Court and Supreme Court was moved by the petitioners herein. V H 3. Brief facts of the case are that land measuring 64 Canals comprising Survey Nos.201, 325, 360, 373, 165, 349, 371, 407, 372 and 54 situated in Village Nagpur, Thesis Chamber, District Mirror (now Thesis Barnsley District Chamber) was allotted in the name of Abdul Aziz son of Shalwar (deceased), the husband of petitioner No.4 and father of others petitioners. The respondents herein filed different suits on 1-4- 1980 before the Deputy Custodian, Chamber for redemption of land in dispute. The petitioners defendants resisted the suits by filing their written statement. After trial of the suits, the Deputy Custodian decreed all the suits side judgment, dated 30-10-1991. An appeal, was preferred by the petitioners before the Custodian. The *r learned Custodian upheld. The judgment recorded by the Deputy Custodian vide its judgment dated 9-5-2000. Feeling aggrieved from the above-mentioned judgment, the present petitioners filed a review petition before the Custodian. The learned Custodian dismissed the same vide his judgment dated 18-11-2001. The petitioners challenged the said order. through a writ petition on 26-4-2002 and the same. was dismissed vide order dated 25- 10-2000 by this Court in view of decision of the apex Court rendered in Appeal No.54 of 2004. The other petition titled 1. ‘ Muhammad Real and others v. Pervier Mehdi and others: was contested by the petitioners and. pro forma respondents, which was r ultimately disallowed on the ground that an alternate* efficacious remedy was available to the. petitioners in the shape of section 43-A of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. Beng dissatisfied with the above-mentioned judgment of the High Court, the petitioners filed an appeal before the apex Court. The Honorable Supreme Court dismissed ® the appeal vide its judgment dated 6-5-2005. This judgment was also assailed in a review petition, but the apex Court dismissed the same in line on 25-11-2005. - 4, After completion of first round of litigation, the petitioners herein filed a* revision under section 43-A of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957 before this Court. Both the learned counsel for the parties are in agreement that the application under section 14 of Limitation Act may be taken first. In view of the agreement of the learned Advocates, arguments have been heard on this application. 5. Heidi Muhammad Axial, the learned counsel representing the petitioners vehemently argued that the petitioners invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of High Court bona-fide and prosecuted that same in a good faith. The petitioners are, therefore, entitled to seek the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): on this application. 5. Heidi Muhammad Axial, the learned counsel representing the petitioners vehemently argued that the petitioners invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of High Court bona-fide and prosecuted that same in a good faith. The petitioners are, therefore, entitled to seek the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act. The learned counsel further contended that the period spent in the aforesaid cause may kindly be condoned and the revision petition under section 43-A may also be treated to have been filed within limitation. The learned counsel maintained that the petitioners fulfilled the required conditions for exclusion of the time spent in a wrong forum as is visualized by section }4 of Limitation Act. The learned counsel further maintained that the case of the petitioner is also covered’ by section 5 of Limitation Act, because no. limitation runs against a void order. According to the learned counsel, the exclusion of full period in the instant case is requirement of the justice. 6. Ch. Muhammad TAJ, the learned counsel for the respondents controverted the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for. petitioners. The learned counsel argued that no sufficient cause has been N shown by the petitioners. The learned counsel contended that the w petitioner call in question the validity of judgment of learned Custodian in a writ petition before this Court, but subsequently, this wrt was dismissed on the request of petitioners. The learned counsel maintained that in Writ Petition No.2'9 of 2002, the High Court given a direction, that the petitioners may seek the remedy by invoking the revisional jurisdiction under section 43-A of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. The learned counsel maintained that in the presence of clear-cut direction, the petitioners did not avail the proper remedy, but with the connivance of pro forma respondents filed an appeal before the Apex. Court. The learned counsel also submitted that after the dismissal of appeal and thereafter review petition, the petitioners were not legally entitled to file the instant revision petition. According to the learned counsel, the petitioners do not deserve any leniency due to their own conduct. The learned counsel further argued that section 14 of Limitation Act does not apply in the case in hand. This section is confined to only suits, not to appeals or revisions. The learned counsel placed reliance on a case titled Mascot Ahmed and others v. United Bank Limited and others 1992 SCR 98 and Abdul Gianni v. Ghulam Salwar -PLD 1997(?) SC 102. The learned counsel for respondents further controverted that the revision petition was filed beyond the period of limitation and is hopelessly time-barred. Therefore, he prayed that by rejecting the application under section 14 the revision petition may also be dismissed. 17. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record made available with care and also perused the case- m law cited at bar. It is settled principle of law, that the benefit of section 14 would be available to a party who has

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): dismissed. 17. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record made available with care and also perused the case- m law cited at bar. It is settled principle of law, that the benefit of section 14 would be available to a party who has diligently and with good faith prosecuted his case in a wrong forum. In other words, the benefit of section 14 can only be extended, if the'following conditions are fulfilled:- “(a) That the plaintiffs been prosecuting another civil proceedings against the defendant; ’ _ (b) that he has been prosecuting it with due diligence; (c) that this proceeding is founded upon the same cause of action; (d) that it is prosecuted in good faith; and that, it does not bear fruit because that Court is unable to entertain it due to the defect of jurisdiction or other, cause of alike nature. (f) that both the proceedings are in a Court." 1 8. In the. Present case, the circumstances are altogether different. Admittedly the order of learned Custodian was challenged in a writ petition before this Court. The writ petition was dismissed by this Court vide order, dated 25-10-2005 on the request of the petitioners, in the light of decision of apex Court NBA Civil Appeal No.54 of 2004 decided on 6-5-2005. After dismissal of writ petition, the petitioners herein filed a revision petition before this Court on 22- 2-2006. Whereas revision petition under section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act can be filed within three months of such declaration given by the Custodian. 9. It would be useful to reproduce section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 as under:- '"43-A. Revision by High Court.- If in any case in which a Custodian has, on or after the first day of January, 1953, declared any evacuee or any EVACUEE property to be a nonevacuee or, as the case may be, non-evacuee property, the Central Government or the Government of West Pakistan considers it necessary so to do, it may, notwithstanding anything in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force send, within STX months of the commencement of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee property) (Amendment) Act, 1958, or within three months of such declaration, whichever be later, the record of the case to the High Court for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or proprietary of the order passed by the Custodian, and the High Court may pass such order in the case as it may deem fit”. Careful perusal of the provision shows that when the custodian declared any evacuee property to be non-evacuee then only remedy is available to a party to file a revision petition before this Court within » prescribed limit, but needful was not done by the petitioners. It is to be noted that no plausible explanation has been shown I'm the revision petition as well as in the application under section 14 of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): available to a party to file a revision petition before this Court within » prescribed limit, but needful was not done by the petitioners. It is to be noted that no plausible explanation has been shown I'm the revision petition as well as in the application under section 14 of Limitation Act, that why the petitioners have filed the instant revision petition at such a belated stage. No reasonable grounds have been given by the petitioner for exclusion of time in the application. Especially when this Court has observed its judgment, dated 22-1-2004 that in a case in which the Custodian has declared any property to be non-evacuee, the remedy in shape of revision under section 43-A of Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act was available to the petitioners, it was essential for the petitioners to file revision petition before this Court under the relevant provision of law immediately but needful was not done by them. 10. We agree with the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that section 14 of Limitation Act deals with the time spent in suits not in appeals in wrong forum. 11. On the. Proposition in hand, the Apex Court has already observed in Mascot Ahmed's case 1992 SCR 98, as under:- "We may however observe that this section has nothing to do with appeals and its application is confined to suits. In this provision of law TT is laid down that in computing the period of m limitation prescribed for a suit, the time spent by the plaintiff in prosecuting, with due diligence, another civil proceeding shall be excluded." 12. In Abdul Gianni's case reported as PLD 1997 SC 102, the Supreme Court of Pakistan has held that:-- "prosecuted in good faith" therefore, in order to make out sufficient cause under section 5 an appellant must prove that he had acted in good faith in presenting his appeal in the wrong f Court. Good faith has been defined in clause (7) of section 2 of - the Limitation Act as: “good faith’, nothing shall be deemed to be done in good faith which is not done with due care and attention:" y k 13. From the perusal of the record and after consider mg the case-law, referred to hereinabove, we are of the view that in the N circumstances of the case, benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act M cannot be extended to the petitioners. The principle of coral- non-judicial is not applicable in the petitioner’s case. Same proposition has already been resolved by the apex Court in a Civil Appeal No.54 of 2004 decided on 6-5-2005. The apex Court has observed at page 14 of the "# judgment as under:---. "The myth of coral-non-judice is not acceptable in the case in hand because Custodian had the power to make any declaration under section 22, whether declaration is with authority or, without authority in view of section 3-A does not make the order crampon- juice."’ 11 11f£*, * 14.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 412?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 412 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K, 2008-01-18): as under:---. "The myth of coral-non-judice is not acceptable in the case in hand because Custodian had the power to make any declaration under section 22, whether declaration is with authority or, without authority in view of section 3-A does not make the order crampon- juice."’ 11 11f£*, * 14. As the next contention of the learned Advocate that petitioner's case is covered by section 5 is also devoid of any force, because.’ period of Imitation for film the revision petition is provided by the special law and section 5 of the Limitation Act is not made applicable to the proceedings before the Custodian. This view finds support from a judgment, reported as PLD 1970Xah. 6.'j’T* krJi15. Even otherwise, no sufficient cause or reasons have been shown by the petitioners in their revision petition or in the application under section 14 of Limitation Act. 16. A contemplate perusal of the record shows that a gross negligence was committed by the petitioners themselves, by not availing proper remedy within reasonable time. It is not a.case of,good faith rather is of gross negligence. - 4–1*7 The- upshot of the above discussion is that finding no force in any application, it is hereby, rejected, consequently, the revision petition is declared time-barred and is hereby dismissed. Vs?

Question: What is case 2008 CLC 366 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 366 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K) on 2007-12-14. The case involved ABDULLAH. KHAN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS «CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY (AJ&K) AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 18-A, 18-B AND 43(6) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) 'ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(6) INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(6). The case was heard by SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, CJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 366, the court applied the following statutes: PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - SS. 18-A, 18-B AND 43(6) PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) 'ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(6) INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES PAKISTAN (ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY) ACT (XII OF 1957) - S. 43(6). This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K) and decided on 2007-12-14.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 366 were: SARDAR ABDUL HAMEED KHAN FOR PETITIONERS. M*|SYED HABIB HUSSAIN SHAH AND SARDAR M. A. KHALIQ FOR RESPONDENTS. «*.. The judges presiding were: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, CJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 366 were: ABDULLAH. KHAN AND OTHERS (PETITIONERS) VERSUS «CUSTODIAN EVACUEE PROPERTY (AJ&K) AND OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K).

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 366.
Answer: SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.- These 2 constitutional petitions' certiorari in nature call in question the validity of order of the learned Custodian. dated 23–9*-1993 passed on two review petitions filed against respondents Hassan Din and Tali Hussain. A few other orders passed earlier by the Custodian and Rehabilitation Authorities are also under challenge therefore, the petitions shall stand decided through the proposed judgment. The petitions were brought by one Abdullah Khan who died during pendency of these petitions and his successors-in-interest have been arrayed as petitioners through the order of this Court, dated 14-10-1999. The facts of both the petitions are almost the same and are stated as below. j- 2. The parties are contesting over allotment of evacuee property out of Survey No. total measuring 186 Canals, 6 Marla's situated at Monza Villain Marshal Thesis Walk.OT. Out of the said survey number, 36 Canals were allotted to one Lai Din in the capacity of refugee. Similarly, 44 Canals and 18 Marla's were allotted to Muhammad Din father of Tali Hussain respondent as refugee. Hassan Din respondent being refugee was also allotted 35 Canals out of the said survey number. The total allotment prior to allotment in favor of predecessors-in-interest of the petitioners harm comes to 115 Canals, 18 Marla's, therefore, the acreage left behind as without allotment to any person comes to 70 Canals, 6 Marla's. The predecessors-in-interest of the petitioner Abdullah Khan by name was allotted 28 Canals, Marla out of allotted acreage. After the allotment in favor of Abdullah Khan deceased, the acreage which renamed allotted come to 42 Canals, 5 Marla's. Tali Hussain respondent who is son of Muhammad Dm got this remaining land allotted in his favor as a head of family in the capacity of refugee. Thus, in this way the entire Survey No. measuring 186 Canals, 6 Marla's stood allotted in the name of aforesaid persons. ' The petitioners are contesting in the capacity of local destitute whereas the respondents and all other persons in whose favor the evacuee land has been allotted are admittedly refugees. 3. The controversy arose when respondent Hassan Din challenged the validity of allotment in favor of Tali Hussain and Abdullah. The learned D.R.C. by accepting the appeal cancelled the allotment in favor of Tali Hussain and Abdullah and remanded the case to A.R.C. to look into the matter and allot the evacuee land in question to any deserving person. Both the respondents 1.e. Tali Hussain and Abdullah feeling aggrieved by the order of D.R.C. went in appeal before Rehabilitation Commissioner and challenged the legality of order passed by.D.R.C. Pooch. The learned Rehabilitation Commissioner accepted the appeal Abdullah deceased and restored his allotment however, the DT-“appeal by Tali Hussain was disallowed and the order of D.R.C. was upheld. I will take this opportunity to note here that while, the appeal by Tali Hussain was pending before Rehabilitation Commissioner, the respondent Hassan Din surrendered his claim for allotment in favor of Tali Hussain and requested the Commissioner to restore the allotment m favor of Talk Hussain. The learned Rehabilitation Commissioner did not accept the surrender by the respondent Hassan Dm and observed that Tali Hussain being son of Muhammad Din refugee was included in the family of Muhammad Din at the time of migration therefore, the allotment in his favor as a separate family was illegal and could not be, allowed to sustain consequently, the order of D.R.C. was upheld by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. The Rehabilitation Commissioner while deciding this controversy also observed that as Hassan Din respondent had surrendered his claim, ‘therefore, he was also not entitled to allotment of the land which stood illegally allotted to Tali Hussain. The decision of Rehabilitation Commissioner, dated 26-5-1983 is reproduced as under: - 1 IWM Ifc£25.10.1980.wW/f4LIVIyU JIX, /22.04.1979>>.Wis 'T”’. Ji 125.10.10i LV It FHE JJ/* 162 /ef1>AU LEA Ugh t 5.1. t/if i {/. © thy't IX Hi 1} JJ,Di/m JJ e>A t/1?* t-"V UX CIV. - - '<£-(elf 4. It will not be out of place to mention here that Tali Hussain and Abdullah challenged the order of the D.R.C. Pooch, dated 25-10-1980 through,two different revision petitions. The order by the Rehabilitation Commissioner on the petition by Tali Hussain has already been reproduced whereas the order by Rehabilitation Commissioner on the petition of Abdullah, dated 31-3- 1983 is as under: - JASI*> f» It>CGR - *21.12.1978* v/LY \-4Lj2;£. ill in ft. Fe JJ/typify Jer*India/LA_ JV/ /114*- \ID* m If \fl*2S.10.1980 5. The above reproduced orders would show that the allotment in favor of Tali Hussain was cancelled, the claim by Hassan Din was disallowed and the allotment MN favor of Abdullah was restored. Mr. Hassan Din respondent, after the above referred order by Rehabilitation Commissioner, approached A.R.C. Pooch and got 28 Canals of evacuee land out of the Survey No. allotted in his favor on 7-11-1984. 6. Tali Hussain respondent challenged the order of learned Rehabilitation Commissioner with regard to dismissal of his revision petition before the learned Custodian. The respondent Hassan Dm at one hand secured the allotment of 28 Canals out of the land claimed by Tab Hussain respondent and on the other hand, he surrendered his claim in his favor during pendency of the revision petition before learned Custodian on a subsequent date 1e. 9-10-1984. The order of learned Custodian, dated 9-10-1984 is reproduced as under:- “The petition is addressed against the order of learned Rehabilitation, Commissioner, dated 26-5-1983 whereby prayer for allotment of the land in dispute measuring 42 Canals, 5 Marla's out of Survey No. situate in Village Gillan, Thesis Rawalakot, was refused. v The clam of the petitioner is that at the time of migration, he was major as his date of birth was 19-6-1941. He was sole supporter of 13 defendants including 12 children and one wife as such, the petitioner is head of an independent family. The petitioner moved for allotment of the land in dispute. Hassan Din his opponent surrendered his claim to allotment in favor of. petitioner. There is no other contender for allotment of land in dispute. » The aforesaid claim of the petitioner finds support from the record. ’It is, therefore, ordered that petition is allowed accordingly. ”" 7, Hassan Din respondent also through a revision petition challenged the validity of order of Rehabilitation Commissioner, dated 31-3-1984 before the learned Custodian who on 23-4-1985 passed the following order:-- “The petition is preferred against the ostler' of the learned Rehabilitation Commissioner, passed on 31st March, 1984.' The dispute pertains to evacuee land measuring 28 Canals, Marla out of Survey No. situate in village Punjabi. Thesis Rawalakot. Hassan Din is a refugee in possession of the land in dispute. The learned Rehabilitation Commissioner. refused his claim with the recommendation that the petitioner ' 9, r may be allotted some other land instead of the land in dispute. Abdullah Khan, respondent frankly. conceded possession of the petitioner and stated that he has no dispute with the possession and title of the petitioner. As the petitioner is refugee, he is eligible to the allotment of the land in dispute. The petitioner shall retain the allotment of the land which is already in his possession, out of Survey No. to the extent of prescribed scale. The petition 1s, therefore, allowed - accordingly.” 8. Abdullah deceased filed a review petition against the order of learned Custodian, dated 30-4-1984 reproduced hereinbefore. The learned Custodian while dismissing the review petition against the order of his predecessor, dated 23-4-1985 upheld the same however, he declared the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased as illegal and ineffective because in his opinion Abdullah Khan deceased being a local destitute was not entitled to allotment of evacuee property as the same was not in his possession at the time of allotment. This order was passed on 20-6- 1986. Meanwhile, the property allotted to Abdullah Khan deceased remained under his possession. According to him, the respondents meanwhile obtained proprietary nights certificate in their favor and he on acquiring knowledge of grant of proprietary rights challenged the same through two review petitions before Custodian. The learned Custodian through the impugned judgment disallowed the review petitions mainly on 2 grounds. Firstly, the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased vide order of his learned predecessor, dated J. 20-6-1987 was cancelled and JT had attained finality therefore, the same could not be called into question through the review petition before him against the proprietary nights transfer order. Secondly, the review petition before him against the proprietary rights transfer order was time-barred. ' 9. The learned counsel for the petitioners while assailing the judgment of learned Custodian contended that the impugned judgment, merited interference in view of law available under Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957. According to him, the Custodian while deciding the review petitions filed by Abdullah deceased could go into the validity of allotments and different orders made by Rehabilitation Authorities or even by his predecessor and he was fully competent to annul the proprietary rights granted in favor of respondents regardless of time limit. He further submitted that despite the fact that the learned Custodian under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act, was competent to decide the review petitions on merit without having regard to time limit however, even if there was a limitation provided for review petition against the proprietary rights transfer order, the same was within time from the date of knowledge as the proprietary rights were obtained ex parte. The land in dispute remained in his possession, and he has improved it since long. He was not aware of the grant of proprietary rights in favor of respondents and when he acquired knowledge about it, he within time filed the review petitions which have been wrongly dismissed by the Custodian. He went on to say that the allotment in favor of respondents and different orders passed by Rehabilitation Authorities and the learned Custodian had merged into proprietary rights transfer order, therefore, the limitation could legally be reckoned from the date of knowledge about the proprietary rights transfer order. He, during his arguments, relied upon Vardar Ali’s case 1992 CLC 1861, Affair Iqbal’s case 1998 CLC 286, Manor Ahmed’s case 2001 PLC (C.S.) 50, Muhammad Adeeb’s case 1999 YLR 2310, Khadija Ghulam Nadir’s case 2002 SCR 183, Muhammad Iqbal and others v. Custodian 1996 SCR 359 and Abdul Aziz’s case 199S SCR 204. 10. On factual side of the case, the learned Advocate representing the petitioners contended that Tali Hussain respondent was minor at the time of migration and was included in the family of his father and this fact was satisfactorily proved through the evidence on record but the ? f learned Custodian without application of mind to the facts of the case dismissed the review petitions on technical grounds which under law, were also erroneous. He further argued that allotment in favor of respondent Hassan Dm was also cancelled by the Rehabilitation’ Commissioner and he buy keeping the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner aside maneuvered to secure the allotment of 28 Canals out p of the said survey number. Not only this, his allotment was cancelled from his name on a revision petition by respondent Tali Hussain but despite all that the proprietary rights were granted in his favor. The learned Custodian failed to attend the most important and relevant facts r in this case and arrived at a wrong conclusion. The petitioners BMG m locals were allotted 28 Canals of evacuee land out of the survey number mentioned hereinbefore, and the same is in their possession since long. They were entitled to the allotment under the amended council order. Assuming it that they were not in the possession of the said piece of land, the fac tum of possession while allotment in their favor was not necessary. The petitioners in either case whether the land was in their possession were entitled to allotment. The learned Custodian of the time was wrong to hold that allotment in favor of locals without possession was illegal. The learned Custodian while deciding review petition against the proprietary rights transfer order was competent to look into the validity of order of his predecessors in view of settled law about the allotment of evacuee land in favor of locals but he without V having regard to the settled law travelled in tie wrong direction which resulted into these writ petitions. 11. Conversely, the learned counsel representing the respondents submitted that the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased stood cancelled by the predecessors of the learned Custodian and the allotments in favor of respondents were upheld. They, during their arguments, referred to different orders recorded by the learned Custodian of the time at different dates and maintained that in view of the orders earlier recorded by the learned Custodian the proprietary rights transfer orders in favor of respondents could not be reviewed under law. It was further submitted that the order of allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased was declared unlawful through the earlier order of learned Custodian. Therefore, the order of cancellation at tamed finality thus, it could not be reviewed by the learned Custodian while deciding the review petitions against the proprietary rights transfer orders. It was also their case that the petitioners or for that matter their predecessors-in- interest had knowledge of proprietary rights and allotment etc. but despite the fact he failed to challenge the same within time limit prescribed for filing of review petition against the proprietary rights transfer order. 11 12. The entire record made available to this Court in this case has been examined carefully. Before coming to the facts of the case and decision thereon it TS felt advisable to have a brief survey of the case-law cited at bar. w 13. In 1993 CLC 1861, it has been held by the Honorable Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir that under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act, the learned Custodian while deciding a review petition is competent to decide the same regardless of the limitation. This exercise of power by the Custodian is not barred by the time. In the same case, it is held that second review petition is also v competent. 14. In Afar Iqbal’s case 1998 CLC 286, it has been held by the apex Court of the State that the subsequent allotment in presence of previous allotment TS a nullity in the eye of law. 15. In Manor Ahmed’s case 2001 PLC (C.S.) 50, it has been held that if appeal is filed by a person who is not a party before the Court below limitation starts from the date of knowledge. 16. In 1999 YLR 2310, the Honorable Supreme Court has observed as under “It is evident from the above-mentioned provisions of Order that it does not deal with the question of allotment of the evacuee property rather a protects the possession of the categories mentioned therein, whether such possession was in pursuance of an allotment previously made or without TT. ’ However, the amending Act, 1974, deals with the question of allotment of the evacuee land, of course, to TJTIE same categories which have been enumerated in government Order No. The said amending Act or for that matter section 6-A of the Rehabilitation Act, 1956, which was introduced by the amending Act, 1974, does not stipulate that before an allotment TS made to a person belonging'to any of the said categories, he should be.in the possession of the property tended to be allotted. Therefore, the findings of the High Court that the possession of the allottees respondents over the respective evacuee land before their allotments was not necessary, is correct and does not call for any interference.” 17. In 2002 SCR 183 Ghulam Nadir’s case, it has been held that the technicalities should not be extended to defeat the purpose of law and justice but which are fundamental and basic cannot be bypassed. 18. In Muhammad Iqbal and others’ case 1996 SCR 359 it has been held by the apex Court that while granting propriety rights, the Custodian of Evacuee Property is fully competent to look into the validity of allotment and satisfy himself before granting the propriety rights and such rights could only be granted to allottee after satisfaction of genuineness of his claim. It is further held in the same judgment that the Custodian Evacuee Property is competent to cancel any allotment if the same is made in violation of law or is without jurisdiction. According to this judgment, sections 18-A and 18-B reopen the validity of allotments irrespective of any period of limitation. ¥. 19, In Abdul Aziz’s case 1998 SCR 204, it has been observed by the Supreme Court of AJ&K that in case of fraud limitation starts running from the date of knowledge and the suit to challenge it has to be filed’ ' within 3 years. 20. The order of Commissioner Rehabilitation, dated 26-5-1983 would show that the allotments in favor of Tali Hussein and Hassan Din were cancelled from their name. Likewise the order of the said Commissioner, dated 31-3-1984, shows that the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased was restored in his name, and it was opined by the learned Commissioner that the respondent Hassan Din had already secured 36 Canals evacuee land, and he was also in possession of some other evacuee property without allotment, therefore, the deficiency m his allotment with regard to the scale of allotment could be makeup without cancelling the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased. The learned Commissioner, therefore, set aside the order of Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner and restored the allotment 06 28 Canals, Marla in favor of Abdullah. According to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, total acreage of Survey No. comes to 186 Canals, therefore, the deficiency with regard to allotment of Hussain Din could be made up from the rest of allotted land. It was further observed by the Commissioner that the possession of 28 Canals, Marla while allotting the same to Abdullah deceased was obtained from one Muhammad Din, therefore, there was no justification to cancel the allotment of' a Abdullah. The order of the learned Custodian, dated 9-10-1984 would of* show that Tali Hussain challenged the order of learned Rehabilitation Commissioner, dated 26-5-1983 and, during pendency of this revision petition before Custodian, the respondent Hassan Din surrendered his claim of allotment in favor of Tali Hussain. h. 21. The above referred orders by the learned Commissioner and the learned Custodian are evident of the fact that Hassan Din respondent despite’ surrender of his claim before secured the allotment in his favor with regard to 28 Canals out of Survey No. and obtained the propriety rights in his favor on 22-3-1988. Another order by the learned Custodian, dated 23-4- 1988 is on the file. This order has been passed by the learned Custodian on the revision petition titled Hassan Din v. Abdullah. The said order has been reproduced in this judgment hereinbefore. The perusal of this order shows that the same piece of land the. 28 Canals and Marla out of Survey No. situated in village Gillan Thesis Rawalakot was in dispute. According to the learned Custodian, the Rehabilitation Commissioner refused his claim with the recommendation that petitioner Hussein Din may be allotted some other land instead of the land in dispute. He further observed that Abdullah Khan deceased frankly* conceded the possession of the petitioner and stated that he‘had no dispute with the possession and title of the petitioner. The learned Custodian opined that as the Hassan Din respondent was refugee, therefore, he was eligible for allotment of land in dispute and shall retain the allotment of land which was already in his possession out of Survey No. to the extent of prescribed scale. 22. After having examined the order, dated 30-4-1985, TT appears that the respondent Hassan Din in fact was allowed to ream the evacuee piece of land under his possession. The allotment MN favor of Abdullah deceased when seen in the light of order of Rehabilitation Commissioner through which it was restored in his name would suggest saying that this piece of land was under his possession at the time when the order, dated 23-4- 1985 was made by the learned Custodian. It would further show that he did not concede the possession of Hassan Din over the property allotted to him. The learned Custodian while passing the said order observed, that the Hassan Din shall retain the allotment of the land, which was already in his possession. The record bears it out that Hassan Din was allottee of apiece of land measuring 35 Canals prior to allotment of Abdullah deceased and the same was in his possession. He challenged the allotment of Abdullah and Tali Hussain before D.R.C. with the t__ grievance that the allotment in favor of Tali Hussain was illegal because he was included in the family of his father Muhammad Dm and the allotment in favor of Abdullah measuring 28 Canals and Marla was unlawful because he being local was not entitled to the allotment. The D.R.C. allowed his appeal, cancelled both the allotments and remanded the case to A.R.C. for allotment in favor of any deserving person. Both the aggrieved persons 1.e. Abdullah and Tali Hussain went in appeal before R.C. from where Abdullah deceased succeeded, whereas Tali Hussain failed. It means that the cancellation of allotment in favor of Tali Hussain by D.R.C. was upheld by the R.C. and the allotment in favor of Abdullah was restored. Hassan Din who earlier challenged the allotment in favor of Tali Hussain surrendered his. claim before Rehabilitation Commissioner and the learned Rehabilitation Commissioner in view of his surrender declare him not entitled to any allotment but despite this fact he cleverly secured the allotment of 28 J T Canals out of the allotment cancelled from the name of Tali Hussain. This all would show that Abdullah deceased did not surrender his allotment n favor of Hassan Din, but he conceded that possession and allotment of that property which had already been allotted to Hassan Din and was MN his possession. Survey No.-2437114 is a big number measuring 186 Canals, 6 Marla's. The allotment in favor of Muhammad Din, Hassan Din and Lai Din being refugees were made prior to k ' allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased. Rest of the land coming to 70 Canals, 6‘ Marla's remained allotted out of which 28 Canals was allotted in favor of Abdullah deceased and the possession was handed over to him at the time of allotment. It was done in the year 1978. Rest of allotted land coming to 42' Canals, 5 Marla's was allotted m the name of Tali Hussain respondent which stood cancelled by the R.C. but, later on, Hassan Din and Tali Hussain in order to deprive Abdullah domed hands, fell MN collusion and maneuvered to secure the allotment of the evacuee land already allotted in favor of Abdullah deceased. Abdullah deceased, according to them, made a statement showing surrender of his allotment before the learned Custodian. The perusal of the said statement would show that it pertains to that property which was, already under the possession of Hassan Din respondent. The language used by the learned Custodian vide his order, dated 23-4-1985 clearly suggested saying so. Later on, Abdullah deceased when came to know that the respondent Hassan Din in view of his statement had maneuvered to secure the allotment of his land, he challenged the order, dated 23-4-1985 before the learned Custodian through a review petition. The learned Custodian unfortunately; failed to understand the order, dated 23-4- 1985 and erroneously disallowed his review petition on the ground that, Abdullah had conceded the allotment and possession by the respondent Hassan Din MN respect of the disputed land. The order, dated 23-4-1985 when seen and examined in its true perspective in the light of record it would suggest that he neither surrendered his allotment nor accepted the possession of Hassan Din over the piece of land under his possession and allotment. The learned Custodian while deciding the review petition committed another illegality about the prerequisite of allotment in favor of locals. According to him, the fac tum of possession was necessary before making allotment in favor of locals whereas the law is otherwise as has been held by the Supreme Court of AJ&K m 1999 YLR 2310. Therefore, the learned Custodian while making his order, dated 20-6-1987 was wrong on both the counts that neither the deceased Abdullah surrendered his allotment nor fac tum of possession is a prerequisite for allotment in his favor. 23. The question now arises that whether the learned Custodian in presence of the above stated facts borne out by the record was justified under law to dismiss the review petition against the proprietary rights transfer order in favor of respondent? The answer is in negative. No doubt, at the time of grant of proprietary rights transfer order the Custodian as held by the Honorable Supreme Court TS fully competent to look into the validity of allotment in favor of any person and is also competent to cancel the allotment illegally made or even made in excess of prescribed scale. The powers of review available to the Custodian under sections 18-A and 18-B of Administration of Evacuee Property Act can be exercised only at the time of grant of proprietary rights but not later on. Such powers are available regardless of time limit. However, the question which agitates the mind is about the powers of Custodian regarding review of proprietary rights transfer order. Is there any other provision available under Administration of Evacuee Property Act which gives powers to the Custodian to review his earlier orders including proprietary rights transfer order. There is another provision, and it is section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. Let us find answer to this question in view of the said provision of law. This provision of law deals with the general powers of the Custodian whereas the powers available under sections 18-A and 18-B are restricted to be exercised at the time of grant of proprietary rights. The provision in shape of section 43(6) has wisely been kept on statute book so that the Custodian may review his earlier order or even orders of his. predecessors if justice and law demands so. The scope of review under section 43(6) came before Lahore High Court in the year 1962 in a case titled Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram v. Custodian PLD 1962 LAH. 424. In this case their Lordships have very elaborately considered the scope and limitation of the review powers of the Custodian under 9 section 43(6). The law laid down by the Lordship is precisely given below:- “The main post that requires determination is whether the fact that the Custodian of Evacuee Property considers that a certain order should be passed as the justice of the case demands it was sufficient to bring the case within the ambit of subsection (6) of section 43 of Act of 1957. Having given the matter my anxious consideration. I have reached the conclusion that no order can be considered to be just for the purposes of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, if the thing’ which according to the Custodian of Evacuee Property was demanded by the justice of the case offends against the provisions of any law* applicable to it. I say that because I am clear in my mind that for the purposes of ‘what is done by a Tribunal set up by a State a thing cannot be said to be just if it contravenes a provision of law which governs it. If therefore, what is directed to be done by the Custodian offends against the provisions of the law that applies, it could not be considered to be just for the purposes of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, however, just the Custodian himself might have considered it to be. It needs hardly be mentioned that the review of an order means substituting therefore, another order either because the previous order was wrong or because the latter order was more appropriate in the circumstances of the particular case. As far as I am aware, powers of review given to no Tribunal are as wide as those given to a Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, but from that inference cannot be drawn that the Legislature which brought that Act on the statute book and conferred on the Custodian the power to ignore any law which he wanted to ignore, because if that had been the intention of the Legislature, it would have been exercised in very, clear terms. Conferment of powers which were claimed to have been conferred on the Custodian of Evacuee Property was a thing so much out of the ordinary that it cannot be inferred to have been i done unless such an inference was unavoidable. t It was contended by major Iraq Muhammad Khan that the plain meaning of the language in which subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, is couched was that the Custodian had the power to review any order of his predecessors-1rt-office or of himself and substitute therefore any order which in his view the Justice of the case required. I am not prepared to accept this contention which can lead to results that would be startling. It.could not be urged that in the exercise of his ordinary jurisdiction the Custodian of Evacuee Property can pass an order which is opposed to law. But if the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan were to be accepted. whereby a Custodian of Evacuee Property has been given power to pass an order which the justice of the case may require, is that the order he passes on review should not offend against the law of the land. A number of orders could be passed under the law in any case, and when subsection (6) of section 43 of Act of 1957 confers on THT Custodian of Evacuee Property the power to pass on review of an order passed by himself or by any of his predecessors- in-office any order that justice of the case may demand, the intention clearly is that though the order which has to be reviewed was correct according to law, it could be set aside - in exercise of the power of review conferred by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 subject to the condition that a law which otherwise binding did not get contravened by the order passed in the purported exercise of the powers of review. That is the meaning of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957), is also clear from the fourth subsection of the section which empowers the Custodian to pass any order in the exercise of his revisional jurisdiction. This subsection empowers the Custodian to pass any order that he thinks fit and this power to pass an order that the Tribunal having powers to pass orders in revision thinks fit is conferred by almost all laws which confer powers of revision. Can anyone for a moment think that in the exercise of his power of revision a Custodian of Evacuee Property can after sending for the record of a case to satisfy himself about. The legality or propriety of an order passed by one of his subordinates, say that though the order passed by this subordinate was legal and the only proper order MN the circumstances of the ease, he would pass another order because he considered TT fit to pass it? The answer to this question will not be given in the affirmative by anyone. J am clear in my mind that the powers of review conferred on the Custodian of Evacuee Property by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, are like the powers of revision conferred on him by subsection (4) of that section, limited to passing orders the passing of which the law does not prohibit. It is inconceivable that the law is that though a Custodian of Evacuee Property cannot set aside in exercise of his powers of revision an order passed by one of his subordinates because he would thereby be violating the law of the land, he can set aside the same order if it had been* passed by his predecessor-in-office or himself.” 24. The*case-law cited above would show that the Custodian is * competent under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act to review his earlier order or orders of his predecessors or subordinates provided his order on review does not contravene any law of the land. To put m other words if the earlier order of the Custodian or his predecessors are against the law and justice as is in this case, the Custodian is competent to review them. If the Custodian reaches the conclusion that earlier order passed by him or his predecessor or subordinates are required to be reversed in order to meet the ends of justice and his review order shall not offend any law of the land, he is fully competent to review such order regardless of time limit. The 1 Honorable Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir has also subscribed to this view in case Vardar Ah and others v. Kara mat Ali Khan and others 1992 CLC 1861. a 25. As stated earlier, the powers of Custodian under sections 18-A and 18-B are exercisable by the Custodian at the time of grant of proprietary rights irrespective of limitation; his general powers of review are also available to him under section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act and such powers are regardless of time limit. It appears that the learned Custodian while dismissing the review petitions was of the view that limitation provided under Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950 being 30 days from the date of order impugned before him was applicable. It may be observed that the rules are made always subservient to Act and not against it. Where the Act itself provides a limitation or allows a cause to be decided on merits regardless of time, the rules cannot provide otherwise. As provided under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act, the powers under this provision of law are exercisable at any time, the rules made thereunder cannot provide otherwise. In fact the Rules, 1950 provide limitation for those matters for which the Act is silent. When Administration of Evacuee Property Act under its section 43(6) allows the Custodian to’exercise his powers regardless of time limit, the rules made thereunder cannot provide otherwise. Thus, the opinion of the learned Custodian about limitation is misconceived. 26: The case of the petitioner when tested on'the touchstone of the above laid down principle law would suggest saying that the learned Custodian while deciding review petitions challenging the validity of proprietary rights in favor of respondents fell in error. The orders challenged before him were either result of misconception or illegal therefore, to review such orders was in the interest of justice and law. It is satisfactorily proved through the record that respondent. Talib Hussein f was minor at the time of migration and was included in the family of his father. He, under law, was not entitled to allotment however, he and his refugee brother Hassan Din collusively adopted different tactics and modes to deprive a local of his legitimate right. Firstly, they had been contesting against each other but subsequently, they joined hands and maneuvered to secure allotment of that piece of LAPD which already stood allotted to Abdullah deceased. The deceased did not surrender his allotment neither cancellation of his allotment was lawful. The allotment in favor of respondent Tali Hussein was earlier cancelled by Rehabilitation Commissioner and subsequently, restored by the. Custodian of the time on a fallacious ground. It is amazing to note here that learned Custodian vide his order, dated 9-10-1984 recorded the age of Tali Hussain as 19-10-1941. but at the same time declared him head of the family. It is no less than a miracle that a boy of six years age at ' the time of migration was father of 12 children and one wife. It is manifestation of total non-application of mind which resulted into grave miscarriage of justice by depriving the petitioners of their legitimate right. Similarly orders by the Custodian of the time, dated 9-10-1984 and 23-9-1993 are also result of either misconception or passed against law. The orders, therefore, were liable to be cancelled and the learned Custodian while deciding review petitions against proprietary rights was competent under law to Rev them. The respondents cleverly and collusively deprived the petitioners of their allotment and secured allotment of this piece of land illegally and ultimately got the propriety rights in their favor. The respondent Tali Hussain maneuvered to get proprietary rights of 42 Canals and 5 M dr las in his favor despite the fact that he was not entitled to any allotment under law. The allotment in favor of both the respondents was illegal and against the facts and, as such it was reviewable under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act regardless of time Inuit. The learned Custodian is found to have illegally exercised the jurisdiction available to him thus, his order impugned before this Court BMG unlawful stands recalled. As a result of it the allotment and proprietary rights in favor of respondent Tali Hussain are cancelled. The allotment of proprietary rights in favor of Hassan Din respondent to the extent of 28 Canals, Marla is also cancelled. The petitioners may approach the Custodian for grant of proprietary rights. P The case of respondent Muhammad Rasheed has also been considered in the light of the record. He is son of Muhammad Din allottee. His case is that the petitioners are in possession of his father’s land. This TS a disputed fact which cannot be resolved by this Court and, if the land allotted to Muhammad Dm is under the possession of t somebody else or the petitioners are in excess of possession, the remedy may be sought from the relevant forum. His claim, therefore, having no merits, is also hereby disallowed. Petition allowed.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): SARDAR MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN, C.J.- These 2 constitutional petitions' certiorari in nature call in question the validity of order of the learned Custodian. dated 23–9*-1993 passed on two review petitions filed against respondents Hassan Din and Tali Hussain. A few other orders passed earlier by the Custodian and Rehabilitation Authorities are also under challenge therefore, the petitions shall stand decided through the proposed judgment. The petitions were brought by one Abdullah Khan who died during pendency of these petitions and his successors-in-interest have been arrayed as petitioners through the order of this Court, dated 14-10-1999. The facts of both the petitions are almost the same and are stated as below. j- 2. The parties are contesting over allotment of evacuee property out of Survey No. total measuring 186 Canals, 6 Marla's situated at Monza Villain Marshal Thesis Walk.OT. Out of the said survey number, 36 Canals were allotted to one Lai Din in the capacity of refugee. Similarly, 44 Canals and 18 Marla's were allotted to Muhammad Din father of Tali Hussain respondent as refugee. Hassan Din respondent being refugee was also allotted 35 Canals out of the said survey number. The total allotment prior to allotment in favor of predecessors-in-interest of the petitioners harm comes to 115 Canals, 18 Marla's, therefore, the acreage left behind as without allotment to any person comes to 70 Canals, 6 Marla's. The predecessors-in-interest of the petitioner Abdullah Khan by name was allotted 28 Canals, Marla out of allotted acreage. After the allotment in favor of Abdullah Khan deceased, the acreage which renamed allotted come to 42 Canals, 5 Marla's. Tali Hussain respondent who is son of Muhammad Dm got this remaining land allotted in his favor as a head of family in the capacity of refugee. Thus, in this way the entire Survey No. measuring 186 Canals, 6 Marla's stood allotted in the name of aforesaid persons. ' The petitioners are contesting in the capacity of local destitute whereas the respondents and all other persons in whose favor the evacuee land has been allotted are admittedly refugees. 3. The controversy arose when respondent Hassan Din challenged the validity of allotment in favor of Tali Hussain and Abdullah. The learned D.R.C. by accepting the appeal cancelled the allotment in favor of Tali Hussain and Abdullah and remanded the case to A.R.C. to look into the matter and allot the evacuee land in question to any deserving person. Both the respondents 1.e. Tali Hussain and Abdullah feeling aggrieved by the order of D.R.C. went in appeal before Rehabilitation Commissioner and challenged the legality of order passed by.D.R.C. Pooch. The learned Rehabilitation Commissioner accepted the appeal Abdullah deceased and restored his allotment however, the DT-“appeal by Tali Hussain was disallowed and the order of D.R.C. was upheld. I will take this opportunity to note here that while, the appeal by Tali Hussain was pending before Rehabilitation Commissioner, the respondent Hassan Din surrendered his claim for allotment in favor of Tali Hussain and requested the Commissioner to

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): Tali Hussain was disallowed and the order of D.R.C. was upheld. I will take this opportunity to note here that while, the appeal by Tali Hussain was pending before Rehabilitation Commissioner, the respondent Hassan Din surrendered his claim for allotment in favor of Tali Hussain and requested the Commissioner to restore the allotment m favor of Talk Hussain. The learned Rehabilitation Commissioner did not accept the surrender by the respondent Hassan Dm and observed that Tali Hussain being son of Muhammad Din refugee was included in the family of Muhammad Din at the time of migration therefore, the allotment in his favor as a separate family was illegal and could not be, allowed to sustain consequently, the order of D.R.C. was upheld by the Rehabilitation Commissioner. The Rehabilitation Commissioner while deciding this controversy also observed that as Hassan Din respondent had surrendered his claim, ‘therefore, he was also not entitled to allotment of the land which stood illegally allotted to Tali Hussain. The decision of Rehabilitation Commissioner, dated 26-5-1983 is reproduced as under: - 1 IWM Ifc£25.10.1980.wW/f4LIVIyU JIX, /22.04.1979>>.Wis 'T”’. Ji 125.10.10i LV It FHE JJ/* 162 /ef1>AU LEA Ugh t 5.1. t/if i {/. © thy't IX Hi 1} JJ,Di/m JJ e>A t/1?* t-"V UX CIV. - - '<£-(elf 4. It will not be out of place to mention here that Tali Hussain and Abdullah challenged the order of the D.R.C. Pooch, dated 25-10-1980 through,two different revision petitions. The order by the Rehabilitation Commissioner on the petition by Tali Hussain has already been reproduced whereas the order by Rehabilitation Commissioner on the petition of Abdullah, dated 31-3- 1983 is as under: - JASI*> f» It>CGR - *21.12.1978* v/LY \-4Lj2;£. ill in ft. Fe JJ/typify Jer*India/LA_ JV/ /114*- \ID* m If \fl*2S.10.1980 5. The above reproduced orders would show that the allotment in favor of Tali Hussain was cancelled, the claim by Hassan Din was disallowed and the allotment MN favor of Abdullah was restored. Mr. Hassan Din respondent, after the above referred order by Rehabilitation Commissioner, approached A.R.C. Pooch and got 28 Canals of evacuee land out of the Survey No. allotted in his favor on 7-11-1984. 6. Tali Hussain respondent challenged the order of learned Rehabilitation Commissioner with regard to dismissal of his revision petition before the learned Custodian. The respondent Hassan Dm at one hand secured the allotment of 28 Canals out of the land claimed by Tab Hussain respondent and on the other hand, he surrendered his claim in his favor during pendency of the revision petition before learned Custodian on a subsequent date 1e. 9-10-1984. The order of learned Custodian, dated 9-10-1984 is reproduced as under:- “The petition is addressed against the order of learned Rehabilitation, Commissioner, dated 26-5-1983 whereby prayer for allotment of the land in dispute measuring 42 Canals, 5 Marla's out of Survey No. situate in Village Gillan, Thesis Rawalakot, was refused. v The clam of the petitioner is that at the time of migration, he was major as his date of

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): Rehabilitation, Commissioner, dated 26-5-1983 whereby prayer for allotment of the land in dispute measuring 42 Canals, 5 Marla's out of Survey No. situate in Village Gillan, Thesis Rawalakot, was refused. v The clam of the petitioner is that at the time of migration, he was major as his date of birth was 19-6-1941. He was sole supporter of 13 defendants including 12 children and one wife as such, the petitioner is head of an independent family. The petitioner moved for allotment of the land in dispute. Hassan Din his opponent surrendered his claim to allotment in favor of. petitioner. There is no other contender for allotment of land in dispute. » The aforesaid claim of the petitioner finds support from the record. ’It is, therefore, ordered that petition is allowed accordingly. ”" 7, Hassan Din respondent also through a revision petition challenged the validity of order of Rehabilitation Commissioner, dated 31-3-1984 before the learned Custodian who on 23-4-1985 passed the following order:-- “The petition is preferred against the ostler' of the learned Rehabilitation Commissioner, passed on 31st March, 1984.' The dispute pertains to evacuee land measuring 28 Canals, Marla out of Survey No. situate in village Punjabi. Thesis Rawalakot. Hassan Din is a refugee in possession of the land in dispute. The learned Rehabilitation Commissioner. refused his claim with the recommendation that the petitioner ' 9, r may be allotted some other land instead of the land in dispute. Abdullah Khan, respondent frankly. conceded possession of the petitioner and stated that he has no dispute with the possession and title of the petitioner. As the petitioner is refugee, he is eligible to the allotment of the land in dispute. The petitioner shall retain the allotment of the land which is already in his possession, out of Survey No. to the extent of prescribed scale. The petition 1s, therefore, allowed - accordingly.” 8. Abdullah deceased filed a review petition against the order of learned Custodian, dated 30-4-1984 reproduced hereinbefore. The learned Custodian while dismissing the review petition against the order of his predecessor, dated 23-4-1985 upheld the same however, he declared the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased as illegal and ineffective because in his opinion Abdullah Khan deceased being a local destitute was not entitled to allotment of evacuee property as the same was not in his possession at the time of allotment. This order was passed on 20-6- 1986. Meanwhile, the property allotted to Abdullah Khan deceased remained under his possession. According to him, the respondents meanwhile obtained proprietary nights certificate in their favor and he on acquiring knowledge of grant of proprietary rights challenged the same through two review petitions before Custodian. The learned Custodian through the impugned judgment disallowed the review petitions mainly on 2 grounds. Firstly, the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased vide order of his learned predecessor, dated J. 20-6-1987 was cancelled and JT had attained finality therefore, the same could not be called into question through the review petition before him against the

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): judgment disallowed the review petitions mainly on 2 grounds. Firstly, the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased vide order of his learned predecessor, dated J. 20-6-1987 was cancelled and JT had attained finality therefore, the same could not be called into question through the review petition before him against the proprietary nights transfer order. Secondly, the review petition before him against the proprietary rights transfer order was time-barred. ' 9. The learned counsel for the petitioners while assailing the judgment of learned Custodian contended that the impugned judgment, merited interference in view of law available under Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957. According to him, the Custodian while deciding the review petitions filed by Abdullah deceased could go into the validity of allotments and different orders made by Rehabilitation Authorities or even by his predecessor and he was fully competent to annul the proprietary rights granted in favor of respondents regardless of time limit. He further submitted that despite the fact that the learned Custodian under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act, was competent to decide the review petitions on merit without having regard to time limit however, even if there was a limitation provided for review petition against the proprietary rights transfer order, the same was within time from the date of knowledge as the proprietary rights were obtained ex parte. The land in dispute remained in his possession, and he has improved it since long. He was not aware of the grant of proprietary rights in favor of respondents and when he acquired knowledge about it, he within time filed the review petitions which have been wrongly dismissed by the Custodian. He went on to say that the allotment in favor of respondents and different orders passed by Rehabilitation Authorities and the learned Custodian had merged into proprietary rights transfer order, therefore, the limitation could legally be reckoned from the date of knowledge about the proprietary rights transfer order. He, during his arguments, relied upon Vardar Ali’s case 1992 CLC 1861, Affair Iqbal’s case 1998 CLC 286, Manor Ahmed’s case 2001 PLC (C.S.) 50, Muhammad Adeeb’s case 1999 YLR 2310, Khadija Ghulam Nadir’s case 2002 SCR 183, Muhammad Iqbal and others v. Custodian 1996 SCR 359 and Abdul Aziz’s case 199S SCR 204. 10. On factual side of the case, the learned Advocate representing the petitioners contended that Tali Hussain respondent was minor at the time of migration and was included in the family of his father and this fact was satisfactorily proved through the evidence on record but the ? f learned Custodian without application of mind to the facts of the case dismissed the review petitions on technical grounds which under law, were also erroneous. He further argued that allotment in favor of respondent Hassan Dm was also cancelled by the Rehabilitation’ Commissioner and he buy keeping the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner aside maneuvered to secure the allotment of 28 Canals out p of the said survey number. Not only this, his allotment was

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): erroneous. He further argued that allotment in favor of respondent Hassan Dm was also cancelled by the Rehabilitation’ Commissioner and he buy keeping the order of Rehabilitation Commissioner aside maneuvered to secure the allotment of 28 Canals out p of the said survey number. Not only this, his allotment was cancelled from his name on a revision petition by respondent Tali Hussain but despite all that the proprietary rights were granted in his favor. The learned Custodian failed to attend the most important and relevant facts r in this case and arrived at a wrong conclusion. The petitioners BMG m locals were allotted 28 Canals of evacuee land out of the survey number mentioned hereinbefore, and the same is in their possession since long. They were entitled to the allotment under the amended council order. Assuming it that they were not in the possession of the said piece of land, the fac tum of possession while allotment in their favor was not necessary. The petitioners in either case whether the land was in their possession were entitled to allotment. The learned Custodian of the time was wrong to hold that allotment in favor of locals without possession was illegal. The learned Custodian while deciding review petition against the proprietary rights transfer order was competent to look into the validity of order of his predecessors in view of settled law about the allotment of evacuee land in favor of locals but he without V having regard to the settled law travelled in tie wrong direction which resulted into these writ petitions. 11. Conversely, the learned counsel representing the respondents submitted that the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased stood cancelled by the predecessors of the learned Custodian and the allotments in favor of respondents were upheld. They, during their arguments, referred to different orders recorded by the learned Custodian of the time at different dates and maintained that in view of the orders earlier recorded by the learned Custodian the proprietary rights transfer orders in favor of respondents could not be reviewed under law. It was further submitted that the order of allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased was declared unlawful through the earlier order of learned Custodian. Therefore, the order of cancellation at tamed finality thus, it could not be reviewed by the learned Custodian while deciding the review petitions against the proprietary rights transfer orders. It was also their case that the petitioners or for that matter their predecessors-in- interest had knowledge of proprietary rights and allotment etc. but despite the fact he failed to challenge the same within time limit prescribed for filing of review petition against the proprietary rights transfer order. 11 12. The entire record made available to this Court in this case has been examined carefully. Before coming to the facts of the case and decision thereon it TS felt advisable to have a brief survey of the case-law cited at bar. w 13. In 1993 CLC 1861, it has been held by the Honorable

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): available to this Court in this case has been examined carefully. Before coming to the facts of the case and decision thereon it TS felt advisable to have a brief survey of the case-law cited at bar. w 13. In 1993 CLC 1861, it has been held by the Honorable Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir that under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act, the learned Custodian while deciding a review petition is competent to decide the same regardless of the limitation. This exercise of power by the Custodian is not barred by the time. In the same case, it is held that second review petition is also v competent. 14. In Afar Iqbal’s case 1998 CLC 286, it has been held by the apex Court of the State that the subsequent allotment in presence of previous allotment TS a nullity in the eye of law. 15. In Manor Ahmed’s case 2001 PLC (C.S.) 50, it has been held that if appeal is filed by a person who is not a party before the Court below limitation starts from the date of knowledge. 16. In 1999 YLR 2310, the Honorable Supreme Court has observed as under “It is evident from the above-mentioned provisions of Order that it does not deal with the question of allotment of the evacuee property rather a protects the possession of the categories mentioned therein, whether such possession was in pursuance of an allotment previously made or without TT. ’ However, the amending Act, 1974, deals with the question of allotment of the evacuee land, of course, to TJTIE same categories which have been enumerated in government Order No. The said amending Act or for that matter section 6-A of the Rehabilitation Act, 1956, which was introduced by the amending Act, 1974, does not stipulate that before an allotment TS made to a person belonging'to any of the said categories, he should be.in the possession of the property tended to be allotted. Therefore, the findings of the High Court that the possession of the allottees respondents over the respective evacuee land before their allotments was not necessary, is correct and does not call for any interference.” 17. In 2002 SCR 183 Ghulam Nadir’s case, it has been held that the technicalities should not be extended to defeat the purpose of law and justice but which are fundamental and basic cannot be bypassed. 18. In Muhammad Iqbal and others’ case 1996 SCR 359 it has been held by the apex Court that while granting propriety rights, the Custodian of Evacuee Property is fully competent to look into the validity of allotment and satisfy himself before granting the propriety rights and such rights could only be granted to allottee after satisfaction of genuineness of his claim. It is further held in the same judgment that the Custodian Evacuee Property is competent to cancel any allotment if the same is made in violation of law or is without jurisdiction. According to this judgment, sections 18-A and

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): be granted to allottee after satisfaction of genuineness of his claim. It is further held in the same judgment that the Custodian Evacuee Property is competent to cancel any allotment if the same is made in violation of law or is without jurisdiction. According to this judgment, sections 18-A and 18-B reopen the validity of allotments irrespective of any period of limitation. ¥. 19, In Abdul Aziz’s case 1998 SCR 204, it has been observed by the Supreme Court of AJ&K that in case of fraud limitation starts running from the date of knowledge and the suit to challenge it has to be filed’ ' within 3 years. 20. The order of Commissioner Rehabilitation, dated 26-5-1983 would show that the allotments in favor of Tali Hussein and Hassan Din were cancelled from their name. Likewise the order of the said Commissioner, dated 31-3-1984, shows that the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased was restored in his name, and it was opined by the learned Commissioner that the respondent Hassan Din had already secured 36 Canals evacuee land, and he was also in possession of some other evacuee property without allotment, therefore, the deficiency m his allotment with regard to the scale of allotment could be makeup without cancelling the allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased. The learned Commissioner, therefore, set aside the order of Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner and restored the allotment 06 28 Canals, Marla in favor of Abdullah. According to the Rehabilitation Commissioner, total acreage of Survey No. comes to 186 Canals, therefore, the deficiency with regard to allotment of Hussain Din could be made up from the rest of allotted land. It was further observed by the Commissioner that the possession of 28 Canals, Marla while allotting the same to Abdullah deceased was obtained from one Muhammad Din, therefore, there was no justification to cancel the allotment of' a Abdullah. The order of the learned Custodian, dated 9-10-1984 would of* show that Tali Hussain challenged the order of learned Rehabilitation Commissioner, dated 26-5-1983 and, during pendency of this revision petition before Custodian, the respondent Hassan Din surrendered his claim of allotment in favor of Tali Hussain. h. 21. The above referred orders by the learned Commissioner and the learned Custodian are evident of the fact that Hassan Din respondent despite’ surrender of his claim before secured the allotment in his favor with regard to 28 Canals out of Survey No. and obtained the propriety rights in his favor on 22-3-1988. Another order by the learned Custodian, dated 23-4- 1988 is on the file. This order has been passed by the learned Custodian on the revision petition titled Hassan Din v. Abdullah. The said order has been reproduced in this judgment hereinbefore. The perusal of this order shows that the same piece of land the. 28 Canals and Marla out of Survey No. situated in village Gillan Thesis Rawalakot was in dispute. According to the learned Custodian, the Rehabilitation Commissioner refused his claim with the recommendation that petitioner Hussein

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): this judgment hereinbefore. The perusal of this order shows that the same piece of land the. 28 Canals and Marla out of Survey No. situated in village Gillan Thesis Rawalakot was in dispute. According to the learned Custodian, the Rehabilitation Commissioner refused his claim with the recommendation that petitioner Hussein Din may be allotted some other land instead of the land in dispute. He further observed that Abdullah Khan deceased frankly* conceded the possession of the petitioner and stated that he‘had no dispute with the possession and title of the petitioner. The learned Custodian opined that as the Hassan Din respondent was refugee, therefore, he was eligible for allotment of land in dispute and shall retain the allotment of land which was already in his possession out of Survey No. to the extent of prescribed scale. 22. After having examined the order, dated 30-4-1985, TT appears that the respondent Hassan Din in fact was allowed to ream the evacuee piece of land under his possession. The allotment MN favor of Abdullah deceased when seen in the light of order of Rehabilitation Commissioner through which it was restored in his name would suggest saying that this piece of land was under his possession at the time when the order, dated 23-4- 1985 was made by the learned Custodian. It would further show that he did not concede the possession of Hassan Din over the property allotted to him. The learned Custodian while passing the said order observed, that the Hassan Din shall retain the allotment of the land, which was already in his possession. The record bears it out that Hassan Din was allottee of apiece of land measuring 35 Canals prior to allotment of Abdullah deceased and the same was in his possession. He challenged the allotment of Abdullah and Tali Hussain before D.R.C. with the t__ grievance that the allotment in favor of Tali Hussain was illegal because he was included in the family of his father Muhammad Dm and the allotment in favor of Abdullah measuring 28 Canals and Marla was unlawful because he being local was not entitled to the allotment. The D.R.C. allowed his appeal, cancelled both the allotments and remanded the case to A.R.C. for allotment in favor of any deserving person. Both the aggrieved persons 1.e. Abdullah and Tali Hussain went in appeal before R.C. from where Abdullah deceased succeeded, whereas Tali Hussain failed. It means that the cancellation of allotment in favor of Tali Hussain by D.R.C. was upheld by the R.C. and the allotment in favor of Abdullah was restored. Hassan Din who earlier challenged the allotment in favor of Tali Hussain surrendered his. claim before Rehabilitation Commissioner and the learned Rehabilitation Commissioner in view of his surrender declare him not entitled to any allotment but despite this fact he cleverly secured the allotment of 28 J T Canals out of the allotment cancelled from the name of Tali Hussain. This all would show that Abdullah deceased did not surrender his allotment

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): Commissioner in view of his surrender declare him not entitled to any allotment but despite this fact he cleverly secured the allotment of 28 J T Canals out of the allotment cancelled from the name of Tali Hussain. This all would show that Abdullah deceased did not surrender his allotment n favor of Hassan Din, but he conceded that possession and allotment of that property which had already been allotted to Hassan Din and was MN his possession. Survey No.-2437114 is a big number measuring 186 Canals, 6 Marla's. The allotment in favor of Muhammad Din, Hassan Din and Lai Din being refugees were made prior to k ' allotment in favor of Abdullah deceased. Rest of the land coming to 70 Canals, 6‘ Marla's remained allotted out of which 28 Canals was allotted in favor of Abdullah deceased and the possession was handed over to him at the time of allotment. It was done in the year 1978. Rest of allotted land coming to 42' Canals, 5 Marla's was allotted m the name of Tali Hussain respondent which stood cancelled by the R.C. but, later on, Hassan Din and Tali Hussain in order to deprive Abdullah domed hands, fell MN collusion and maneuvered to secure the allotment of the evacuee land already allotted in favor of Abdullah deceased. Abdullah deceased, according to them, made a statement showing surrender of his allotment before the learned Custodian. The perusal of the said statement would show that it pertains to that property which was, already under the possession of Hassan Din respondent. The language used by the learned Custodian vide his order, dated 23-4-1985 clearly suggested saying so. Later on, Abdullah deceased when came to know that the respondent Hassan Din in view of his statement had maneuvered to secure the allotment of his land, he challenged the order, dated 23-4-1985 before the learned Custodian through a review petition. The learned Custodian unfortunately; failed to understand the order, dated 23-4- 1985 and erroneously disallowed his review petition on the ground that, Abdullah had conceded the allotment and possession by the respondent Hassan Din MN respect of the disputed land. The order, dated 23-4-1985 when seen and examined in its true perspective in the light of record it would suggest that he neither surrendered his allotment nor accepted the possession of Hassan Din over the piece of land under his possession and allotment. The learned Custodian while deciding the review petition committed another illegality about the prerequisite of allotment in favor of locals. According to him, the fac tum of possession was necessary before making allotment in favor of locals whereas the law is otherwise as has been held by the Supreme Court of AJ&K m 1999 YLR 2310. Therefore, the learned Custodian while making his order, dated 20-6-1987 was wrong on both the counts that neither the deceased Abdullah surrendered his allotment nor fac tum of possession is a prerequisite for allotment in his favor. 23. The question now arises that whether

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): of AJ&K m 1999 YLR 2310. Therefore, the learned Custodian while making his order, dated 20-6-1987 was wrong on both the counts that neither the deceased Abdullah surrendered his allotment nor fac tum of possession is a prerequisite for allotment in his favor. 23. The question now arises that whether the learned Custodian in presence of the above stated facts borne out by the record was justified under law to dismiss the review petition against the proprietary rights transfer order in favor of respondent? The answer is in negative. No doubt, at the time of grant of proprietary rights transfer order the Custodian as held by the Honorable Supreme Court TS fully competent to look into the validity of allotment in favor of any person and is also competent to cancel the allotment illegally made or even made in excess of prescribed scale. The powers of review available to the Custodian under sections 18-A and 18-B of Administration of Evacuee Property Act can be exercised only at the time of grant of proprietary rights but not later on. Such powers are available regardless of time limit. However, the question which agitates the mind is about the powers of Custodian regarding review of proprietary rights transfer order. Is there any other provision available under Administration of Evacuee Property Act which gives powers to the Custodian to review his earlier orders including proprietary rights transfer order. There is another provision, and it is section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act. Let us find answer to this question in view of the said provision of law. This provision of law deals with the general powers of the Custodian whereas the powers available under sections 18-A and 18-B are restricted to be exercised at the time of grant of proprietary rights. The provision in shape of section 43(6) has wisely been kept on statute book so that the Custodian may review his earlier order or even orders of his. predecessors if justice and law demands so. The scope of review under section 43(6) came before Lahore High Court in the year 1962 in a case titled Mrs. Doreen Bark at Ram v. Custodian PLD 1962 LAH. 424. In this case their Lordships have very elaborately considered the scope and limitation of the review powers of the Custodian under 9 section 43(6). The law laid down by the Lordship is precisely given below:- “The main post that requires determination is whether the fact that the Custodian of Evacuee Property considers that a certain order should be passed as the justice of the case demands it was sufficient to bring the case within the ambit of subsection (6) of section 43 of Act of 1957. Having given the matter my anxious consideration. I have reached the conclusion that no order can be considered to be just for the purposes of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, if the thing’ which according to the Custodian of Evacuee Property

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): Having given the matter my anxious consideration. I have reached the conclusion that no order can be considered to be just for the purposes of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, if the thing’ which according to the Custodian of Evacuee Property was demanded by the justice of the case offends against the provisions of any law* applicable to it. I say that because I am clear in my mind that for the purposes of ‘what is done by a Tribunal set up by a State a thing cannot be said to be just if it contravenes a provision of law which governs it. If therefore, what is directed to be done by the Custodian offends against the provisions of the law that applies, it could not be considered to be just for the purposes of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, however, just the Custodian himself might have considered it to be. It needs hardly be mentioned that the review of an order means substituting therefore, another order either because the previous order was wrong or because the latter order was more appropriate in the circumstances of the particular case. As far as I am aware, powers of review given to no Tribunal are as wide as those given to a Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1957, but from that inference cannot be drawn that the Legislature which brought that Act on the statute book and conferred on the Custodian the power to ignore any law which he wanted to ignore, because if that had been the intention of the Legislature, it would have been exercised in very, clear terms. Conferment of powers which were claimed to have been conferred on the Custodian of Evacuee Property was a thing so much out of the ordinary that it cannot be inferred to have been i done unless such an inference was unavoidable. t It was contended by major Iraq Muhammad Khan that the plain meaning of the language in which subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, is couched was that the Custodian had the power to review any order of his predecessors-1rt-office or of himself and substitute therefore any order which in his view the Justice of the case required. I am not prepared to accept this contention which can lead to results that would be startling. It.could not be urged that in the exercise of his ordinary jurisdiction the Custodian of Evacuee Property can pass an order which is opposed to law. But if the contention of Major Iraq Muhammad Khan were to be accepted. whereby a Custodian of Evacuee Property has been given power to pass an order which the justice of the case may require, is that the order he passes on review should not offend against the law of the land. A number of orders

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): Iraq Muhammad Khan were to be accepted. whereby a Custodian of Evacuee Property has been given power to pass an order which the justice of the case may require, is that the order he passes on review should not offend against the law of the land. A number of orders could be passed under the law in any case, and when subsection (6) of section 43 of Act of 1957 confers on THT Custodian of Evacuee Property the power to pass on review of an order passed by himself or by any of his predecessors- in-office any order that justice of the case may demand, the intention clearly is that though the order which has to be reviewed was correct according to law, it could be set aside - in exercise of the power of review conferred by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 subject to the condition that a law which otherwise binding did not get contravened by the order passed in the purported exercise of the powers of review. That is the meaning of subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957 (Act XII of 1957), is also clear from the fourth subsection of the section which empowers the Custodian to pass any order in the exercise of his revisional jurisdiction. This subsection empowers the Custodian to pass any order that he thinks fit and this power to pass an order that the Tribunal having powers to pass orders in revision thinks fit is conferred by almost all laws which confer powers of revision. Can anyone for a moment think that in the exercise of his power of revision a Custodian of Evacuee Property can after sending for the record of a case to satisfy himself about. The legality or propriety of an order passed by one of his subordinates, say that though the order passed by this subordinate was legal and the only proper order MN the circumstances of the ease, he would pass another order because he considered TT fit to pass it? The answer to this question will not be given in the affirmative by anyone. J am clear in my mind that the powers of review conferred on the Custodian of Evacuee Property by subsection (6) of section 43 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Act, 1957, are like the powers of revision conferred on him by subsection (4) of that section, limited to passing orders the passing of which the law does not prohibit. It is inconceivable that the law is that though a Custodian of Evacuee Property cannot set aside in exercise of his powers of revision an order passed by one of his subordinates because he would thereby be violating the law of the land, he can set aside the same order if it had been* passed by his predecessor-in-office or himself.” 24. The*case-law cited above would show that the Custodian is * competent under section

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): an order passed by one of his subordinates because he would thereby be violating the law of the land, he can set aside the same order if it had been* passed by his predecessor-in-office or himself.” 24. The*case-law cited above would show that the Custodian is * competent under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act to review his earlier order or orders of his predecessors or subordinates provided his order on review does not contravene any law of the land. To put m other words if the earlier order of the Custodian or his predecessors are against the law and justice as is in this case, the Custodian is competent to review them. If the Custodian reaches the conclusion that earlier order passed by him or his predecessor or subordinates are required to be reversed in order to meet the ends of justice and his review order shall not offend any law of the land, he is fully competent to review such order regardless of time limit. The 1 Honorable Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir has also subscribed to this view in case Vardar Ah and others v. Kara mat Ali Khan and others 1992 CLC 1861. a 25. As stated earlier, the powers of Custodian under sections 18-A and 18-B are exercisable by the Custodian at the time of grant of proprietary rights irrespective of limitation; his general powers of review are also available to him under section 43(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act and such powers are regardless of time limit. It appears that the learned Custodian while dismissing the review petitions was of the view that limitation provided under Administration of Evacuee Property Rules, 1950 being 30 days from the date of order impugned before him was applicable. It may be observed that the rules are made always subservient to Act and not against it. Where the Act itself provides a limitation or allows a cause to be decided on merits regardless of time, the rules cannot provide otherwise. As provided under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act, the powers under this provision of law are exercisable at any time, the rules made thereunder cannot provide otherwise. In fact the Rules, 1950 provide limitation for those matters for which the Act is silent. When Administration of Evacuee Property Act under its section 43(6) allows the Custodian to’exercise his powers regardless of time limit, the rules made thereunder cannot provide otherwise. Thus, the opinion of the learned Custodian about limitation is misconceived. 26: The case of the petitioner when tested on'the touchstone of the above laid down principle law would suggest saying that the learned Custodian while deciding review petitions challenging the validity of proprietary rights in favor of respondents fell in error. The orders challenged before him were either result of misconception or illegal therefore, to review such orders was in the interest of justice and law. It is satisfactorily proved through the record that respondent. Talib Hussein f

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): challenging the validity of proprietary rights in favor of respondents fell in error. The orders challenged before him were either result of misconception or illegal therefore, to review such orders was in the interest of justice and law. It is satisfactorily proved through the record that respondent. Talib Hussein f was minor at the time of migration and was included in the family of his father. He, under law, was not entitled to allotment however, he and his refugee brother Hassan Din collusively adopted different tactics and modes to deprive a local of his legitimate right. Firstly, they had been contesting against each other but subsequently, they joined hands and maneuvered to secure allotment of that piece of LAPD which already stood allotted to Abdullah deceased. The deceased did not surrender his allotment neither cancellation of his allotment was lawful. The allotment in favor of respondent Tali Hussein was earlier cancelled by Rehabilitation Commissioner and subsequently, restored by the. Custodian of the time on a fallacious ground. It is amazing to note here that learned Custodian vide his order, dated 9-10-1984 recorded the age of Tali Hussain as 19-10-1941. but at the same time declared him head of the family. It is no less than a miracle that a boy of six years age at ' the time of migration was father of 12 children and one wife. It is manifestation of total non-application of mind which resulted into grave miscarriage of justice by depriving the petitioners of their legitimate right. Similarly orders by the Custodian of the time, dated 9-10-1984 and 23-9-1993 are also result of either misconception or passed against law. The orders, therefore, were liable to be cancelled and the learned Custodian while deciding review petitions against proprietary rights was competent under law to Rev them. The respondents cleverly and collusively deprived the petitioners of their allotment and secured allotment of this piece of land illegally and ultimately got the propriety rights in their favor. The respondent Tali Hussain maneuvered to get proprietary rights of 42 Canals and 5 M dr las in his favor despite the fact that he was not entitled to any allotment under law. The allotment in favor of both the respondents was illegal and against the facts and, as such it was reviewable under section 43(6) of Administration of Evacuee Property Act regardless of time Inuit. The learned Custodian is found to have illegally exercised the jurisdiction available to him thus, his order impugned before this Court BMG unlawful stands recalled. As a result of it the allotment and proprietary rights in favor of respondent Tali Hussain are cancelled. The allotment of proprietary rights in favor of Hassan Din respondent to the extent of 28 Canals, Marla is also cancelled. The petitioners may approach the Custodian for grant of proprietary rights. P The case of respondent Muhammad Rasheed has also been considered in the light of the record. He is son of Muhammad Din allottee. His case is that the petitioners are

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 366?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 366 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K), 2007-12-14): extent of 28 Canals, Marla is also cancelled. The petitioners may approach the Custodian for grant of proprietary rights. P The case of respondent Muhammad Rasheed has also been considered in the light of the record. He is son of Muhammad Din allottee. His case is that the petitioners are in possession of his father’s land. This TS a disputed fact which cannot be resolved by this Court and, if the land allotted to Muhammad Dm is under the possession of t somebody else or the petitioners are in excess of possession, the remedy may be sought from the relevant forum. His claim, therefore, having no merits, is also hereby disallowed. Petition allowed.

Question: What is case 2008 CLC 632 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 632 was decided by HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] on 2008-02-29. The case involved ZAHOOR AHMED (PETITIONER) VERSUS IMST. PERVEEN BIBI AND 12 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). The relevant statutes include CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XVIII, R.18 AND O. ILL, RR. 1, SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) - SS.39, 42 AND 54 STAMPACT (II OF 1899) - S.2(21). The case was heard by RAFIULLAH SULTANI.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 632?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 632, the court applied the following statutes: CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (V OF 1908) - O. XVIII, R.18 AND O. ILL, RR. 1, SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (1 OF 1877) - SS.39, 42 AND 54 STAMPACT (II OF 1899) - S.2(21). This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)] and decided on 2008-02-29.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 632?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 632 were: KH. MUHAMMAD NASEEM FOR APPELLANT. KH. SHOUKAT GANAI FOR RESPONDENTS.. The judges presiding were: RAFIULLAH SULTANI.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 632?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 632 were: ZAHOOR AHMED (PETITIONER) VERSUS IMST. PERVEEN BIBI AND 12 OTHERS (RESPONDENTS). This case was heard in HIGH COURT (AJ&K)].

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 632.
Answer: ] RAFIULLAH SULTANI, J.- This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Muzaffarabad, dated 25-5-2008, whereby, the judgment and decree of Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad, dated 30-11-2004 was maintained. ' m Brief facts of the case are that respondents to 6 filed a declaratory suit cum permanent injunction and for cancellation of sale-deed titled Afrasian v. Km. Yahoo Ahmed, executed on 13-9-1997, regarding land number Kara 17 (new), measure 6 Marla's, situated at Jalalabad Muzaffarabad, in the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad on 19-5-2000. It was alleged in the plaint that plaintiffs are owners of the suit-land on the basis of unregistered sale-deed in favor of Muhammad Hussain husband of respondent No. and father of respondents 2 to 6. It was further alleged that the sale-deed executed in favor of Km. Yahoo Ahmed, appellant herein, by Afrasian Shout, dated 13-9-1997 and entries of Revenue Record on the basis of said sale-deed are operative against the rights of plaintiffs and the sale-deed is label to be cancelled and entries of Revenue record should be corrected in the name of plaintiffs/respondents 1 to 6 by the Revenue Authorities. ' The suit was contested and appellant and pro forma respondents submitted written statements in the trial Court on 22-7-2004, in which they negated the allegations of the plaint and alleged that Km. Yahoo Ahmed is owner of the suit-land on the basis of sale-deed executed on 13-9-1997 and plaintiffs have no title regarding the suit-land, and they have also no locus standi to file the suit. After framing issues, the parties were ordered by the Court to produce the evidence on 7- 8-2004. The evidence of the plaintiffs was closed on 9-10-2004 and the defendants were ordered to produce the evidence on 27-11-2004. On 27-11-2004, the learned Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad recorded the statements of one of the plaintiffs Preen Bibi and Abdul Waheed (brother of Km. Yahoo Ahmed) for spot inspection and to decide the suit. In the light of said statements, the learned Judge visited the spot and recorded statements of witnesses of plaintiffs only and decreed the suit in favor of respondents to 6 on 30-11- 2004, Feeling aggrieved by the judgment and decree of Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad, appellant preferred an appeal before District Judge, Muzaffarabad which was dismissed on 25-5-2005, hence this appeal. The learned counsel for the appellant reiterated the grounds of appeal and further argued that judgment and decree of both the Courts are against the facts and law. He further argued that Abdul Waheed was not apported as power of attorney by appellant, and he had no right to get record his statement on behalf of appellant for spot section and to decide the case. He also argued that Abdul Waheed was not party in the suit. The trial Judge has committed illegality to make spot inspection and to decide the suit on the statement of Abdul Waheed without affording opportunity to appellant to lead the evidence in respect of his claim. He further argued that District Judge has wrongly dismissed the appeal of appellant. The learned counsel for the respondents defended the judgments and decrees of both the lower Courts. He further argued that both the Courts have committed no illegality and their judgments and decrees are according to facts and law. He further argued that a request made by Abdul Waheed to the trial Court for spot inspection and to decide the case accordingly was not objected by the appellant before the TNA Court and at this stage he is not in position to raise this point and nor he can back out from his offer. The judgment and decree of District Judge, dated 25-5-2005 requires no legal interference. After perusal of record, it is evident that learned Senior Civi3 Judge, Muzaffarabad carried spot inspection in the light of statements recorded on 27-11-2004 by one of the plaintiffs named Preen Bibi and Abdul Waheed power of attorney of Km. Yahoo Ahmed. At the time of recording of statements for local inspection on 27-11-2004, Abdul Waheed got recorded his statement before the Court on the basis of two points; firstly as power of attorney of appellant and secondly as real brother of appellant. It appears from the said statement, which is at page 60 of the file of trial Court, that word “Mukhtar” has not been written in consequence of the LNE. The word “Mukhtar” is written on the above of the LNE which creates serious doubt. Here I would like to reproduce the relevant law Order III, rules and 2 of C.P.C. which reads as under-- I- (1) Appearances etc. may be in person, by recognized agent or by pleader.- Any appearance, application or act in or to any Court, required or authorized by law to be made or done by a. party in such Court, may, except where otherwise expressly provided by any law for the time being in' force, be made or done by the party in person, or by his recognized agent, or by a pleader (appearing, applying or acting, as the case may be), on his behalf:. Provided that any such appearance shall, if the Court so directs, be made by the party in person. ’ (2) Recognized agents.-- The recognized agents of parties by whom such appearance, applications and acts may be made or done are- (a) persons holding powers of attorney, authorizing then to make and do such appearance, applications and acts on behalf of such parties;. (b) persons carrying on trade or business for and MN names of parties not resident within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court within which limits the appearance, application or act is made or done, in matters connected with such trade or business only, where no other agent is expressly authorized to make arid do such appearances, applications and acts.” r The plain reading of the above-mentioned relevant law shows that it permits the performance of acts on behalf of the parties by their recognized agents, and they are specific persons to be among others. “The persons holding power of attorney authorizing them to do such acts on behalf of such parties”. The word party as defined will include his authorized agent in terms of the above-mentioned provision of C.P.C. According to section 2, subsection (21) of Stamp Act, definition of power of attorney is as under:- “(21) Power of attorney.- “Power of attorney” includes any instrument (not chargeable with a fee under the law relating to Court-fees for the time BMG in force) empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of the person executing TT. ” It 1s crystal clear from the above prescribed law that the word “power of attorney” as defined in subsection (21) of section 2 of Stamp Act includes any instrument empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of that person. Abdul Waheed was not party in the suit, nor he was recognized agent according to relevant law and nor his power of attorney is available on the file of the Court. Due to this reason he was not authorized to act on behalf of the appellant and his statement, dated 27-11-2004, and request for local inspection to the Court and decide the case carries no legal value. The Court has committed illegality to make local inspection on the statement of that person who was stranger in the file and was not authorized to do any action on behalf of the appellant. There is no request orally or written available on the file by the learned counsel of the appellant in the light of order-sheet of the Court, dated 27-11-2004. The learned counsel was present before the Court, why the Court did not record the statement of the counsel? There is no legal value attached to the statement of Abdul Waheed has no legal value. ' Now I would like to deal with the next question that whether the judgment of the trial Court which is based on local inspection is correct or not? Before dealing with this post I would like to reproduce Order XVIII, rule 18 of C.P.C. which reads as under:- “18. Power of Court to aspect.- The Court may at any stage of suit aspect any property or thing concerning which any question may arise. ” It is true that the above-mentioned relevant law gives wide powers to the Court to make local inspection of any suit property at any stage of the suit. The Court can make local inspection only for the purpose of understanding the controversy and the evidence or for its proper appreciation. But a local inspection cannot be allowed to replace the legal evidence and a judgment cannot be based merely on the result of local inspection unless the parties agree to adopt such a way. As stated earlier that the statement of Abdul Waheed has no legal value because the parties were not agreed to adopt such a way for judgment. It is pertinent to note that judgment of the trial Court was announced on 30-11-2004. The inspection note which was made by the learned Civil ‘ Judge on 30-11-2004 (which 1s available on page 61 of the file of trial Court) while the order-sheet shows that local inspection carried by learned Civil Judge on 29-11-2004. The report made by Atari Muhammad Shabbir Away which is at page 62 of the file of trial Court, the date of preparation of report is 4-12-2004. Copy of Mile-Haqiat, 1998-1999 and Kara Girafarig are prepared on 3- 12-2004 and 4-12-2004, respectively, and the Atari has got recorded his statement before the Court on 30-11-2004. Another post which is involved MN this case is that the learned Civil Judge has recorded the statements of five witnesses including one of the plaintiffs at the time of spot inspection, but the opportunity of cross-examination was not provided to appellant or his counsel. In this case the statements recorded by the learned Civil Judge during course of section have no evidentiary value because persons whose statements were recorded are subject to cross-examination or the opposite party should be given opportunity.to do so. This course has not been adopted by the Court. As stated earlier that the case was fixed for evidence of _ appellant/defendant on 27-11-2004 but the learned Civil Judge, without giving opportunity to the appellant to produce the evidence, made local inspection without the consent of appellant and decide the case. The course adopted. by the trial Court was not legal and his judgment was based on the impression of local inspection, which was also illegal. For the reasons listed, above, this appeal is accepted and the judgments and decrees of both the Courts are set aside, and the case is remanded to Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad to decide it in legal manner as indicated above. H.B.T./2/H.C.(AJ&K) ' Appeal accepted.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 632?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 632 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-02-29): ] RAFIULLAH SULTANI, J.- This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Muzaffarabad, dated 25-5-2008, whereby, the judgment and decree of Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad, dated 30-11-2004 was maintained. ' m Brief facts of the case are that respondents to 6 filed a declaratory suit cum permanent injunction and for cancellation of sale-deed titled Afrasian v. Km. Yahoo Ahmed, executed on 13-9-1997, regarding land number Kara 17 (new), measure 6 Marla's, situated at Jalalabad Muzaffarabad, in the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad on 19-5-2000. It was alleged in the plaint that plaintiffs are owners of the suit-land on the basis of unregistered sale-deed in favor of Muhammad Hussain husband of respondent No. and father of respondents 2 to 6. It was further alleged that the sale-deed executed in favor of Km. Yahoo Ahmed, appellant herein, by Afrasian Shout, dated 13-9-1997 and entries of Revenue Record on the basis of said sale-deed are operative against the rights of plaintiffs and the sale-deed is label to be cancelled and entries of Revenue record should be corrected in the name of plaintiffs/respondents 1 to 6 by the Revenue Authorities. ' The suit was contested and appellant and pro forma respondents submitted written statements in the trial Court on 22-7-2004, in which they negated the allegations of the plaint and alleged that Km. Yahoo Ahmed is owner of the suit-land on the basis of sale-deed executed on 13-9-1997 and plaintiffs have no title regarding the suit-land, and they have also no locus standi to file the suit. After framing issues, the parties were ordered by the Court to produce the evidence on 7- 8-2004. The evidence of the plaintiffs was closed on 9-10-2004 and the defendants were ordered to produce the evidence on 27-11-2004. On 27-11-2004, the learned Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad recorded the statements of one of the plaintiffs Preen Bibi and Abdul Waheed (brother of Km. Yahoo Ahmed) for spot inspection and to decide the suit. In the light of said statements, the learned Judge visited the spot and recorded statements of witnesses of plaintiffs only and decreed the suit in favor of respondents to 6 on 30-11- 2004, Feeling aggrieved by the judgment and decree of Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad, appellant preferred an appeal before District Judge, Muzaffarabad which was dismissed on 25-5-2005, hence this appeal. The learned counsel for the appellant reiterated the grounds of appeal and further argued that judgment and decree of both the Courts are against the facts and law. He further argued that Abdul Waheed was not apported as power of attorney by appellant, and he had no right to get record his statement on behalf of appellant for spot section and to decide the case. He also argued that Abdul Waheed was not party in the suit. The trial Judge has committed illegality to make spot inspection and to decide the suit on the statement of Abdul Waheed without affording opportunity to appellant to lead the evidence in respect

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 632?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 632 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-02-29): section and to decide the case. He also argued that Abdul Waheed was not party in the suit. The trial Judge has committed illegality to make spot inspection and to decide the suit on the statement of Abdul Waheed without affording opportunity to appellant to lead the evidence in respect of his claim. He further argued that District Judge has wrongly dismissed the appeal of appellant. The learned counsel for the respondents defended the judgments and decrees of both the lower Courts. He further argued that both the Courts have committed no illegality and their judgments and decrees are according to facts and law. He further argued that a request made by Abdul Waheed to the trial Court for spot inspection and to decide the case accordingly was not objected by the appellant before the TNA Court and at this stage he is not in position to raise this point and nor he can back out from his offer. The judgment and decree of District Judge, dated 25-5-2005 requires no legal interference. After perusal of record, it is evident that learned Senior Civi3 Judge, Muzaffarabad carried spot inspection in the light of statements recorded on 27-11-2004 by one of the plaintiffs named Preen Bibi and Abdul Waheed power of attorney of Km. Yahoo Ahmed. At the time of recording of statements for local inspection on 27-11-2004, Abdul Waheed got recorded his statement before the Court on the basis of two points; firstly as power of attorney of appellant and secondly as real brother of appellant. It appears from the said statement, which is at page 60 of the file of trial Court, that word “Mukhtar” has not been written in consequence of the LNE. The word “Mukhtar” is written on the above of the LNE which creates serious doubt. Here I would like to reproduce the relevant law Order III, rules and 2 of C.P.C. which reads as under-- I- (1) Appearances etc. may be in person, by recognized agent or by pleader.- Any appearance, application or act in or to any Court, required or authorized by law to be made or done by a. party in such Court, may, except where otherwise expressly provided by any law for the time being in' force, be made or done by the party in person, or by his recognized agent, or by a pleader (appearing, applying or acting, as the case may be), on his behalf:. Provided that any such appearance shall, if the Court so directs, be made by the party in person. ’ (2) Recognized agents.-- The recognized agents of parties by whom such appearance, applications and acts may be made or done are- (a) persons holding powers of attorney, authorizing then to make and do such appearance, applications and acts on behalf of such parties;. (b) persons carrying on trade or business for and MN names of parties not resident within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court within which limits the appearance, application or act is

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 632?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 632 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-02-29): authorizing then to make and do such appearance, applications and acts on behalf of such parties;. (b) persons carrying on trade or business for and MN names of parties not resident within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court within which limits the appearance, application or act is made or done, in matters connected with such trade or business only, where no other agent is expressly authorized to make arid do such appearances, applications and acts.” r The plain reading of the above-mentioned relevant law shows that it permits the performance of acts on behalf of the parties by their recognized agents, and they are specific persons to be among others. “The persons holding power of attorney authorizing them to do such acts on behalf of such parties”. The word party as defined will include his authorized agent in terms of the above-mentioned provision of C.P.C. According to section 2, subsection (21) of Stamp Act, definition of power of attorney is as under:- “(21) Power of attorney.- “Power of attorney” includes any instrument (not chargeable with a fee under the law relating to Court-fees for the time BMG in force) empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of the person executing TT. ” It 1s crystal clear from the above prescribed law that the word “power of attorney” as defined in subsection (21) of section 2 of Stamp Act includes any instrument empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of that person. Abdul Waheed was not party in the suit, nor he was recognized agent according to relevant law and nor his power of attorney is available on the file of the Court. Due to this reason he was not authorized to act on behalf of the appellant and his statement, dated 27-11-2004, and request for local inspection to the Court and decide the case carries no legal value. The Court has committed illegality to make local inspection on the statement of that person who was stranger in the file and was not authorized to do any action on behalf of the appellant. There is no request orally or written available on the file by the learned counsel of the appellant in the light of order-sheet of the Court, dated 27-11-2004. The learned counsel was present before the Court, why the Court did not record the statement of the counsel? There is no legal value attached to the statement of Abdul Waheed has no legal value. ' Now I would like to deal with the next question that whether the judgment of the trial Court which is based on local inspection is correct or not? Before dealing with this post I would like to reproduce Order XVIII, rule 18 of C.P.C. which reads as under:- “18. Power of Court to aspect.- The Court may at any stage of suit aspect any property or thing concerning which any question may arise. ” It is true that the above-mentioned relevant law gives

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 632?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 632 (HIGH COURT (AJ&K)], 2008-02-29): I would like to reproduce Order XVIII, rule 18 of C.P.C. which reads as under:- “18. Power of Court to aspect.- The Court may at any stage of suit aspect any property or thing concerning which any question may arise. ” It is true that the above-mentioned relevant law gives wide powers to the Court to make local inspection of any suit property at any stage of the suit. The Court can make local inspection only for the purpose of understanding the controversy and the evidence or for its proper appreciation. But a local inspection cannot be allowed to replace the legal evidence and a judgment cannot be based merely on the result of local inspection unless the parties agree to adopt such a way. As stated earlier that the statement of Abdul Waheed has no legal value because the parties were not agreed to adopt such a way for judgment. It is pertinent to note that judgment of the trial Court was announced on 30-11-2004. The inspection note which was made by the learned Civil ‘ Judge on 30-11-2004 (which 1s available on page 61 of the file of trial Court) while the order-sheet shows that local inspection carried by learned Civil Judge on 29-11-2004. The report made by Atari Muhammad Shabbir Away which is at page 62 of the file of trial Court, the date of preparation of report is 4-12-2004. Copy of Mile-Haqiat, 1998-1999 and Kara Girafarig are prepared on 3- 12-2004 and 4-12-2004, respectively, and the Atari has got recorded his statement before the Court on 30-11-2004. Another post which is involved MN this case is that the learned Civil Judge has recorded the statements of five witnesses including one of the plaintiffs at the time of spot inspection, but the opportunity of cross-examination was not provided to appellant or his counsel. In this case the statements recorded by the learned Civil Judge during course of section have no evidentiary value because persons whose statements were recorded are subject to cross-examination or the opposite party should be given opportunity.to do so. This course has not been adopted by the Court. As stated earlier that the case was fixed for evidence of _ appellant/defendant on 27-11-2004 but the learned Civil Judge, without giving opportunity to the appellant to produce the evidence, made local inspection without the consent of appellant and decide the case. The course adopted. by the trial Court was not legal and his judgment was based on the impression of local inspection, which was also illegal. For the reasons listed, above, this appeal is accepted and the judgments and decrees of both the Courts are set aside, and the case is remanded to Senior Civil Judge, Muzaffarabad to decide it in legal manner as indicated above. H.B.T./2/H.C.(AJ&K) ' Appeal accepted.

Question: What is case 2008 CLC 1363 about?
Answer: Case 2008 CLC 1363 was decided by SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS on 2008-04-23. The case involved SHAKOOR ALI AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) (APPELLANTS) VERSUS ZEEN AT SHAH RESPONDENT. The relevant statutes include SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - SS. AND 42 NORTHERN AREAS COUNCIL LEGAL FRAMEWORK ORDER, 1994 - ART.19-A. The case was heard by ALTAF HUSSAIN.AND SYED TAHIR ALI SHAH, JJ.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 CLC 1363?
Answer: In case 2008 CLC 1363, the court applied the following statutes: SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT (I OF 1877) - SS. AND 42 NORTHERN AREAS COUNCIL LEGAL FRAMEWORK ORDER, 1994 - ART.19-A. This case was heard in SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS and decided on 2008-04-23.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 CLC 1363?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 CLC 1363 were: MALIK SHAFQAT WALI FOR PETITIONERS/APPELLANTS.|MUHAMMAD ISSA FOR RESPONDENT.. The judges presiding were: ALTAF HUSSAIN.AND SYED TAHIR ALI SHAH, JJ.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 CLC 1363?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 CLC 1363 were: SHAKOOR ALI AND ANOTHER (PETITIONERS) (APPELLANTS) VERSUS ZEEN AT SHAH RESPONDENT. This case was heard in SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 CLC 1363.
Answer: SYED TAHIR ALI SHAH, J.- Instant petition for leave to appeal filed in this Court is the outcome of judgment recorded by the Single Bench of the Chief Court N. As, dated 26-6- 2007, whereby judgment decrees passed by the two subordinates Courts were maintained and the revisional petition dismissed. - " Brief facts enshrined through pleadings of the parties are that one Shakier Ali and his brother Raja Ali resident of Nagar Gil git filed a suit with the Civil Judge, Gil git against Final Shah for declaration cum possession of a piece of land in the year 1982. The land described in the heading of plaint as contended was given to the plants father by the then Mir of Nagar which later on improved by the plaintiff’s father. The strained relation of the Mir with the plaintiff resulted the dispossession of the plaintiff of the suit land followed by transfer of said land to one Garden the father of one Ir shad. The possession, as averred was regained by the plaintiffs, for some months, but they were again dispossessed by defendants forcibly. He prayed the grant of decree for possession of the suit land as ancillary relief. The defendant, on the other hand has set up a quite different story in his written statement and contended that the owner of the land in dispute was one Garden, and he was succeeded by his son Ir shad. The latter gifted the land in dispute to him some 25 years back. Besides, many legal points were also, raised. ' The trial Court after having a full investigation vide his T judgment/decree dismissed the suit as not proved. In appeal the District and Sessions Judge, Gil git confirmed the findings arrived at the. Trial Court vide judgment dated 26-3-1990. Still not contended petitioners filed a revision petition before the Chief Court N. As. but the result was not different from earlier ones. Hence this petition. Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners contended that the two lower Courts including the revisional Court failed to take notice of the glaring inconsistencies in the statements of D. Ws. the misreading and non-reading of evidence by the Courts below. He further submitted that credible evidence led by plaintiffs/petitioners was overlooked and not weighed in the golden scale of justice. However, no legal post was raised. The learned counsel for respondent vehemently controverted the ports so raised and argued that besides the plaintiffs failed to prove his case the suit is hopelessly barred by limitation. We have given our thorough consideration to the points raised by both sides and also gone through the record minutely with the able assistance of learned counsel of the parties. *' Before evaluating on the factual points coming across in the matter in hand we deem TT proper to take the point of limitation first which is always a mixed question of law and facts. An additional issue vide order dated 21-4-2000 regarding limitation has been framed by the then Chief Justice Chief Court while the matter was under adjudication before him, and case was remitted back to the trial Court for his findings on the newly framed issues which was basically miss mg in the plant. This particular issue was decided against the plaintiffs/petitioners and was main tamed up to the Chief Court N. As. " It is an admitted proposition that the plaintiff is duty bound to prove his claim with time. The findings arrived by the Courts below on. the specific point do not expose any misreading and' non-reading of the evidence brought on the record. The apex Court in. the normal circumstances is reluctant to interfere in concurrent findings of facts unless some alarm and apparent drawbacks are brought into the notice of the Court regarding any misreading or non-reading of the evidence which overlooked by the subordinate Courts. We. therefore, failed to find out any apparent misreading or non-reading of evidence to weigh the arguments of the learned counsel on this point. - T I. t f The learned counsel during, the arguments have drawn our attention to a document marked as Ex.P.| at page-41 of the trial Court file and contended that the matter was pending before the Ulema Board, which transferred the case to Civil Judge after abolition of such Ulema Board vide notification issued by provincial Government of Northern Areas, therefore, the suit is not barred by limitation, being a continuous I process. Having a glance of the documents referred above it appears to be an original application which production has been made by the plaintiff along with plant. Here the question arises as to why the original one left with the plaintiff when it was meant to submit before the Ulema Board, meaning thereby that the matter was not subjudiced before the Ulema Board. Moreno the applicant has,prayed the. Then A.C. to send the matter to the Ulema Board, and it does not disclose that any matter was pending before the Ulema Board between the parties. In other words through this application, that too never presented before Ulema Board, the plaintiff/petitioner wanted to involve the Ulema Board for the first time in the dispute. Moreover, the plaintiff has-not availed the provision ( contained in rule 6 of Order VII, C.P.C. to bring his stale claim. Within the limitation. This point also fails as the same does not help the petitioners in any way. In the light of whatever discussed we do not find any cogent reason to allow the instant petition which is declined accordingly. File. H.B.T/7/GLT. Leave refused

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1363?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1363 (SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS, 2008-04-23): SYED TAHIR ALI SHAH, J.- Instant petition for leave to appeal filed in this Court is the outcome of judgment recorded by the Single Bench of the Chief Court N. As, dated 26-6- 2007, whereby judgment decrees passed by the two subordinates Courts were maintained and the revisional petition dismissed. - " Brief facts enshrined through pleadings of the parties are that one Shakier Ali and his brother Raja Ali resident of Nagar Gil git filed a suit with the Civil Judge, Gil git against Final Shah for declaration cum possession of a piece of land in the year 1982. The land described in the heading of plaint as contended was given to the plants father by the then Mir of Nagar which later on improved by the plaintiff’s father. The strained relation of the Mir with the plaintiff resulted the dispossession of the plaintiff of the suit land followed by transfer of said land to one Garden the father of one Ir shad. The possession, as averred was regained by the plaintiffs, for some months, but they were again dispossessed by defendants forcibly. He prayed the grant of decree for possession of the suit land as ancillary relief. The defendant, on the other hand has set up a quite different story in his written statement and contended that the owner of the land in dispute was one Garden, and he was succeeded by his son Ir shad. The latter gifted the land in dispute to him some 25 years back. Besides, many legal points were also, raised. ' The trial Court after having a full investigation vide his T judgment/decree dismissed the suit as not proved. In appeal the District and Sessions Judge, Gil git confirmed the findings arrived at the. Trial Court vide judgment dated 26-3-1990. Still not contended petitioners filed a revision petition before the Chief Court N. As. but the result was not different from earlier ones. Hence this petition. Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners contended that the two lower Courts including the revisional Court failed to take notice of the glaring inconsistencies in the statements of D. Ws. the misreading and non-reading of evidence by the Courts below. He further submitted that credible evidence led by plaintiffs/petitioners was overlooked and not weighed in the golden scale of justice. However, no legal post was raised. The learned counsel for respondent vehemently controverted the ports so raised and argued that besides the plaintiffs failed to prove his case the suit is hopelessly barred by limitation. We have given our thorough consideration to the points raised by both sides and also gone through the record minutely with the able assistance of learned counsel of the parties. *' Before evaluating on the factual points coming across in the matter in hand we deem TT proper to take the point of limitation first which is always a mixed question of law and facts. An additional issue vide order dated 21-4-2000 regarding limitation has been framed by the then Chief

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 CLC 1363?
Answer: From case 2008 CLC 1363 (SUPREME APPELLATE COURT NORTHERN AREAS, 2008-04-23): Before evaluating on the factual points coming across in the matter in hand we deem TT proper to take the point of limitation first which is always a mixed question of law and facts. An additional issue vide order dated 21-4-2000 regarding limitation has been framed by the then Chief Justice Chief Court while the matter was under adjudication before him, and case was remitted back to the trial Court for his findings on the newly framed issues which was basically miss mg in the plant. This particular issue was decided against the plaintiffs/petitioners and was main tamed up to the Chief Court N. As. " It is an admitted proposition that the plaintiff is duty bound to prove his claim with time. The findings arrived by the Courts below on. the specific point do not expose any misreading and' non-reading of the evidence brought on the record. The apex Court in. the normal circumstances is reluctant to interfere in concurrent findings of facts unless some alarm and apparent drawbacks are brought into the notice of the Court regarding any misreading or non-reading of the evidence which overlooked by the subordinate Courts. We. therefore, failed to find out any apparent misreading or non-reading of evidence to weigh the arguments of the learned counsel on this point. - T I. t f The learned counsel during, the arguments have drawn our attention to a document marked as Ex.P.| at page-41 of the trial Court file and contended that the matter was pending before the Ulema Board, which transferred the case to Civil Judge after abolition of such Ulema Board vide notification issued by provincial Government of Northern Areas, therefore, the suit is not barred by limitation, being a continuous I process. Having a glance of the documents referred above it appears to be an original application which production has been made by the plaintiff along with plant. Here the question arises as to why the original one left with the plaintiff when it was meant to submit before the Ulema Board, meaning thereby that the matter was not subjudiced before the Ulema Board. Moreno the applicant has,prayed the. Then A.C. to send the matter to the Ulema Board, and it does not disclose that any matter was pending before the Ulema Board between the parties. In other words through this application, that too never presented before Ulema Board, the plaintiff/petitioner wanted to involve the Ulema Board for the first time in the dispute. Moreover, the plaintiff has-not availed the provision ( contained in rule 6 of Order VII, C.P.C. to bring his stale claim. Within the limitation. This point also fails as the same does not help the petitioners in any way. In the light of whatever discussed we do not find any cogent reason to allow the instant petition which is declined accordingly. File. H.B.T/7/GLT. Leave refused

Question: What is case 2008 MLD 868 about?
Answer: Case 2008 MLD 868 was decided by LAHORE HIGH COURT on 2005-07-05. The case involved TEHSIL MUNICIPALADMINISTRATION,MANDI BHAUDDIN (APPELLANT) VERSUS EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. The relevant statutes include LAW REFORMS ORDINANCE (XII OF 1972) - S. EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 17. The case was heard by MIAN HAMID FAROOQ AND SYED HAMID ALI SHAH.

Question: What statutes were applied in case 2008 MLD 868?
Answer: In case 2008 MLD 868, the court applied the following statutes: LAW REFORMS ORDINANCE (XII OF 1972) - S. EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTIES (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL) ACT (XIII OF 1975) - S. 17. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT and decided on 2005-07-05.

Question: Who were the lawyers in case 2008 MLD 868?
Answer: The lawyers involved in case 2008 MLD 868 were: MUHAMMAD SHAHZAD SHAUKAT FOR APPELLANT. MUHAMMAD QAM AR-UZ-ZAMAN FOR RESPONDENTS NOS. TO 3.RAFIQUE AHMAD, A. A. G. FOR RESPONDENT NO.4.ASHTAR AUSAF FOR RESPONDENT NO.5.. The judges presiding were: MIAN HAMID FAROOQ AND SYED HAMID ALI SHAH.

Question: Who were the parties in case 2008 MLD 868?
Answer: The parties in case 2008 MLD 868 were: TEHSIL MUNICIPALADMINISTRATION,MANDI BHAUDDIN (APPELLANT) VERSUS EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS. This case was heard in LAHORE HIGH COURT.

Question: Provide the full judgment for case 2008 MLD 868.
Answer: Appellant through this Intra-Court Appeal has called in question judgment, dated 4-3-2004 by learned Judge to Chamber, passed in Writ Petition No. 12477 of 2003. 2. The property m dispute is land measure 35-Kanals, 15-Marlas comprising Kara No. situated at Mandi Haha-ud- Din. Officials of respondent No.1 put property in dispute to auction on -4-2002 and was transferred to respondent No.5 through registered sale-deed, dated 18-7-2003. Mutation in this respect was attested on 22-7- 2003. The sale was approved by Federal Government and the same was conveyed. Appellant challenged the sale on the ground that Evacuee Trust Property Board is not competent to sell and transfer evacuee trust property. Prior approval of Federal Government is necessary, which has not been sought and auction was not conducted legally. The property was sold without fixing necessary price. The impugned sale through auction to respondent No.5 was approved by Evacuee Trust Property Board. Letter, dated 23-4-2003 (Annex- EE) in this respect was referred. 3. Learned Single Judge in Chamber dismissed the writ petition on 4-3-2004. Appellant has challenged the order, dated 4-3-2004 before this Court through instant I.C.A. as well as through a petition (C.P.L.A. No.B76-L-2004) before the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan. Appellant has resorted to both the remedies. It is settled law that appeal is substantive right and can only be availed if law provides the same. An appeal at two different for a cannot be made available to an aggrieved litigant. 4. We are not inclined to entertain this appeal firstly for the reason that petition MN the higher forum (Hon’BLE Supreme Court) is pending and to entertain this appeal would nullify the effect of the pendency of that petition; secondly that disputed property was declared as evacuee property, sold in auction and sale was approved by Evacuee Trust Property Board. Provisions of section 17 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, provide the remedy of revision before the Federal Government. The I.C.A. in view whereof is not competent. While holding so we follow the view of another learned Division Bench of this Court, which has held in an unreported case titled “Pepsi Cola International (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Evacuee Trust Property Board etc.” (ICA No.310 of 2003). Relevant portion is reproduced as under:- “The legislature has specifically used following terminology in section 17 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975: - (i) The Federal Government may at any time of its own motion; (i) or otherwise; WW. (ITL) or proceedings under this Act; (iv) which is pending; (v) or in which the Chairman and Administrator, a Deputy Administrator or Assistant Administrator pass an order. The world ‘or’ clearly used by the legislature in the sense of disjunctive, meaning thereby that each phrase and clause in the afore-said section is independent of each other. The legislature also used “comma” which has its own significance as the law laid down by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court in “Main Muhammad Nawab Sharif v. President of Pakistan and others” (PLD 1993 SC 473). Similarly, the word “proceedings” has its own meaning in the said section. It is pertinent to mention here that appellant has challenged the proceedings initiated by the respondents against the appellant with regard to eviction of the premises in question or for granting the premises in question on lease to the appellant or not. The word “proceedings” is defined by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in the following terms in “Muhammad Abdullah v. Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Centrex, Lahore” (PLD 1985 SC 107):- “The above contention, however, can no longer be accepted, because a similar question has been elaborately examined by this Court recently in a settlement case, namely MST. Karim Bibi v. Hussain Baths and others (PLD 1984 SC 344), and it was held that the meaning of the expression ‘original order’ is the order with which that proceedings under the relevant statute commenced. It was observed that:- “The crucial words are the ‘original order’. It 1s clear from the wording of proviso that the requirement of the availability of an appeal in the law applicable is not in relation to the impugned order in the Constitutional petition, which may be the order passed by the lowest officer or authority in the hierarchy or an order passed by the higher authorities in appeal, revision or review, if any, provided in the relevant statute. Therefore, the relevant order may not necessarily be the one which is under challenge, but the test is whether the original order passed in the proceedings was subjected to appeal under the relevant law.” The conclusion was expressed thus:- “Apparently the meaning of the expression ‘original order’ is the order with which the proceedings under the relevant statute commenced. ’ In view of this clear enunciation of the law, the ‘original order’ in the present case was clearly the order of the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, dated 21-9-1970. As such the view expressed by the learned Judges of the High Court in the impugned judgment that an intra-Court Appeal was not competent because the law provided for an appeal against the original order, dated 21-9-1970 is unexceptionable. WW. In view of what has been discussed above, we are of the view that appellant has alternate remedy of revision before the Federal Government under section 17 of the said Act, therefore, ICA is not main tamable in view of proviso of section 3(2) of law laid down by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court in the basic judgment on the point 1e. “MST. Arm Bibi and others v. Hussain Baths and another’ (PLD 1984 SC 344).” 5. For the foregoing, instant appeal is not competent and the same is accordingly dismissed with no orders as to costs. H.B.T/T-40/L Ap peal dismissed

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 MLD 868?
Answer: From case 2008 MLD 868 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2005-07-05): Appellant through this Intra-Court Appeal has called in question judgment, dated 4-3-2004 by learned Judge to Chamber, passed in Writ Petition No. 12477 of 2003. 2. The property m dispute is land measure 35-Kanals, 15-Marlas comprising Kara No. situated at Mandi Haha-ud- Din. Officials of respondent No.1 put property in dispute to auction on -4-2002 and was transferred to respondent No.5 through registered sale-deed, dated 18-7-2003. Mutation in this respect was attested on 22-7- 2003. The sale was approved by Federal Government and the same was conveyed. Appellant challenged the sale on the ground that Evacuee Trust Property Board is not competent to sell and transfer evacuee trust property. Prior approval of Federal Government is necessary, which has not been sought and auction was not conducted legally. The property was sold without fixing necessary price. The impugned sale through auction to respondent No.5 was approved by Evacuee Trust Property Board. Letter, dated 23-4-2003 (Annex- EE) in this respect was referred. 3. Learned Single Judge in Chamber dismissed the writ petition on 4-3-2004. Appellant has challenged the order, dated 4-3-2004 before this Court through instant I.C.A. as well as through a petition (C.P.L.A. No.B76-L-2004) before the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan. Appellant has resorted to both the remedies. It is settled law that appeal is substantive right and can only be availed if law provides the same. An appeal at two different for a cannot be made available to an aggrieved litigant. 4. We are not inclined to entertain this appeal firstly for the reason that petition MN the higher forum (Hon’BLE Supreme Court) is pending and to entertain this appeal would nullify the effect of the pendency of that petition; secondly that disputed property was declared as evacuee property, sold in auction and sale was approved by Evacuee Trust Property Board. Provisions of section 17 of Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975, provide the remedy of revision before the Federal Government. The I.C.A. in view whereof is not competent. While holding so we follow the view of another learned Division Bench of this Court, which has held in an unreported case titled “Pepsi Cola International (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Evacuee Trust Property Board etc.” (ICA No.310 of 2003). Relevant portion is reproduced as under:- “The legislature has specifically used following terminology in section 17 of the Evacuee Trust Properties (Management and Disposal) Act, 1975: - (i) The Federal Government may at any time of its own motion; (i) or otherwise; WW. (ITL) or proceedings under this Act; (iv) which is pending; (v) or in which the Chairman and Administrator, a Deputy Administrator or Assistant Administrator pass an order. The world ‘or’ clearly used by the legislature in the sense of disjunctive, meaning thereby that each phrase and clause in the afore-said section is independent of each other. The legislature also used “comma” which has its own significance as the law laid down by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court in “Main Muhammad Nawab Sharif v. President of Pakistan and others” (PLD

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 MLD 868?
Answer: From case 2008 MLD 868 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2005-07-05): of disjunctive, meaning thereby that each phrase and clause in the afore-said section is independent of each other. The legislature also used “comma” which has its own significance as the law laid down by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court in “Main Muhammad Nawab Sharif v. President of Pakistan and others” (PLD 1993 SC 473). Similarly, the word “proceedings” has its own meaning in the said section. It is pertinent to mention here that appellant has challenged the proceedings initiated by the respondents against the appellant with regard to eviction of the premises in question or for granting the premises in question on lease to the appellant or not. The word “proceedings” is defined by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court of Pakistan in the following terms in “Muhammad Abdullah v. Deputy Settlement Commissioner, Centrex, Lahore” (PLD 1985 SC 107):- “The above contention, however, can no longer be accepted, because a similar question has been elaborately examined by this Court recently in a settlement case, namely MST. Karim Bibi v. Hussain Baths and others (PLD 1984 SC 344), and it was held that the meaning of the expression ‘original order’ is the order with which that proceedings under the relevant statute commenced. It was observed that:- “The crucial words are the ‘original order’. It 1s clear from the wording of proviso that the requirement of the availability of an appeal in the law applicable is not in relation to the impugned order in the Constitutional petition, which may be the order passed by the lowest officer or authority in the hierarchy or an order passed by the higher authorities in appeal, revision or review, if any, provided in the relevant statute. Therefore, the relevant order may not necessarily be the one which is under challenge, but the test is whether the original order passed in the proceedings was subjected to appeal under the relevant law.” The conclusion was expressed thus:- “Apparently the meaning of the expression ‘original order’ is the order with which the proceedings under the relevant statute commenced. ’ In view of this clear enunciation of the law, the ‘original order’ in the present case was clearly the order of the Deputy Settlement Commissioner, dated 21-9-1970. As such the view expressed by the learned Judges of the High Court in the impugned judgment that an intra-Court Appeal was not competent because the law provided for an appeal against the original order, dated 21-9-1970 is unexceptionable. WW. In view of what has been discussed above, we are of the view that appellant has alternate remedy of revision before the Federal Government under section 17 of the said Act, therefore, ICA is not main tamable in view of proviso of section 3(2) of law laid down by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court in the basic judgment on the point 1e. “MST. Arm Bibi and others v. Hussain Baths and another’ (PLD 1984 SC 344).” 5. For the foregoing, instant appeal is not competent and the same is accordingly dismissed with no orders as to costs.

Question: What legal principles are discussed in case 2008 MLD 868?
Answer: From case 2008 MLD 868 (LAHORE HIGH COURT, 2005-07-05): laid down by the Hon’BLE Supreme Court in the basic judgment on the point 1e. “MST. Arm Bibi and others v. Hussain Baths and another’ (PLD 1984 SC 344).” 5. For the foregoing, instant appeal is not competent and the same is accordingly dismissed with no orders as to costs. H.B.T/T-40/L Ap peal dismissed

